Whether it settles their feud once and for all remains to be seen, but Brooks Koepka defeated Bryson DeChambeau 4 and 3 in a 12-hole edition of ‘The Match’ Friday at Wynn Golf Club in Las Vegas. The players’ bitter rivalry took over headlines in the golf world for the better part of a year. After they temporarily put aside their differences to help Team USA dominate the Ryder Cup in September, it was announced they would square off in the charity golf match that has become a semi-regular, made-for-TV event. “Not going to lie, I just wanted to spank you,” Koepka told DeChambeau upon clinching victory on the ninth hole. Koepka won the second hole with a 15-foot birdie putt, then added birdies at Nos. 5 and 6 to beat DeChambeau and move 3 up. DeChambeau hurt his chances to rally by missing a birdie putt at No 8. Koepka responded by sinking his birdie to go 4 up. At the par-3 ninth hole, DeChambeau conceded the match after missing another putt for birdie. Officially, the hole was halved for a final score of 4 and 3. Playful trash talk flowed before and during the match. “‘Brooksy’ seems to get to him quite a bit,” Koepka said on a pre-match livestream event responding to fans’ questions. “He had to go to the Tour to get them to stop.” It was a reference to the peak of the rivalry during the 2020-21 season, when fans began taunting DeChambeau by calling him “Brooksy” from the galleries at tournaments. The PGA Tour eventually ruled that fans caught yelling “Brooksy” would be grounds for removal from a tournament, though it’s unproven that anyone from DeChambeau’s camp ever asked the Tour to enact such an order. Friday was the latest installment of the celebrity match-play competition that has featured Tiger Woods, Phil Mickelson, Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, Aaron Rodgers, Charles Barkley and Steph Curry in prior editions. Mickelson and Barkley served as commentators on Friday.New South Wales public teachers will strike for the first time in more than a decade in response to a “statewide staffing crisis” caused by stagnating wages and an escalating workload. The NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, said a unanimous vote among council members passed on Saturday morning. Principals will join with teachers on Tuesday 7 December for the 24-hour strike, accompanied by a statewide advertising campaign to be rolled out on television, radio and print. Gavrielatos said expectations on teachers were increasing while rewards and pathways weren’t providing “enough incentive” to keep staff in the job. “This … reflects the gravity of the situation we find ourselves in,” he said. “Over the course of the last 18 months we have exhausted all options available to us to arrive at a negotiated settlement with the government. Every year teachers have been asked to do more and every year their salary has fallen compared to other professions.” The union had failed to successfully lobby the state government to lift a 2.5% wages cap that it said had contributed to decline in graduates. The number of vacant permanent positions in NSW schools had increased by 80% since June. An independent inquiry tabled this year warned the NSW government teachers’ workloads were so high that quality of practice espoused in policy documents was “simply not attainable” without additional release time. The Gallop inquiry, released in February, found “the salary levels in place and projected for the next three to five years are dangerous for the public standing of the profession, and for the quality of education available to the students of the state’s public schools.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Instead of recognising teachers’ workloads are unsustainable, turning people off teaching and limiting what can be done for students, they are refusing to increase your release time,” Gavrielatos said. “We are facing a perfect storm: plummeting new graduate numbers, rising enrolments, an ageing workforce which spell out acute teacher shortages. “If we don’t act now, workloads will continue to rise and salaries will continue to fall relative to other professions.” The union is calling for a salary increase for teachers and principals of between 5% and 7.5% per year in line with recommendations of the Gallop inquiry. It is also calling for a two-hour increase in preparation time for lesson planning and collaboration with colleagues outside of school. A state government survey found one-third of teachers had time to do their job well, while time for planning and teaching outside the classroom hadn’t increased since the 1980s for primary teachers and the 1950s for secondary teachers. Department of Education documents provided to the union warned NSW could run out of teachers within five years due to declining numbers of graduates, rising enrolments and a rapidly ageing workforce. A briefing in August last year said “the salary ceiling and perceptions regarding career trajectory may be impeding choices to become a teacher”. Gavrielatos said the strike was for “every teacher, in every classroom across NSW. It is also about every student”. “We cannot have a situation where kids are missing out due to a lack of teachers,” he said. “This is about the future of the teaching profession and the quality of education children receive. No student should miss out because of a lack of teachers, but this is what is going to increasingly happen across NSW if the government fails to act.” The NSW industrial award that determines the salaries and conditions of teachers is set to expire in December. Reports suggest all 2,200 of the state’s public schools may be impacted by the industrial action, with as many as 60,000 teachers considering taking part. The NSW department of education said it was disappointed the union had decided to take industrial action and cause further disruption and inconvenience to students and families who had experienced a difficult year due to Covid lockdowns. It was seeking orders in the industrial relations commission to prevent the strike. The education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said claims the state was heading for a teacher crisis were “blatantly misleading and self-serving”. “We have 90,000 teachers in NSW, and it is concerning a handful of union reps are urging them to abandon our students after months of home learning and just a week before the summer holidays,” Mitchell said. “The staffing data used by the teachers’ federation is wrong and assumes the government is doing nothing to manage teacher supply. “The truth is that our government is taking a proactive approach to teacher supply, backed by research, and $125m in funding. We are seeking to find opportunities to challenges that broad-brush approaches won’t fix. We know this because teachers have told us.”The independent candidate for the seat of Wentworth in Sydney’s east, Allegra Spender, has launched her campaign to take the blue ribbon Liberal seat with a message that action on the climate crisis is an economic as well as an environmental imperative. Speaking to to a crowd of more than 450 at Paddington RSL on a wet Saturday, Spender said she had been motivated to run to be a voice that truly represented the concerns of Wentworth voters. “Everyone knows we cannot afford one more electoral cycle of spin, denial and inaction on climate change, inaction on women’s representation and inaction on the economic opportunities of the green revolution,” she said. “If the local member is not up to the task then he needs to get out of the way.” Spender, whose father, John Spender, was a Liberal minister, and whose grandfather Sir Percy Spender served in the Menzies government, said that “today’s Liberal party was not the same party of my father and my grandfather”. “Wentworth is not radical and I am not a radical at all. But there are those who are trying to paint me and this wave of independents as such. “To them I would say: trying to protect the environment or our children is not a radical choice; ensuring that our businesses are at the forefront of innovation is not a radical choice; having equal representation of women and men in parliament is not a radical choice; and making sure that our institutions have transparency and integrity is not a radical choice.” Spender said that she would be supporting the target advocated by the Business Council of Australia of between 46%-50% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 and warned that unless Australia moved more swiftly in this decade it faced a “brutal transition” to a decarbonised economy after 2030. She also said she shared Wentworth’s concerns about the treatment of refugees and the lack of progress on reconciliation with First Nations people, drawing cheers. She also vowed to ensure money was spent by government on “what is important to Australians, not to win marginal seats”. She said she would draw on her business experience and develop evidence-based policies. Speaking earlier to the Guardian she said: “For me and for a lot of people in Wentworth, there is deep frustration about Canberra. The values of the people here are not being represented. “The most potent example of this is climate and it’s both the environmental issue, which is incredibly important to the people of Wentworth, but it’s also an economic question. “The people of Wentworth have a wide range of involvement in the economy and they expect Australia to be leading the way. We are going to miss out on the investment opportunities and the innovation opportunities if we don’t act now and very decisively for 2030.” Spender said that while the Liberal MP for Wentworth, Dave Sharma, a moderate, might say the right things on climate policy, he had not been able to deliver. Spender, the daughter of the late fashion designer Carla Zampatti, announced her intention to run two weeks ago. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She is still running her mother’s eponymous fashion label but is in the throes of handing over to devote her energies fulltime to winning Wentworth at the next election, expected sometime between March and May 2022. She has also been involved in the Sydney Renewable Power company, which installed large-scale community solar projects. “Cop 26 was the nail in the coffin for me, but there are other issues including integrity in government, whether it be a federal Icac with teeth, or the scandals we have seen in sports rorts, car park rorts,” she said. The former independent MP Kerryn Phelps, who held Wentworth after winning a byelection in 2018 but lost it to Sharma in 2019, has backed Spender. “She’s grown up in Wentworth, she was head girl at Ascham and a standout student, she’s run a business and she’s got substantial lifelong connections with Wentworth and its community,” Phelps said. “I am happy to provide her with advice during the campaign.” The Australian businesswoman Jillian Broadbent introduced Spender at the campaign launch, highlighting another campaign theme: the need for equal representation of women in federal parliament. Broadbent was a trailblazer on ASX boards. She is currently a member of the board of the Reserve Bank of Australia and the chair of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. She has been a director of the ASX, SBS and Qantas. Phelps became the first woman ever to represent Wentworth, which had been in Liberal hands (and occupied by a male) since it was proclaimed in 1901. “The Liberals in 2013 had 23% [women MPs], this year it’s 22%, it’s going nowhere,” Spender said. “You look at that and think, ‘when is this going to change?’ “I have girls and when I talk to them about politics and tell them we have only ever had one female prime minister, they ask, ‘Why is that?’ And it’s a really good question.” Asked whether she thought the independents would hold the balance of power and how she would use that power, Spender said she did not want to speculate. “The most important thing is to stand true, to stand up for what the people of Wentworth want.” She said that was clearly more action on climate policy and integrity in politics. But she added: “Wentworth is a very economically focused electorate and they want to see good economic management and management that is good for business.” If the independents don’t hold the balance of power, Spender said there was still much she could do as an independent to highlight sensible policy and pursue issues such as donations reform, which the major parties were reluctant to tackle. She pointed to the examples of Zali Steggall’s climate bill and Helen Haines’ national integrity commission bill, which have shown what could be done in concrete terms. “I will vote in the way that the community wants,” she said. “I will consult, I will listen to experts.”It has been more than three and a half years since Steve Smith’s captaincy of the Australian men’s Test team ended in tears. A fair bit has happened since then – enough that the ball-tampering scandal in Cape Town that cost Smith his job feels as if it was from another era entirely. At the time of the investigation into Smith’s role in the incident, Cricket Australia ruled that “any consideration of future leadership would be conditional on acceptance by fans and the public, form and authority among the playing group.” With Smith announced on Friday as the Test vice-captain, alongside new captain Pat Cummins, the governing body clearly believes these criteria have been fulfilled. While Smith’s authority among the players is not in doubt, it is the acceptance by fans and the public that is particularly interesting to consider. The backlash at the time of ‘sandpapergate’ was immense – then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull even spoke to CA directly to urge for the strongest action to be taken. The anger and disappointment of the Australian public was a driving factor behind a harsher-than-usual punishment for a ball-tampering charge. But while the pandemic has altered our perception of time to the point that an incident from 2018 feels as if it may as well have occurred in 1918, has it been long enough for Smith’s sins to be forgiven? It is possible that if Tim Paine’s captaincy had come to an end under more illustrious circumstances – a humble retirement after a winning Ashes campaign perhaps – these questions would not even be asked? Smith may have even been reinstated as captain, allowing more time for Cummins to find his feet as a leader. It may barely have raised an eyebrow. But the nature of Paine’s indiscretions and yet another scandal for CA to deal with, meant that they needed an unblemished captain – a ‘golden boy’ who (they dearly hope) will never bring the game into disrepute. A male Meg Lanning, if you will. This allows Smith to sidle in and enjoy the protection of Cummins’s golden glow. With the endorsement of a player so universally loved and respected by fans and players, we can remember Smith as the lovable boy with blonde tips who was so delighted to hug a lion cub. The quirky character with so much love for the game that he keeps his teammates awake at night because he simply cannot stop shadow batting in his hotel room. It is doubtful the public will ever forget Smith’s role in sandpapergate, but with Cummins’s backing, they will most likely forgive him for it. That is not to say the 32-year-old will not be under scrutiny. While the Australian public was united in their condemnation of his actions in 2018, they do not always present such a united front in their expectations of their sporting heroes. From the traditional cricket fans who value Steve Waugh’s style of ‘mental disintegration’ through to younger generations who are more likely to be repelled by notions of toxic masculinity, it is a tough balance to strike. In the time that has passed since Smith’s captaincy it has become clear that the ball-tampering incident was the result of years of conditioning in the need to win at all costs. The players involved in Cape Town overstepped the mark, but other behaviours which fall into the win-at-all-costs philosophy, such as sledging, risk-taking and playing through injury are often lauded. The question around Smith’s leadership now is: what did he learn from his fall from grace? Was it simply where to draw the line to avoid further trouble? Is it just a step back from ‘win at all costs’ to ‘win at most costs’? Or was it a broader lesson around leadership – about doing the right thing, even when it’s not popular? Is he ready to assist in ushering in a new era of Australian men’s cricket, one where honesty and accountability are more than just slogans to be emblazoned across a change-room wall? It is a complex situation to be navigated, especially considering Cummins’s assertion that Smith will play an “elevated vice-captaincy” role and the pair will be more collaborative than the traditional leadership model. It is a mature approach from Cummins, who may well have chosen to walk his own path and make sure to stamp his authority on the captaincy straight up. The fact that he has no interest in this speaks volumes for his suitability for the role. But for Smith, this elevated role means increased scrutiny on his integrity and it remains to be seen how he will cope with that. With the Ashes less than two weeks away, it is a quick turnaround for this leadership group to gain the trust of the public. But by playing a supporting role to Cummins, Smith has the ability to re-establish himself as an honourable leader.Australian TV reporter Matt Doran has made a lengthy, unreserved apology to Adele for failing to listen to her new album before an exclusive interview with the singer, calling the bungle a “terrible mistake”. Doran made international headlines this week for his interview with the singer, which was canned after he conceded he had only heard one track from her latest work, 30. Sony is refusing to release the footage. Live on Channel Seven program Weekend Sunrise on Saturday, Doran concluded the show by lamenting that he had “insulted” Adele and apologising to the singer, her fans and viewers of the station. “This is a story that has sparked a torrent of abuse and mockery from around the world and, if I’m being honest with you, the bulk of this savaging I deserve and I totally own,” Doran said. Doran was flown to London for the exclusive interview with Adele in the lead-up to the release of her fourth album, which he described as an “unspeakable privilege””. The interview was reportedly part of a A$1m package including broadcast rights to Adele’s One Night Only television special. It would have been Adele’s only Australian interview. “I made the terrible mistake of assuming we weren’t to be given a preview copy of this album because our interview was airing before it was released and Adele’s album was the industry’s most prized secret,” Doran said. “The day after we landed in London an email came through from Sony, it didn’t mention Adele but it did contain a link to her album. “The genuine, deadset, hand on heart truth is that I missed it. By an absurdly long margin the most important email I’ve ever missed in my life.” Doran said contrary to media reports, Adele didn’t walk out on the interview, which ran overtime and was at least 50% focused “squarely” on the new music. “I thought it was reductive to describe [the new music] as simply being about divorce, that it was about empowerment and would inspire people to summon the courage to steer their lives in a new direction,” Doran said of the interview. “We spoke about of the paradox that is being the world’s most famous artist but hating fame, we also discussed at length the concept of pure artistry, the majesty of Adele’s voice, what it must be like to hear that sound come out of one’s own mouth. “How go Easy On Me was conceived in part by singing acapella in the shower, and how the album helped repair her relationship towards the end with her now late father,” Doran said throughout the 29 minutes he was speaking with Adele, the singer was “profound” “funny” and “raw”, opening up about her experience with depression and describing it as “end of the world stuff”. “But all that doesn’t matter because, by missing the album link, however I might try to justify it, I’ve insulted Adele,” he said. “To Adele I say, I’ve never knowingly disrespected you by deliberately not listening to your work. I am so sorry. “I also apologise to Adele’s Australian fans and to … our viewers, who through my error have been denied this interview and the insight to her character.” The interview would have been a coup for Channel Seven, which is locked in a battle with Channel Nine’s Today in the ratings. Doran concluded the apology, which clocked in at two-and-a-half minutes, by citing the bridge after the second chorus in track 10 of Adele’s album, Hold On, where she sings “sometimes forgiveness is easiest in secret”. “I’m not expecting that forgiveness, but I do owe you an apology,” he said.The bodies of three people have been discovered in a burnt-out building in the Solomon Islands capital of Honiara, the first reported deaths after days of rioting. The charred bodies were discovered in a store in the Chinatown district of Honiara, police said on Saturday. A security guard, Edie Soa, said the bodies had been found in the OK Mart in Honiara’s Chinatown on Friday night. “Three of them were in the same room with a cash box and money on the floor,” he said. Many buildings in the Chinatown district have been torched and Soa said the bodies were very badly burnt. “We couldn’t tell if they are Chinese people or locals.” Police said forensic teams had launched an investigation and were still on the scene but that the cause of the deaths was unclear. The streets of the capital remained relatively quiet on Saturday morning as locals begin to assess the damage left by days of rioting. More than 100 people have been arrested. A curfew had been imposed on the restive capital overnight after a third day of violence that saw the prime minister’s home come under attack and swathes of the city reduced to smouldering ruins. Australian peacekeepers, who arrived in the country late on Thursday, also joined police on the streets to restore order and protect critical infrastructure. The explosion of violence is partly a result of frustrations with prime minister Manasseh Sogavare’s government and chronic unemployment – made worse by the pandemic. Experts say the crisis has also been fuelled by long-standing animosity between residents of the most populous island Malaita and the central government based on the island of Guadalcanal. The archipelago nation of around 700,000 people has for decades endured ethnic and political tensions. Malaita residents have long complained that their island is neglected by the central government, and divisions intensified when Sogavare recognised Beijing in 2019.Australia has suspended flights from nine southern African countries and closed its borders to any foreign nationals who have been to the region, amid concern about the emerging Covid-19 variant of concern, Omicron. The announcement, made by the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, on Saturday afternoon, followed travel restrictions imposed by the United States, United Kingdom and European Union. The new measures were discussed in a series of meetings, including between the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, early on Saturday morning. The previous day, Hunt had said Australia had no intention of closing its border to South Africa and surrounding nations. The restrictions apply to nine African countries: South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, the Seychelles, Malawi and Mozambique. Australians attempting to return home from that region will be allowed into the country, but ordered into mandatory hotel quarantine. Anyone who is already in Australia, who has visited one of the listed nations in the past 14 days, is ordered to quarantine and get tested immediately. Authorities say fewer than 100 recent arrivals to Australia would be subject to such orders. There are 20 people from South Africa, who have arrived during the past week, quarantining at the Howard Springs facility in the Northern Territory. One of those cases is positive, though the variant is not yet known. Hunt said there were no known cases of Omicron in Australia, but that precautionary measures were needed given emerging concern about the variant. Hunt said the government had taken “strong, swift, decisive and immediate actions”. “They’re taken on the best medical advice,” he said. “We’ve taken [precautionary] action in the past. We’ve taken early action in the past. We are doing that again. “The difference is that we now have strong vaccines, we have one of the highest levels of coverage in the world, we have one of the most recently vaccinated populations in the world, and we have strong public health and social measures, and we also have, most significantly, a well-prepared hospital system.” Hunt said the measures could be quickly altered – scaled up or wound back – as the world learned more about Omicron. “If the medical evidence shows that further actions are required, we will not hesitate to take them,” he said. The World Health Organisation and the EU have quickly classified the variant as “of concern”. Kelly said authorities still did not have “any clear indication” that it was more severe that other variants, or how it affected people who had been vaccinated. “They’re crucial points,” he said. “It’s the reason why we’re taking this precautionary approach, which is proportionate to that risk, and putting in place the measures that the minister has outlined in relation to that.” Earlier on Saturday, the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, called for the borders to be closed to South Africa and surrounds. “We know the impact that Delta had when it came here,” he said. “And we can’t afford to be complacent. “We should close the border with southern African countries, just like our counterparts in advanced economies in the northern hemisphere have done. “The health authorities are still examining the detail but what we should have is an attitude which mitigates risk.” State health authorities have already begun contacting international arrivals in an attempt to quickly identify and isolate anyone who has been to southern Africa. NSW Health said all travellers who had been in the region in the 14 days before arriving in Australia should get tested and isolate until further notice. “The emergence of this new variant reinforces the critical importance of all fully vaccinated travellers who return from overseas complying with the NSW Health guidelines; there are requirements to be tested and restrictions on attending certain high-risk premises,” NSW Health said in a statement. On Saturday, Victoria recorded 1,252 new Covid-19 cases and five deaths. In the third consecutive weekend of Victorian protests against vaccine mandates, thousands gathered outside state parliament at midday before moving on to Bourke Street Mall. Protesters waved Australian and Eureka flags as well as those of other countries including Greece, Lebanon and Macedonia, and held signs with slogans such as “fear God not Dan”, “end segregation now” and “kill the bill”, in reference to the pandemic legislation before parliament. Several bus and tram routes were affected by the protest, with motorists urged to allow plenty of extra time if travelling into the city. A protest against mandatory vaccination was also held in Sydney’s Hyde Park. In New South Wales there were 235 new Covid cases on Saturday. The NT recorded two new Covid cases, including the man on a repatriation flight from South Africa. Queensland had one new case, in hotel quarantine.The prime ministerial language is starkly reminiscent. In 2013, as asylum seeker boats appeared on Australia’s north and west horizons almost daily, the then prime minister Kevin Rudd said those who were bringing them were “the absolute scum of the earth” and should “rot in hell”. “Our country has had enough of people smugglers exploiting asylum seekers and seeing them drown on the high seas.” The man who would replace him, Tony Abbott, elected that year on a bare promise to “stop the boats”, vowed likewise, “by hook or by crook we will do what is necessary to keep our country safe and to keep this evil trade stopped”. In the UK in 2021, in the wake of the brutal tragedy of 27 lives lost in the frigid waters of the Channel, the British prime minister Boris Johnson has sounded, to Australian ears, extraordinarily familiar. “This disaster underscores how dangerous it is to cross the Channel in this way. “And it also shows how vital it is that we… use every power that we can, leave no stone unturned to demolish the business proposition of the human traffickers and the gangsters.” Australia has promoted itself globally as a country with a solution. An adamantine and unflinching policy of boat interceptions and turn-backs, of offshore processing and indefinite detention, even of children. But an examination of the facts of Australia’s asylum policies reveals a pernicious cost: legal, moral, financial, but above all, human. Eight years and the equivalent of £5bn. Twelve deaths and thousands of lives damaged, disrupted, and left in limbo. Australia’s asylum policies have resolved little. The UK is openly contemplating an “Australian-style” offshore processing regime, where the legal obligation to assess an asylum seeker’s claim for protection under the refugee convention is - claimed at least - to be outsourced to some place overseas. Gibraltar, Ascension Island, Papua New Guinea, Moldova, Rwanda: Britain’s list has grown longer, the places more distant, more doubtful. The Falkland Islands has been proposed. Albania has angrily rebuffed overtures. But home office minister Kevin Foster has conceded no country is, yet, willing to host offshore processing centres for people who have sought asylum in the UK. In Australia, offshore processing did not stop the arrival of boats. Australia announced it would restart offshore processing of asylum seekers who arrive by boat (those who arrive by plane, a far larger number, are not sent offshore), in August 2012. The first asylum seekers were sent to the Pacific island of Nauru in September of that year, to Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island in November. The government’s own data shows that in 2013, the first full year of offshore processing, 300 boats arrived in Australian waters, carrying 20,587 asylum seekers, the largest number of boat arrivals ever recorded. So many boats arrived, in fact, that the capacity of both centres was overwhelmed within three months and the government was forced to announce some boat arrivals would be kept onshore. “The Australian experience shows that offshore processing does not do what it’s meant to do,” Madeline Gleeson, senior research fellow at the University of New South Wales’s Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law said, “it does not deter asylum seekers from seeking protection by boat”. “In the first 12 months we saw more people arrive in Australia by boat seeking asylum than at any other time in history or since.” Boat arrivals only began to reduce in Australia in 2014 with the implementation of forcible boat interceptions, turn-backs and take-backs. Asylum seekers, most coming from Indonesia or Sri Lanka, were forced by Australia’s navy to turn their boats around - on occasion skippers were bribed by Australian officials to go back. Others were towed back outside Australian waters. Others still were put into lifeboats with just enough fuel to reach Indonesia’s closest islands. But turnbacks have raised legal issues around refoulement - sending people back to harm. Gleeson argued boat turnbacks have “serious legal and humanitarian concerns … in fact, we know that people have been taken back to their countries of origin, only to flee again and be recognised as refugees elsewhere”. “The legal and geographic environments of the UK are too different from those of Australia to make that a viable option to be adopted there.” The Australian government maintains the policy is a success. Defence minister Peter Dutton said on Friday, the government had made the “difficult decisions necessary to regain control of our sovereignty, by securing our borders and breaking the people smugglers’ business model”. Australia’s ambassador to the UK, formerly the attorney general in Abbott’s government, George Brandis, told a commons home affairs select committee this year that deterrence efforts in transit countries such as Indonesia, boat turnbacks at sea, and offshore processing, were a collective force: “a suite of policies that, operating together, had the effect of driving the people smugglers out of business”. But Australia’s asylum policies carry other significant, fundamental flaws. Parts of it were illegal: Australia’s largest offshore detention centre, on Manus Island, was found to be unconstitutional by Papua New Guinea’s Supreme Court. The Australian government was later ordered to pay AU$70m [£35m] in compensation to those it had unlawfully detained. The United Nations has said Australia’s system violates the convention against torture and the International Criminal Court’s prosecutor said indefinite detention offshore was “cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment” and unlawful under international law. It is dangerous: At least 12 people have died in the camps, including being murdered by guards, through medical neglect and by suicide. In 2016, the Nauru files published by the Guardian exposed the detention system’s own reports of rape, sexual abuse, self-harm and child abuse in offshore detention. Psychiatrists sent to work in the camps have described the conditions as “inherently toxic” and akin to “torture”. It is also exceptionally costly: the commons committee heard it costs Australia, conservatively, AU$1bn [£540m] a year to run its offshore processing system. Currently on Nauru, Australia’s only “enduring” offshore processing island, there are 107 refugees and asylum seekers held. Most have been there more than eight years. It costs the Australian taxpayer $358,646 (£193,400) every month to hold a single person on the island, nearly $12,000 (£6500) a day, or $4.3m (£2,320,000) per person each year, according to the government’s own figures. Kurdish-Iranian journalist and refugee Behrouz Boochani was held for more than seven years on Manus Island, abused, beaten and tortured, before he secured a visa to New Zealand, which recognised his protection claim. He saw friends killed, watched them descend into madness, or simply give up. “The Australian government has so badly damaged many people we don’t ever hear from them,” he told the Guardian. “People who are still suffering even after being released from those prison camps, families who were separated and children who were traumatised. “People think if they do this cruelty on the most vulnerable people it only damages refugees, but in fact it undermines democracy and basic principles of humanity. The Australian government has deliberately created a tragedy.”I’ve collected four boys from school today – my son and three playmates. Intending to eke out an afternoon of delicious sunshine, I drive us and the dog to the high point of Slingsby Bank, where there are woods and long views of the North York Moors. Boys and dog high-tail ahead of me, jostling and scuffling fiery-hued leaf litter. They reach the edge of the wood when the day funnels abruptly to a tightly focused here and now. Something is happening. Four pairs of wide eyes turn to me. Four mouths making the same small O: the shape of a word none of us has the bandwidth to speak: what? I’ve experienced two earthquakes before, both at night. The first passed in groggy puzzlement, the second jolted body and mind into overdrive. Is that what this is? There’s a long rumble. My insides ripple, like a lake when a pebble drops through. But my feet disagree. I’m wearing barefoot boots with soles so bendy I’m aware of mud squidging against my arches. I should be feeling this tremor the way an elephant senses infrasound. But whatever these vibrations might be, they’re not coming from the ground. The dog bolts, making directly for the safety of the car, and so we abandon our walk and follow. The boys are all talking at once. I post a question to Twitter and replies come fast – the shockwave has been felt across the moors and the British Geological Survey is looking into it. Tomorrow we’ll learn that a Swiss Air Force jet on routine training has broken the sound barrier over the North Sea and by some atmospheric quirk the resulting boom travelled further than normal. A mundane explanation really, but for now, with only the evidence of our senses to go on, it seems we’re experiencing a drawn-out version of the alertness you get when falling. We head home through a supersaturated pink and blue sunset, and even as they discuss earthquake versus sonic boom theories, the boys notice the fallen beech leaves glowing like hot coals. I encourage their chatter, because it is the most normal sound in a world still thrumming with uneasy novelty. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNext Tuesday will mark the end of the Atlantic hurricane season (not that hurricanes take notice of the date, of course), and it has been a busy year. With a total of 21 named storms – seven of which became hurricanes – it has been the third most active season on record and the fourth costliest, causing an estimated $70bn (£52bn) in damages. And it is only the third time ever that all 21 designated names – a practice dating back to 1953, using six recycled lists – have been used. But relentless hurricane seasons are something we will have to get used to. Dazhi Xi and Ning Lin from Princeton University looked at hurricane records dating back to 1979 and showed that back-to-back storms (two storms in the same place within a fortnight) had become more likely over time, with Florida and Louisiana being the states at highest risk. Using a climate model to project this trend into the future, they found that back-to-back storms will be twice as likely along parts of the US Gulf coast by the end of the century (the findings were published in Geophysical Research Letters). “If you need 15 days to restore infrastructure – for example, a power system – after a storm hits, and the second storm makes landfall before the system can recover, residents will face dangerous conditions,” said Xi.Michael Gove is chairing a new weekly cabinet committee on levelling up, to bang heads together across Whitehall, as the government battles to repair the political damage of the past three weeks and show it is serious about tackling economic inequalities. After a tumultuous period that culminated in the prime minister’s fumbled speech to the CBI on Monday, the forthcoming levelling-up white paper, expected to be published in mid-December, is regarded as a key moment to demonstrate the government’s seriousness. Gove had publicly argued for a new committee structure to ensure levelling up is implemented across government, and has won the backing of the prime minister for that approach. He was given the levelling-up brief in Boris Johnson’s September reshuffle in a move widely regarded at the time as underlining the importance placed on it by the prime minister. However, Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, will accuse the government of “selling out the north” on Saturday, after the scaling-back of the integrated rail plan and the introduction of the social care cap, which she will call “a dementia tax on working-class people and a dementia tax on the north”. She will criticise the rail plans, which also disappointed many Conservative MPs. “The government’s rail plan is a betrayal of trust, a betrayal of promises made to our communities and a betrayal of the north,” she will tell Labour’s North West conference. “Only the Conservatives would call a train line that stops on this side of the Pennines a trans-Pennine rail line. It’s like the Eurostar stopping at Dover and then you get on a Pacer train across the Channel.” Government sources rejected reports on Friday that the Treasury had blocked additional funding for levelling up, pointing out that the three-year spending review was only delivered last month, and there had been no additional bid from Gove’s department since then. However, there have been tensions between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and No 10 in recent days, with the Treasury frustrated at a series of botched announcements of major policy decisions. Scores of Conservative backbenchers refused to back detailed plans for the social care cap on Monday amid fears they will disproportionately penalise families with modest assets. The levelling-up white paper is regarded as a potential reset moment for the government. Gove has suggested the aim of the policy is to help young people to “stay local and go far”, by creating more opportunities outside London and the south-east. It has been drawn up with detailed input from Neil O’Brien, formerly the prime minister’s levelling-up adviser and now a minister in Gove’s department, and former Bank of England chief economist Andy Haldane. It is expected to set out new proposals for devolution, including powerful county mayors, and a shake-up of the boundaries of existing mayoralties. Gove told the levelling-up select committee in a hearing on 8 November: “Without wanting to pre-empt the white paper in detail, we will be looking at mayoral combined authorities. Should their geography change, ie grow?” It is understood there are concerns in government that some mayoralties, including those in Bristol and North Tyne, do not match the local economic geography, making them less effective than some other models of devolution. However, government insiders said the policy document would set out a “framework” for more devolution, with final details only to be agreed in consultation with local leaders. Other themes are likely to include skills, transport and investment – but not planning, with controversial reforms to the planning system still on “pause” as they are reconsidered in the light of the Conservatives’ loss of the Chesham and Amersham byelection. Revised proposals are now not expected to be published until the new year, the Guardian understands. Johnson has suggested that levelling up is the central idea of his government, but he was criticised for a keynote speech on the issue in July that contained little new policy. The new cabinet committee, which it is understood has already met twice, is a subcommittee of the government’s domestic and economic strategy committee. The chief secretary to the Treasury, Simon Clarke, is its deputy chair, and ministers from across government will be asked to attend where their department’s work is relevant to the aspect of levelling up being discussed.Freddie Mercury: The Final Act 9pm, BBC Two It is likely we know everything there is to know about Freddie Mercury – and yet, this 90-minute celebration of the Queen singer, who would have been 75 this year, manages to explore his legacy in a fresh context. Tracking the last few years of his life, it uses a mix of new and forgotten interviews alongside endlessly captivating archive footage, while also speaking with those in the LGBTQ+ community who saw the initial impact of HIV/Aids first-hand. Hollie Richardson Dispatches: Escape from the Taliban 6.30pm, Channel 4 This special report by local journalists follows terrified Afghans in the days after the Taliban took Kabul. One of them is female rights activist Zoya Faizi who, like many others, is trying to flee the country. There’s also footage of Taliban negotiator Anas Haqqani going back to visit Bagram prison, from which he was released in November 2019. Hannah Verdier Strictly Come Dancing 6.55pm, BBC One There is no surer sign of the festive season than a dwindling Strictly lineup. It has been a thrilling series: well-earned 10s and the show’s first all-male couple. In week 10, the Glitterball is anyone’s to win but whatever happens, Rose Ayling-Ellis – the first deaf contestant – has surely won the coveted title of “best journey”. Henry Wong I’m A Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! 9pm, ITV The I’m a Celeb class of 2021 have had a week to settle into their Welsh digs and get to know each other a little better. So, who is shaping up to be the king (or queen) of Gwrych Castle? And who might end up being dirty rascals? Ant and Dec track the shifting moods in camp as the stars strive to secure vital supplies. Graeme Virtue Empire State of Mind 9pm, Channel 4 Empireland author Sathnam Sanghera concludes his two-part examination of the British empire’s ongoing legacy in the UK. Tonight, he unpicks misunderstandings of imperial history, and takes us back to his old school in Wolverhampton, where he meets a new generation of pupils keen to learn more about a subject that was missing from the curriculum for so many of us while growing up. HR WeWork: How to Lose $30bn in Two Weeks 9pm, Sky Documentaries “The next revolution is going to be the WeWork revolution … ” So said Adam Neumann, the eccentric co-founder of WeWork – a global network of shared office spaces for millennials who thrive on entrepreneurial culture and free booze. So, how did the startup darling go from multibillion dollar business to bankruptcy? Here, WeWork insiders and former members dish the dirt. HR Film choice Parasite, 10pm, Channel 4 This 2020 Oscar best picture winner was a surprise international breakout hit for South Korea director Bong Joon-ho, coming after his inventive but unprofitable sci-fi dramas Snowpiercer and Okja. In a subversive story of power and privilege, the down-at-heel Kim clan (led by the great Song Kang-ho as the father) stumble on to the idea of usurping the domestic staff of the wealthy Park family after the son becomes the English tutor to the Parks’ daughter. Many a delicious twist and turn follows in a thrilling satire with more than a hint of Losey’s The Servant. Simon Wardell Apocalypse Now: The Final Cut, 12.15am, BBC One One can only hope that this 2019 restoration is Francis Ford Coppola’s final tinker with his wildly ambitious, seminal Vietnam war drama. The “Goldilocks edit” – longer than the 1979 original, shorter than the 2001 Redux take – retains the encounter with the French colonials from Redux that adds historical breadth to the tragic story of America’s anti-communist endeavours and removes an unnecessary second Playboy Bunnies sequence. But in whatever form, it’s an overwhelming visual and aural journey into humanity’s worst impulses. SW The Columnist, 1.50am, Film4 A superb Katja Herbers (from TV’s Westworld and Evil) heads Ivo van Aart’s blackly comic horror about the perils of the comments section. Her sweet-hearted Dutch journalist, Femke Boot, becomes obsessed by abusive, anonymous online trolls, particularly after discovering her neighbour is one of them. This inspires Femke to take up a particularly brutal form of cancelling, while she falls for a horror author who is, conversely, a genuinely nice guy. The film follows through on its premise, possibly beyond reason, but it’s a fun, viperish, bloody ride. SW Live sport Women’s World Cup Football: England v Austria 11.45am, ITV. Group D qualifier from Sunderland, with Arsenal’s Beth Mead (pictured) in contention to start for England. Snooker: UK Championship 1.15pm, BBC Two. Opening last-64 matches. Coverage continues throughout the week. International Rugby Union: Barbarians v Samoa Select XV 2pm, BBC One. The Killik Cup from Twickenham.Christmas is a time when leftovers come into their own. For the fortunate, majestic festive tables heave with roast turkey, crunchy roast potatoes, caramelised root vegetables, brussels sprouts and all our favourite trimmings. But although we might give it a good go, it’s unlikely we’ll devour everything in one sitting. The big roast isn’t just for Christmas Day, though – it should allow for leftovers, making it easier to cater for a crowd on Boxing Day and beyond. Turn leftover turkey into pilaf, roast veg makes a brilliant frittata and uncooked sprouts are delicious shredded into a super-fresh slaw. If you want to keep the rich and decadent meals flowing, this leftover Christmas roast pie will hit the spot: from scraps to glory, it’s satisfying both to make and to eat – salty, savoury and decadent. Leftover Christmas roast pie This pie elevates the humblest Christmas scraps into the most glorious meal. If you don’t have enough turkey or ham, make up the weight with more roast vegetables (I particularly like it with roast parsnips and carrots, but anything will work). I’ve included a recipe for a wholemeal rough puff pastry that’s rich, buttery, flaky and short, but any pastry will work here, including ready-made. (Whenever I make pastry, I usually double the amount and freeze half for a later use, anyway.) And, if you happen to have 200ml thickened gravy left over, use that as the sauce instead of the roux and stock mixture. Prep 15 min Cook/chill 1 hr 30 min Serves 4 For the filling 300g roast turkey or chicken, shredded 200g roast ham, ripped into strips 150g leftover roast vegetables, diced 60g butter 130g green leek tops 40g cheddar 4 sprigs parsley, finely chopped, stalks and all 30ml double cream 1 tsp ready-mixed English mustard 40g wholemeal flour 150ml-220ml turkey (or chicken) stock, or water 50ml whole milk, for glazing For the rough puff 65g wholemeal (or plain) flour 45g cold butter, cut into 1cm cubes 35ml cold water Mix the shredded roast turkey, ham strips and diced leftover roast vegetables in a large bowl (if you have less of one of the ingredients, replace it by weight with more of one of the others). Melt half the butter in a medium pan, then soften the leek tops on a low heat for eight minutes. Tip this into the turkey mixture, and add the grated cheddar, finely chopped parsley, double cream and mustard. In the same pan, make a roux (unless you have 200-220ml thick turkey gravy left over, in which case skip to the bit where you add the sauce to the filling mix). Melt the remaining 30g butter over a medium heat, then add the wholemeal flour and cook for a minute, stirring constantly with a whisk. Add the 150ml stock a little at a time, whisking constantly to prevent lumps, then cook, stirring all the time, until the sauce begins to thicken – if it seems too thick, incorporate more stock. Pour the sauce (or the leftover gravy) into the turkey bowl and mix to combine. To make the pastry, weigh the flour into a bowl, add the diced cold butter and chop in with two butter knives. Measure out the water, stir into the mix, then bring everything together into a ball. Roll out into a large rectangle, then fold in from one short edge by a third; repeat from the other short edge. Roll out the sheet into a rectangle again, then repeat the fold-and-roll process twice more. Put the pastry on a large plate, cover and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Tip the filling mixture into a deep, 20cm pie dish (mine’s a basic rectangular one from Falcon; if you use a round tin, you may need to make as much as one and a half times the amount of pastry above). Roll the pastry into a 3-5mm-thick rectangle and lay it over the top of the filling. Press all around the edge with the back of a fork, to seal, then brush the top of the pastry with milk and cut two small holes in the top, so the steam can escape while it’s cooking. Bake for 25-30 minutes, until the pastry is golden, then remove and leave to rest for 10 minutes. Serve hot – mash and greens would go down a storm alongside, as would a dollop of English mustard. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match Given that we’re talking leftovers, maybe you ought to drink something you have open already with this, but otherwise any easy-going red like a côtes du rhône or Aldi’s immensely gluggable Specially Selected Costières de Nîmes 2020 (£5.99, 13.5%) would rub along just fine.Alizée on Rhys What were you hoping for? Good food, meeting someone interesting and that my date would be as tall as me (six-foot gal over here!) First impressions? Very smiley, smartly dressed and easygoing. What did you talk about? Our shared love of food, adventure and live music. We’ve done ski seasons in the same place, so we shared the juicy stories of what happened there. And my work in the advertising world. Any awkward moments? We both had a laugh when the restaurant misunderstood that we were on a blind date – they thought we were reviewing the restaurant. Good table manners? Faultless. We ate loads of small plates and he remembered what everything was, and always asked if I wanted to go first before trying the food. Best thing about Rhys? Being fully on board when I suggested we order a bottle of champagne. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes, as a friend – he has lots of cool stories to share. Describe Rhys in three words Positive, attentive and well travelled. What do you think he made of you? Tall, outgoing, and he could see how much I love food and adventure. Did you go on somewhere? No. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No, there wasn’t a spark unfortunately. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? The food was impeccable, and he was easy to chat to, but I’m sure he’ll agree there wasn’t any sexual chemistry. He was also a lot shorter than me. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? Unlikely. Rhys on Alizée What were you hoping for? After everything that has happened in the last year, I was just very excited for the opportunity to go out, meet someone I’d never spoken to before and enjoy a fun evening. First impressions? Beautiful: wonderful eyes, great smile. Taller than me (and I was wearing my “Make me taller shoes”). What did you talk about? Winter, travelling, what we do for work, friends … A lot. Any awkward moments? Probably when I said cheers in Spanish and not French (Alizée speaks fluent French). Super smooth. Good table manners? Excellent. She was eating edamame beans with chopsticks. That takes some skill. Best thing about Alizée? Very easy to talk to, wonderfully personable, made me feel at ease. Would you introduce her to your friends? Absolutely. Describe Alizée in three words Ebullient, vivacious, well travelled. What do you think she made of you? I’ll let her answer that! Did you go on somewhere? No, we said goodnight and went our separate ways. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? Nothing. Marks out of 10? 10. Would you meet again? Not knowingly, but if we ran into each other I know it would be a pleasure. • Alizée and Rhys ate at Wild Heart Bar &amp; Shokudo, London W1B. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comThree years ago, I bought a laptop, days before flying to America, because the old iPad I had long used for working away from home had just died. Compared with the other technology in my life, this laptop was like something from the future. I’m not an early adopter. After my phone was stolen on a train, I went in search of the least-desirable model available for purchase: reconditioned, obsolete, unrecommended. “Also, rose gold,” I would say, showing people its pink sheen. “I could leave it on the bonnet of a car overnight and it would still be there in the morning.” In spite of the forward leap the laptop represented, I never used it unless I was travelling. Whenever I opened it in a motel somewhere, the last thing I’d written on it – sometimes many months before – would still be up on the screen, reminding me of past trips. I would read the first paragraph of a column about a fox and a crow fighting in my back garden and think: ah, Marseille. Then, last summer, the desktop computer in my office shed expired. My youngest son got it working, but it was so taxed by the updated operating system that I sometimes had to wait 20 minutes for it to catch up with itself in the morning. One day I set the laptop down in front of it and used that instead. Problem solved, I thought. It didn’t take me long to realise that if it was raining I no longer had to cross the wet garden to sit in a cold shed. I could just work in the kitchen. If it was sunny, I could work in the hammock. I began walking around the house with the laptop open under my chin, like a teenager. I am never not looking at it. It is early evening. My wife and I are watching part five of an underwhelming six-part thriller, but I am also looking at my laptop. When I rise to check on dinner, I take it with me. When I return, I can just see over the lip of the laptop that my wife has switched over to her favourite show: a reality series about a luxury yacht crewed by morons. “Why is this on?” I say. “You were gone for ages,” my wife says, switching back to the thriller. “Anyway, you’re on your laptop.” “I can do two things at once,” I say, thinking: actually, I can do seven things at once. I can check my email, Twitter, my other email, the latest headlines, tomorrow’s weather, and today’s Covid case figures, all while watching this thriller about … I point at the TV. “Who’s she?” I say. “The victim’s mother,” my wife says. “She looks like the other one – whose husband had the affair,” I say. “Not if you’re paying attention she doesn’t,” my wife says. “I am paying attention,” I say. “Can you just quickly remind me of everything that’s happened so far?” “I’m hungry,” my wife says. Dinner is a stew that I have been preparing since 5pm, reading the recipe off my laptop while simultaneously watching live updates from a vote in parliament, and also monitoring various metrics that accurately gauge the success or failure of my career in real time. “It’s basically done,” I tell my wife. “I’ll pause this, if you like,” my wife says, pressing pause. “Fine,” I say, standing up, with my laptop. I call everyone to the kitchen. The stew is meant to last several days, but with all three sons present, the pot is empty once everyone is served. As the three of them sit down at the table, I pick up my plate and my wine glass and head back to the TV, laptop tucked under my right arm. Before I reach the door I can feel the laptop beginning to slip. I apply more pressure with my elbow, to no avail. As I attempt to block its fall with my leg, the plate of stew leaves my hand, turning upside down in the air. On its way I give it a final, accidental kick, sending its contents flying everywhere before it smashes on the floor. The computer lands beside it. “My laptop!” I shriek, in the tone someone might use to shout “My baby!” outside a burning nursery. Stew is flecked across the walls up to a height of three feet. I look around for the remains of my wine glass, only to discover I am still holding it. “Oh dear,” my wife says as I sit down in front of the TV with what remains of my dinner: a very distressed baked potato, and half a glass of wine. “No comment,” I say, checking my email on my rose-tinted phone.Going Out: Cinema House of Gucci Out now Lady Gaga is all the reason anyone should need to catch this glossy crime drama about the demise of the Italian fashion dynasty. If you need further incentive: it’s directed by Ridley Scott, and Adam Driver, Salma Hayek, Jared Leto and Al Pacino also star. Frames of Representation Institute of Contemporary Arts, London, to 4 December The ICA’s signature annual film festival dedicated to “the cinema of the real” returns, featuring – as ever – an impeccably curated offering of 20 international documentary premieres, this year unfolding under the collective thematic banner of (Re)Imagining. Pirates Out now Filmed in London and set in 1999, in some ways Pirates is simply a classic tale of men on a mission. The mission: to gain admission to the best millennium party ever. The men: hapless lads with dreams of big careers in music. Writer-director Reggie Yates gets us rooting for his charming cast from minute one. Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn Out now A teacher’s career is jeopardised when her sex tape is leaked, in what is – as you might have guessed from the title – another button-pushing provocation from Radu Jude, the Romanian director widely celebrated for his gloriously confrontational perspectives on modern life. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs D-Block Europe Tuesday 30 November to 10 December; starts Birmingham Lewisham’s trap-loving hip-hop duo don’t do things in moderation. Last year’s debut album, The Blue Print: Us vs Them, stretched 29 guest-heavy songs to more than 90 minutes, while their rapid release rate has seen them land 16 top 40 hits in just three years. Expect the unexpected at this live show. Michael Cragg Jessie Ware Wednesday 1 to 13 December; starts Birmingham With last year’s Brit-nominated, disco-saturated fourth album What’s Your Pleasure? still riding high following a summer 2021 rerelease, Ware finally gets to unleash it onto venues across the country. Her earlier, more pillow soft-soul should act as ample breathers between sophisticated bangers such as the single Spotlight. MC Aurora Orchestra With Cassie Kinoshi Kings Place, London, Saturday 27 November London’s young Aurora Orchestra furthers its adventurous reputation on this gig with composer-saxophonist Kinoshi, including the premiere of her Three Suns Suite – drawing on her own life as a Black Briton, and the cultural chemistry of her grandparents’ generation. John Fordham A Catalan Celebration Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, Wednesday 1 December The pandemic put paid to events marking the 50th anniversary of the death of the composer Roberto Gerhard. London Sinfonietta is making amends now by including Leo and Libra, the two brilliantly coloured works Gerhard composed for them. Andrew Clements * * * Going Out: Stage The Book of Dust – La Belle Sauvage Bridge theatre, London, Tuesday 30 November to 26 February This first part of Philip Pullman’s The Book of Dust trilogy is set 12 years before His Dark Materials – and sees two children struggle to protect young Lyra as the waters rise. This stage adaptation is directed by Emily Burns, James Cousins and Nicholas Hytner. Miriam Gillinson The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus Pitlochry Festival theatre, Wednesday 1 to 23 December In an outdoor installation experience that takes place in the theatre’s gardens, Hannah Lavery adapts L Frank Baum’s Christmas tale, in which young Alice tries to catch Santa Claus. MG Christopher Bliss Pleasance theatre, London, Thursday 2 December A gloriously spot-on parody of the self-styled “creative type”, Rob Carter’s shell-suited, frighteningly prolific novelist (we’re talking multiple books per day) is both utterly delusional and the creator of some genuinely engaging – albeit very strange – fiction. Rachel Aroesti Romeo &amp; Juliet Royal Albert Hall, London, Wednesday 1 December A return to the stage for the sometimes brilliant, sometimes erratic Sergei Polunin, famed for walking out of the Royal Ballet, his many tattoos and the 30m YouTube views of his Take Me to Church video. He will be dancing here with the divine Alina Cojocaru. Lyndsey Winship * * * Going Out: Art Life Between Islands Tate Britain, London, Wednesday 1 December to 3 April This survey of Caribbean-British art since the Windrush era should be a feast of creative crossings, literally across the Atlantic, and figuratively. Among the 40-plus artists featured are Hurvin Anderson (work pictured, above), Paul Dash, Alberta Whittle and Sonia Boyce. There are plenty of media, and an urgent history to tell. Amy: Beyond the Stage Design Museum, London, to 10 April The Design Museum is taking the road to success already trodden by the V&amp;A, with high-class pop culture exhibitions that bring the frisson of music and the night into the gallery. The late Amy Winehouse gets the Bowie treatment here with displays of her clothes and a survey of her brief career. Derek Jarman Manchester Art Gallery, Thursday 2 December to 10 April The radical film-maker who made Jubilee, Caravaggio and many more alternative classics was also a powerful artist. Jarman’s abstract paintings and passionate assemblages vividly express his anger and love of life. This retrospective puts his art and cinema works side by side to pay homage to a great British original. Cathy Wilkes Modern Institute, Glasgow, to 22 January The ordinary stuff of life gets a furious second chance as raw, expressive art. Wilkes arranges domestic objects as if she was carving words into flesh. She has been feted at the Venice Biennale, shortlisted for the Turner prize, but perhaps Glasgow, where she lives is the best place to understand her work. Jonathan Jones * * * Staying In: Streaming Harlem From Friday 3 December, Amazon Prime Video Tracy Oliver, best known as creator of the raucous 2017 film Girls Trip, is behind this lively comedy-drama (above), which charts the work and love lives of four thirtysomething friends in New York, while also doubling as a meditation on contemporary Black womanhood. Yellowjackets Thursday 2 December, 9pm, Sky Atlantic When a plane crashes en route to a football competition, it’s the beginning of a lifetime of trauma for the schoolgirls who make it out alive: 25 years on, the secrets of their survival still haunt them. Christina Ricci and Juliette Lewis star in a genre-bending thriller. Freddie Mercury: The Final Act Saturday 27 November, 9pm, BBC Two This fascinating feature-length documentary chronicling the end of the Queen frontman’s life doesn’t merely pay homage: colleagues, close friends and family also reflect on the era’s handling of the Aids epidemic, including the historic and heartrending 1992 tribute concert held in Mercury’s memory. Cancelled Thursday 2 December, 10pm, Channel 4 Iconsequences for inappropriate behaviour – and even criminal activity – are still sorely lacking, but there’s no doubt some people genuinely have been caught in cancel culture’s crosshairs. Richard Bacon meets some of those on the receiving end of social media’s moral outrage. RA * * * Staying In: Games Solar Ash Out from Thursday 2 December, PC, PS4, Ps5 Set inside a black hole, this intriguing and ultra-stylish game is all about fluid movement and surreal spacescapes. In motion it looks like a dance through enormous, open, colour-saturated spaces, while its giant hostile space creatures call the PlayStation classic Shadow of the Colossus to mind. Big Brain Academy: Brain vs Brain Out from Friday 3 December, Nintendo Switch A party game designed for people who like to show off how clever they are in front of their families. It’s unlikely that the prospect of beating their parents at maths teasers will draw tweens away from Fortnite, but adjustable difficulty makes this welcoming to kids and adults regardless. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums David Bowie – Toy Out now Originally recorded for a 2001 release but held up by record label politics, and later scuppered by a leak online, Toy now arrives as part of the Brilliant Adventure box set, officially two decades later than intended. Featuring reworkings of Bowie songs from the late 60s and early 70s, the album shows an artist in the midst of a creative upswing. Westlife – Wild Dreams Out now The enduring Irish manband return with album No 12, their second since returning in 2019 following an eight-year hiatus. Billed as capturing “the mood of the moment”, it features the uplifting, key change-tastic Starlight and the more typical, stool-bothering ballad, My Hero, co-written by Ed Sheeran. Fred Again.. – Actual Life 2 (February 2–October 15 2021) Out now Producer Fred Gibson – who has worked with everyone from Brian Eno to Rita Ora to Stormzy – returns to his dance-orientated solo project for his second album of 2021. As the title suggests, it diarises an eight-month period, with its 16 songs built around looped vocal clips and found sounds. Julie Doiron – I Thought of You Out now Canada’s cult indie hero – there’s a day dedicated to her in the village of Bruno, Saskatchewan, no less – returns with her first solo album since 2012’s So Many Days. Its lead singles skip between Darkness to Light’s country-tinged guitars, to the more robust, rock-leaning You Gave Me the Key. MC * * * Staying In : Brain food Masterclass masterclass.com Celeb behemoth Masterclass promises that viewers can become experts in their chosen subjects in only a matter of hours. Short lectures are hosted by everyone from Pharrell teaching empathy, to Gordon Ramsay on cooking, to Nobel peace prize winner Malala (pictured, above) on creating change. Positive Sky Documentaries, Wednesday 1 December, 9pm Three-part docuseries Positive tells the story of Britain’s 40-year history of HIV, centring the voices of those on the frontlines of its effects. We witness the transition from an ingrained culture of homophobia to today’s pioneering treatments. Bent By Nature Podcast This podcast from the US broadcaster KCRW is the perfect curio, telling the story of influential but little-known late-night DJ Deidre O’Donoghue. Her 80s show Snap! was a haven for musical exploration, helping to break Henry Rollins and Ride. Ammar KaliaA cocktail necklace – a bit bold, party-ready, not subtle – is the fashion pro’s secret addition to your jewellery box. With very little effort it helps make a statement with even the most nondescript outfit. A lot of fun can be had by renting a cocktail necklace – go for one as ornate as Venna’s from Mywardrobe and that LBD will look much more interesting. Vintage is a good market for a classic chunky gold chain. A piece like this one from Susan Kaplan brings a sprinkling of 1980s glamour and looks great with, say, a grey sweatshirt. Investing in a cocktail necklace requires a little more consideration, with slightly more low-key designs a good idea. Think about the colours you wear a lot, the jewellery you already own and what you wear on repeat. It could feature pearls, charms or gold – whatever gives your outfit a lift. Lauren Cochrane * * * Buy Pearl and gold, £39.50, marksandspencer.com Layer a pearl chain with your gold necklaces for a luxe look. Green glass pendant, £62, shylajewellery.com Shyla’s beautiful bold designs are made from recycled metals. Gold with blue charm, £249, missoma.com This chunky necklace will look eye-catching worn on its own - try it with a slip dress. Rent Sunray choker by Paco Rabanne, from £66, hurrcollective.com Borrow this crystal choker for a black-tie event. Gold with art deco clasp by Christian Dior, £60 for four days rental, 4element.co.uk Chunky necklaces will stand out when worn with a simple silk blouse. Spiked and jewelled by Venna, £34 for four days rental, mywardrobehq.com Layer over a shirt for a statement daytime look. Thrift Craft heart necklace, £45, susancaplan.co.uk Wear an 80s-inspired gold necklace with a bodycon dress. Woven with large embellished pendant, £15, rokit.co.uk Add to a black tea dress to add some extra neckline interest. Gold linked, £150 by Monet, pre-owned from farfetch.com A chunky gold necklace will never go out of fashion – it’s the ultimate forever wardrobe addition.The USA were lacking most of the superstar names that have seen them dominate international football, but the young squad on display in Sydney proved good enough to defeat Australia in their own back yard. A goal inside 30 seconds proved crucial with Australia’s callow central defensive partnership of Jessika Nash and Courtney Nevin gifting Ashley Hatch her second international strike and allowing the USWNT to defend in numbers and protect their lead. Opportunities came and went for both sides in an end-to-end first half with the Matildas looking dangerous down the left when Sam Kerr linked up with Caitlin Foord. Kyah Simon will rue an awful miss from point-plank range. And that shocker was reinforced shortly after the interval when Margaret Purce’s pace opened the door for the excellent Rose Lavelle to hammer home. A soft penalty to Lindsey Horan sealed the deal. Horan, wearing the recently vacated No 10 jersey, was the leading outfield player, directing her side from midfield and always offering an outlet. But the game’s individual star was debutant goalkeeper Casey Murphy. The 25-year-old made a couple of eye-catching saves, but more than that, she commanded her penalty area and played with an assurance that belied her inexperience. For Australia, the experiment with an untested central defensive combination lasted only until half-time, but whether it’s employing novices or veterans Tony Gustavsson has his work cut out drilling his side not to concede poor goals. For all the brio going forward the lapses at the back throughout 2021 have been embarrassing for a side aiming to win a World Cup in 18 months. But, with a record crowd in attendance, despite Sydney’s lousy weather, the bandwagon continues to build towards WWC 2023 on home soil. This particular caravan rattles north to Newcastle for the second leg of this double-header on Tuesday. It would be nice if there was no need for anyone to trot out the “had their opportunities” and “hard done to” homilies after that one, or at least turn a more critical eye to why they are expressed so often. The immediate reaction on Australian TV includes the phrases: “definitely had their opportunities,” and “hard done to by the scoreline.” A familiar refrain in 2021. A young USWNT scored early in each half, and tucked away a penalty, to see off the Matildas in front of a record crowd in Sydney. 89 mins: Only two clean sheets in that time too, it should be added, and another showing this afternoon that raises serious questions about the readiness at the back for a World Cup on home soil. 85 mins: As an aside, Gustavsson’s record after today’s defeat will read: 15 matches in charge for only three wins and nine defeats. He has avoided even a glimmer of scrutiny so far, but at some point surely all the positivity around the Matildas and his history with the US is overtaken by cold hard reality? 83 mins: Australia’s attacking structure has disintegrated. A lovely build-up ended up being recycled backwards when nobody made a run into the box. Then a hopeful long-ball targeted nobody. Until eventually the US cleared and Horan almost found another cutback assist but van Egmond was on hand to cut out. 80 mins: Well done Sydney. A new record crowd for the Matildas on home soil, and the second biggest in history for the USWNT outside America. 79 mins: As the substitutions grow in number we are in danger of petering out here in Sydney. 78 mins: Not for the first time today Australia are caught out playing out from the back. Huerta on this occasion is alert to the telegraphed switch from the base of midfield to the left fullback. 77 mins: The US are running down the clock where they can, taking the sting out of the closing stages. 75 mins: Carpenter intercepts and storms out of the centre of defence. She feeds Raso down the right, but her cross is poor - and there was nobody attacking the six-yard box anyway. 74 mins: Horan has been on the receiving end of some treatment by the Matildas this afternoon, much of it, I expect, retribution for the penalty incident. 72 mins: Promising for Australia down the left after good work from Catley but Yallop’s lung-busting run is undermined by a woefully overhit return pass. 70 mins: It’s all getting a bit a flat and ragged for the Matildas now. 69 mins: Another good save to add to Murphy’s collection. Fowler did well to work herself some space and face forward before unleashing a fierce left-footed drive that Murphy is forced to tip over the bar. The visitors mount a scrappy attack, Horan chases the loose ball, Carpenter’s leg reaches out, the attacker finds it, tumbles, and the referee points to the spot. Very soft, but probably just about there. Carpenter was asking for trouble, even if Horan did make a meal of things. Horan picks herself up and smashes an unstoppable spot kick beyond Micah and into the side of the net. 65 mins: Without Kerr Australia have lost their structure. Fowler and Foord are buzzing around, but the purposeful vertical passes that have forced the US back four into decisions have gone. 63 mins: Sam Kerr’s day is over. She got through 60 minutes despite not being fully fit. Cooney-Cross is on for her 13th cap. 60 mins: Chance at the other end now with Williams forcing Micah into a low save after Australia failed to deal with another bouncing ball. Gustavsson still has plenty of organisational work to do in that third of the pitch. 59 mins: Chance! Grant does superbly to burn through the US defence to collect a loose ball on the right and dink over an inch perfect cross for Kerr but the striker’s header is straight at Murphy, once again in the right place at the right time. 57 mins: Sloppy from the US playing out of defence and Foord pressures Davdison into a heart-stopping moment, but the block tackle ricochets out of play. 54 mins: There’s been plenty of neat attacking football this afternoon, but debutant Casey Murphy has been flawless in goal. This has been a superb, confident, eye-catching debut. 53 mins: First decent move of the half from the Matildas with Foord and Kerr sharing a one-two to carve open the US defence down the left until Kerr’s cross is blocked for corner. That pairing has offered Australia the most joy this afternoon. 52 mins: Another half-chance for the US. Horan whips in the cross from the left, Hatch wins the header at the near post but she can’t find the angle with Micah stranded. 51 mins: Agreed... Picture the archetypal Man City goal. Purce is too quick and strong to get around the outside of Australia’s defence on the right. She gets to the byline and pulls the ball back for Lavelle to drill home from 8 yards out. Micah will be disappointed the shot beat her low to her left, but it was fiercely struck from point-blank range. Just like the first half, the US are out of the blocks early. 48 mins: Another of the Aussies to endure horror moments that first half, Kiyah Simon, has also been hooked. Hayley Raso and Charlotte Grant are on. For the US, Huerta is on for Fox. 47 mins: Some reshuffling for both teams at the break, including Carpenter shifting from the right to the centre of defence in place of 17-year-old Nash. That might make sense defensively for the Matildas, but it also robs them of their primary attacking weapon down the right. 46 mins: We’re back underway at Stadium Australia. That was a very entertaining half of football. How it is only 1-0 is beyond me. 45 mins: Australia should equalise in the last minute of the half. Fowler is superb, profiting from a turnover in midfield and driving forward before sliding through an inch-perfect through-ball for Kerr, but the sharpshooter’s left-footed finish is tame and the superb Murphy is equal to it. The debutant is at it again soon afterwards, tipping over from Foord’s rising drive. 42 mins: Gustavsson has empowered his central defenders to carry the ball through the lines and into midfield. It is, to put it politely, a bold gambit. Nevin has attempted the manoeuvre on a few occasions and while the bravery is to be admired the execution has lacked precision. With 18-months until the World Cup, it could blossom into a defining characteristic, but it also may end up blowing up in Australia’s faces if there is insufficient cover. 40 mins: But at the other end Australia are being opened up with regularity too. This time Williams doesn’t even get a shot away despite the ball rolling in her direction just 14 yards out. 1-0 is an unlikely scoreline given the chances. 39 mins: Fowler has a snapshot from the edge of the box but Murphy is well positioned again. Australia are opening up the USA consistently. 38 mins: Oh wow. Simon has just earned herself a place on highlights reels all over the world. Foord hunts down an overhit cross, dances into the box, squares the ball to Simon inside the six-yard box with the goal at her mercy, and she slams her left footed effort over the bar. That will haunt a striker on any pitch anywhere in the world. Incredible miss. 37 mins: After that bright start Fowler has gone missing - which is a familiar criticism of the talented prodigy. 35 mins: Purce has to score! Long ball over the top catches the Australian defence flat footed but she lashes over the bar with only Micah to beat. Poor finish with much more time to pick her spot than she realised. 33 mins: First decent strike on target for the Matildas, but Simon shoots straight at Murphy after good work from Kerr. The latter then takes matters into her own hands, striking dangerously from range, drawing a top class save from Murphy, plucking the ball out of her top-left corner. The debutant follows all that with a commanding mark from the resulting corner. Excellent few minutes from the newcomer. 32 mins: Murphy does well to claim a decent cross from van Egmond. Gustavsson will be disappointed it was an unopposed catch on the penalty spot, exactly where runners should have been steaming in for the finish. The US go down the other end and earn the match’s first corner. 30 mins: The crowd volume rises many decibels when the Matildas attack, revealing the sound of thousands of young voices urging as one. They become particularly agitated when space is engineered down the flanks but decent deliveries from both right and left are dealt with efficiently by the US defence. 28 mins: Another huge opportunity for the visitors. Lavelle does brilliantly on the right to beat her opponent and make room for a cross. Horan helps it on when she could have hit the target, and then despite winning the second ball Williams isn’t decisive enough just metres from goal. 26 mins: The frenetic early tempo is slowing down a touch, but Ellie Carpenter is becoming more involved down Australia’s right, so there remain bursts of extreme speed and chaos. 24 mins: Good run from Yallop down the left, but she can’t find a gold shirt with her cross. Australia have linked well going forward but the US have defended their 18-yard-box smartly. 22 mins: Another golden opportunity for the USA. Great interplay on the left, the cross from Williams across the face of goal is teasing, but the finishing touch at the far post is wide with Micah beaten. 19 mins: Back down the other end, Hatch forces Micah into a routine save with an off-balance shot from the edge of the box. 18 mins: Australia remain on the front foot and Simon should do better with a header from the penalty spot after she was found by Yallop. This is an open fast-paced contest. 17 mins: The US play out from the back and almost reach the final third but Australia have bodies to cover. Even then there’s an element of panic in the defensive act. The Matildas counter at speed thanks to Carpenter, tearing down the right with the ball at her feet, but her pass to Kerr is poor and the move fizzles out. 16 mins: Superb hold-up play from Kerr brings Australia onto the attack. Foord takes over, driving into the penalty area, but she’s smothered. The ball gets recycled smartly by the gold jerseys but the second entry is headed out of danger. Everything coming down the left for the Matildas so far. 16 mins: Another awful turnover in midfield, Yallop this time, but without Lavelle on the field the US don’t have the bodies in support to capitalise. 14 mins: Lavelle is receiving some attention for a knock to the face so both coaches are busy delivering instructions from the touchline. 12 mins: The visitors look dangerous in transition, and they are forcing turnovers in dangerous areas repeatedly. Even when the ball is recovered close to their own goal the out ball is effective and sets up runners at pace. For Australia, Fowler is the brightest spark, dropping into pockets between the lines like a veteran trequartista, not an 18-year-old Queenslander. 10 mins: Another cheap turnover in Australia’s half, and again Lavelle has a shooting opportunity, this time skewed wide from the edge of the box with her left foot. 8 mins: While the defence is a shambles, Australia are going through the gears going forward. Fowler and Catley continue to be busy, while van Egmond has found Kerr with a raking pass that the latter turned into a weak snapshot on the turn. There’s good pressure out of possession to deny the US chance to build from the back. 6 mins: Yikes! Nevin has had a nightmare, getting robbed in possession on the edge of her own box by Lavelle, but with only Micah to beat the angle narrowed and the shot was slashed off target. Huge let off for Australia. This is a catastrophic start defensively. 5 mins: Better from the hosts, winning the ball in midfield and then creating an overlap on the left wing through Fowler and Catley, the combination that looked so promising against Brazil. 3 mins: The early stages have been all USA on the front foot. There’s more intent and aggression from the visitors and the Matildas look at best passive and at worst shellshocked. I blame The Wiggles. It took just 24 seconds for the US to take the lead! It was an ugly goal to concede, the US just hustling the ball forward with a series of contested headers of second balls. Australia’s young defence couldn’t deal with the bouncing ball and Ashley Hatch stole in, controlled the ball well on her chest and stroked the finish calmly past Micah. Awful start for Australia, and debutant Jessica Nash. We’re underway at Stadium Australia... Australia are dressed in their familiar gold jersey and green shorts combination. The US are in their change strip of red and blue stripes resembling the split second a jenga tower collapses, complemented by dark shorts and socks. The US national anthem was delivered a cappella, with zero fanfare. An excellent job. Advance Australia Fair - oh boy - that was delivered by The Wiggles. Simon, the red Wiggle, took the closing notes like Pavarotti steaming in to claim all the glory at the end of the Three Tenors. This is not a drill. Out walk the two squads onto Stadium Australia to the soundtrack of some VERY dramatic music, which isn’t really complimented by the overcast skies and sparsely populated Olympic stadium. The Wiggles are warming up the crowd prematch. If Adam Hurrey @footballcliches is watching, this is very “game’s gone” areas. And I am all in. Tonight’s skipper for the Matildas, Tameka Yallop, is settling into life in London, with plenty to keep her occupied. If you’re not into this you’ve got a hole where your heart should be. Viva Le Wiggles. Conditions are grim in Sydney. It’s unseasonably cool, there is a howling gale blowing from the south, and after days of rain there are still showers blowing through, although they should diminish as the afternoon wears on. It’s an unfamiliar USWNT XI with five starters registering seven caps or fewer, including two of the front three, as well as debutant goalkeeper Casey Murphy. Lindsey Horan and Tierna Davidson are the only players in this Starting XI who started in the most recent matchup with the Matildas in the Olympic Bronze Medal Match. The average age of the starting XI is 26, making it youngest lineup to take the field for the USWNT since April 2018. This will be the first time since April 2013 that the USA has deployed a starting XI with every player under the age of 30. Headline news for Australia is Sam Kerr has been passed fit after doubts on her participation, 17-year-old Jessica Nash makes her starting debut, and Tameka Yallop captains the side on the occasion of her 100th cap. No Kennedy or Polkinghorne means a reshuffle at the heart of defence. “It’s been a little bit of a challenging camp, to be honest,” Tony Gustavsson said. “Almost half of the team arriving late on Tuesday, even some at midnight, so we lost two to three trainings at the beginning of the camp here. “But I also want to be clear, like I said in the Olympics, remember that tournament mode is not just about a starting lineup here. It’s about the finishing line up as well.” Hello everybody and welcome to live coverage of Australia’s friendly against the USA from Sydney. Kick-off is 3.00pm. “This isolated game is kind of once in a lifetime opportunity to handle the game similar to a World Cup feeling,” Matildas coach Tony Gustavsson said about the clash against the side five years with as an assistant coach. And although it’s a twice in a lifetime opportunity (with the second half of the double-header in Newcastle on Tuesday) there is no escaping the fact that these powerful nations are meeting as part of their preparations for the 2023 World Cup. For Australia it’s a chance to measure their progress against the preeminent side in international football for over a generation. For the US it’s an opportunity to familiarise themselves with conditions they will face when the World Cup is hosted by Australia and New Zealand in 18 months or so. “This could not be a better dress rehearsal for a World Cup final and we are going to treat it in the same way,” Gustavsson said. “From when we arrive to those match days with what we hope will be record crowds, this is our chance to prepare for the big moments that want to be a part of in 2023.” Covid-19 had prevented the Matildas from appearing on home soil for a 19-month period until they played Brazil twice in Sydney’s west earlier this month. The two games at CommBank Stadium drew crowds of 15,000 and 12,000 and, with restrictions further easing in New South Wales and stadium capacity limits lifted, FA is pushing to surpass the record of 33,000 for a Matildas game in Australia – set during the 2000 Olympics in Sydney. Although torrential rain and flood warnings in NSW have dampened expectations. As for the match-up, neither side will be at full-strength. The only question is how experimentally both coaches approach the contest. “Without revealing too much with names and such, it’s actually been about 20 to 30% of the roster that haven’t been able to train Thursday, Friday, and we do have some question marks for the game tomorrow,” Gustavsson revealed yesterday. For Vlatko Andonovski, it’s a case of doing without a host of names that have dominated the international scene in recent years. From the side that took on South Korea in October, four players with over 100 caps have not made the trip to Australia, including superstars Megan Rapinoe, Alex Lloyd, and Tobin Heath, while those matches also brought the curtain down on the international career of Carli Lloyd. Other centurions like Christen Press, Julie Ertz, and Crystal Dunn are also not among the touring party, so it will be an opportunity for the next wave of US internationals to prove their worth, especially in attack. The last time these sides met the outcome was an end-to-end 4-3 extravaganza for the Olympic bronze medal. Something similar this afternoon would do nicely to grow the hype around World Cup 2023. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today. Please follow our new Covid blog here. It’s been a busy past 24 hours on the Covid front with nations racing to close borders and reimpose restrictions after a new Covid variant was detected last week. In case you’re still struggling to get your head around the new B.1.1.529 “omicron” variant here’s a helpful explainer on what it all means. India saw a single-day rise of 8,318 new Covid infections with active cases declining to 1,07,019 - the lowest in 541 days, according to Union Health Ministry data updated today. The country also recorded 465 daily fatalities. The daily rise in new coronavirus infections has been below 20,000 for 50 continuous days and less than 50,000 daily new cases have been reported for 153 consecutive days now, the Times of India reports. Active cases now comprise 0.311% of total infections, the lowest since March 2020, while the national Covid-19 recovery rate was recorded at 98.34%, the highest since March 2020, the health ministry said. The government of Canada says it will be implementing enhanced border measures to “to protect the health and safety of Canadians” in response to the new Omicron variant. Canada is banning foreign travellers to the country from seven African countries. Foreign nationals who have travelled in any of these countries within the previous 14 days will not be permitted entry into Canada. “As a precautionary measure, until January 31, 2022, the Government of Canada is implementing enhanced border measures for all travellers who have been in the Southern Africa region — including South Africa, Eswatini, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, and Namibia— within the last 14 days before arriving in Canada,” a recently published press release reads. Canadian citizens, permanent residents and people with status under the Indian Act, regardless of their vaccination status or having had a previous history of testing positive for Covid-19, who have been in these countries in the previous 14 days will be subject to enhanced testing, screening, and quarantine measures. Travellers will be required to obtain, within 72 hours of departure, a valid negative Covid test and upon arrival will subject to immediate testing. All travellers will also be required to complete a test on day 8 after arrival and quarantine for 14 days. There will be “increased scrutiny” of quarantine plans for travellers from these countries and “rigorous monitoring” to ensure travellers are complying with quarantine measures, the statement added. Here’s a quick recap of all the key developments you may have missed from the past few hours: US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said no cases of the new Covid-19 Omicron variant detected in South Africa have so far been identified in the United States to date. New York governor Kathy Hochul issued a Covid-19 “disaster emergency” declaration on Friday, citing increasing rates of infections and hospitalisations. An order from the governor said the state was experiencing Covid-19 transmission “not seen since April 2020” and that hospital admissions has been increasing over the past month to over 300 a day. South Korea’s Covid deaths hit record high with new curbs expected. The country reported 4,068 new Covid-19 cases and 52 new deatgs. Critically ill patients hit an all-time high of 634, up 17 from the previous day, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). India will resume scheduled international flights from 15 December with a limited service to 14 nations, the Civil Aviation Ministry said. Australia confirmed it will close its borders to anyone who has been in southern Africa, and is not an Australian citizen. Australian citizens, residents and their dependents arriving from these countries will need to go into immediate supervised quarantine for 14 days. Brazil will shut its borders to travellers arriving from six southern African countries, the chief of staff to president Jair Bolsonaro said. Germany reports an additional 67,125 Covid cases and 303 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. Stocks in the US followed those in Asia and Europe by falling sharply on Friday in the wake of concerns about the new Covid variant. The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 2.5%, its worst day since late October 2020, while the S&amp;P500 was down 1.73% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq fell 2.23%. The latest Covid figures from Germany are in, with an expected rise in both cases and deaths. The European nation reported an additional 67,125 Covid cases and 303 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. This takes the total number of confirmed coronavirus cases to 5,717,295 and total reported deaths to 100,779. South Korea’s new Covid cases rose above 4,000 with the numbers of deaths and critically ill patients hitting fresh record highs on Saturday, Yonhap news agency reports. The country reported 4,068 new Covid-19 cases, including 4,045 local infections, raising the total caseload to 436,968, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). The number was up 167 from 3,901 on Friday but down from 4,115 on Wednesday, which was the highest since the first case was reported in the country in January 2020. Critically ill patients hit an all-time high of 634, up 17 from the previous day. The country added 52 more deaths from Covid-19, bringing the death toll to 3,492. The fatality rate stood at 0.8%. The government said it will announce toughened antivirus measures to contain the spread of the virus on Monday. No cases of the new Covid-19 Omicron variant detected in South Africa have been identified in the United States to date, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Friday. “We expect Omicron to be identified quickly, if it emerges in the US,” CDC said in a statement, Reuters reports. Shanghai today announced the latest three people to be identified with Covid were all infected by Delta mutant strains in the same transmission chain. Authorities believe the flare-up was caused by exposure to the infected environment by imported cases in other province. The outbreak led to the decision to cancel hundreds of flights on Friday while some schools were shuttered and tour groups suspended as China continues its strict zero-Covid policy. India will resume scheduled international flights from 15 December with a limited service to 14 nations, the Civil Aviation Ministry said. “Resumption of scheduled commercial international passenger services, to and from India, has been examined in consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs, External Affairs and Health, and it has been decided... may be resumed from December 15,” the ministry said on Friday evening. The Aviation Ministry said 14 countries designated by the Health Ministry as ‘at risk’, and with whom there is an existing ‘air bubble’ agreement, would be allowed to resume 75% of pre-Covid operations (or a minimum of seven flights per week). These 14 countries are: the United Kingdom, Singapore, China, Brazil, Bangladesh, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, and New Zealand. The list also includes South Africa, Botswana, Israel and Hong Kong - countries that have confirmed cases of the new B.1.1.529 variant of the coronavirus. Here is a quick visual refresh of where Europe stands in its fight against the coronavirus. This updated map indicates incidence rates across the continent. News just in from a Covid press conference today. Australia confirmed it will close its borders to anyone who has been in southern Africa, and is not an Australian citizen, in response to the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant. Australian citizens and residents and their dependents arriving from these countries will need to go into immediate supervised quarantine for 14 days, health minister Greg Hunt announced. Anyone who has already arrived in Australia and who has been in any of the nine listed southern African countries within the past 14 days must immediately isolate themselves and be tested for Covid-19 and follow jurisdictional quarantine requirements Australia will also suspend all flights from nine southern African countries for a period of 14 days as a matter of precaution. The countries concerned are: South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, the Seychelles, Malawi, and Mozambique Brazil will shut its borders to travellers arriving from six southern African countries, the chief of staff to president Jair Bolsonaro said on Friday, the latest in a slew of major nations to announce restrictions meant to combat the newly identified Omicron variant of the coronavirus. “Brazil will close air borders to six African countries due to the new variant of the coronavirus,” Chief of Staff Ciro Nogueira wrote in a Twitter post late Friday evening. “We are going to protect Brazilians in this new phase of the pandemic in that country. Ordinance will be published tomorrow and should take effect from Monday.” The restrictions will affect travellers from South Africa, Botswana, Swatini, Lesotho, Namibia and Zimbabwe, he added. The Australian government is set to announce new travel restrictions later on Saturday, the country’s Channel 7 broadcaster reported, as the new Covid-19 variant raises concerns about a new wave of the pandemic. “7NEWS understands the federal government will today announce changes to travel - in response to new variant,” it said on Twitter on Saturday, without citing sources. “Anyone who has been in South Africa in the last 14 days will likely face quarantine or isolation.” The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, will be holding a press conference at 1pm AEDT. Meanwhile, the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has called for Australia to close the border to southern African countries. “The Omicron outbreak is a major concern that should be of concern to all Australians. We know the impact that Delta had when it came here. And we can’t afford to be complacent,” he said. “I make this point, Scott Morrison always waits until a problem becomes a crisis. And then he waits until a crisis becomes a political issue before he acts. He must act today.” Australians are being urged to remain vigilant and maintain Covid-19 control measures in light of the new Omicron variant. “It is not time to break the glass on the alarm, I don’t think, but I’m as concerned about this as I have been since Delta,” Burnet Institute director Brendan Crabb told ABC TV. “A state of heightened alert and caution is appropriate for us in Australia and for the world.” Professor Crabb described the new strain as having “a whole host of mutations that, I must say, makes me have a sharp inhalation of breath”. He stressed the most important thing wasn’t borders, but keeping up vaccine coverage and infection control measures. About 86% of Australians aged 16 and older are double-dosed. Prof Crabb said this translated to between 72 and 73% of the entire population. Just 1.5% of the country have received a booster shot. Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the Covid developments this Saturday. So let’s dive right in. More on the ‘disaster emergency’ declared by Kathy Hochul, governor of New York state. Hochul confirmed no cases of the Omicron variant has so far been found in the state but cautioned authorities are “on high alert”. “We continue to see warning signs of spikes in Covid this winter, and while the new Omicron variant has yet to be detected in New York State, it’s coming,” she said in a tweet Friday evening. Kathy Hochul, governor of New York state, has issued a Covid-19 “disaster emergency” declaration on Friday, citing increasing rates of infections and hospitalizations. An order from the governor said the state was experiencing Covid-19 transmission “not seen since April 2020” and that hospital admissions has been increasing over the past month to over 300 a day. The state had to therefore “pursue a coordinated approach to ensure hospital capacity statewide is able to meet regional needs”. Stocks in the US followed those in Asia and Europe by falling sharply on Friday in the wake of concerns about the new Covid variant. The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 2.5%, its worst day since late October 2020, while the S&amp;P500 was down 1.73% and the tech-heavy Nasdaq fell 2.23%. Cruise operators Carnival, Royal Caribbean Cruises and Norwegian Cruise Line plunged more than 10% each, while shares in United Airlines, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines slumped almost as much. European stocks had their worst day in 17 months. Here’s a roundup of tonight’s Covid-19 news, as the world reacts to the emergence of the Omicron variant. Countries across the globe, including the US and Canada have introduced travel restrictions on people coming from countries in southern Africa. Governments in the Middle East and North Africa are also among those to introduce curbs. US president Joe Biden said the Omicron variant made it “clearer than ever” that global vaccinations are needed to end the pandemic. The Netherlands will be “effectively closed from 5pm to 5am” according to remarks by caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte, announcing new Covid restrictions from Sunday. Dozens of people are likely to have tested positive for the virus within the 600 passengers who landed at Schiphol airport in the Netherlands from South Africa on Friday. Novavax, the US company that is among those to have produced a Covid vaccine, said it is working on a version to target the new variant. Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson &amp; Johnson have also said they were checking the effectiveness of their vaccines. The European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has classified Omicron, B.1.1.529, a “variant of concern”, warning the risk is “high to very high”. Brazil has reported 315 more Covid deaths and 12,392 new cases, as it joined countries announcing restrictions on travel from southern Africa. Delta Airlines has said it does not plan any changes to its flights between South Africa or the US, after the White House announced travel curbs. The World Trade Organization has delayed its ministers’ meeting indefinitely. It was due to take place next week, in person, but has been suspended because of difficulties for the South African delegation. Brazil has become another country to announce it will ban arrivals from six countries in southern Africa because of the Omicron variant. Reuters reports that restrictions will apply to people arriving from South Africa, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia, Zimbabwe and Botswana. Earlier on Friday it recorded another 315 deaths. Dutch health authorities have said that it is likely dozens of people among the 600 passengers that landed at Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport on Friday will test positive for Covid-19. Two flights landed from South Africa, and travellers have been isolated at the airport due to concerns about the newly detected Omicron variant. Initial test results have estimated there is 85 positive cases among passengers who arrived on the KLM services. Further tests will take place to determine whether those who are positive have the Omicron variant. All air travel was banned on Friday, but some flights already underway are exempt. Delta Airlines has said it won’t plan any changes to its flights between South Africa or the US, after the White House announced travel curbs. The carrier runs a service three-times a week between Johannesburg and Atlanta, and the airline said it had “no planned adjustments to service at this time”. Brazil has reported 315 more Covid deaths and 12,392 new cases according to data released by its health ministry. A total of 613,957 people have died from the virus in the country, with more than 22m confirmed cases. Its health regulator Anvisa has recommended some travel restrictions should be in place in response to the new Covid-19 variant. However president Jair Bolsonaro was noncommittal on Friday. “Brazil can’t handle another lockdown. There’s no use getting terrified,” he said after a military event in Rio de Janeiro according to Reuters. “I’m going to take rational measures.” The World Trade Organization has delayed its first ministerial meeting in four years due to the deteriorating health situation, Reuters has reported. Ministers from WTO members were due to gather next week, in a gathering that had seen pressure on it to waive intellectual property rights on vaccines. The Geneva-based trade body said an in-person meeting would be difficult as delegations from South Africa would be limited to a mostly virtual presence. The European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has classified the newly-named Omicron variant, B.1.1.529, a “variant of concern”. It is added to the group that already includes the Beta (formerly South African), Gamma (formerly Brazilian) and Delta (formerly Indian) variants. The ECDC decision follows that of the World Health Organization earlier on Friday. (See 18:07) A report published by the body says: “[It] is the most divergent variant that has been detected in significant numbers during the pandemic so far, which raises concerns that it may be associated with increased transmissibility, significant reduction in vaccine effectiveness and increased risk for reinfections.” It says that the overall risk is “high to very high” and advocates a “precautionary approach” due the uncertainties around it. The threat assessment adds that the possibility of further introduction and spread in the EU is “high”, with the impact alongside a resurgent Delta variant could be “very high”. In response, the ECDC recommends further testing, avoiding travel to affected areas and contact tracing of cases. It encourages vaccination programmes to continue to target those who have not yet been jabbed and consider a booster dose for people aged 40 and over. Dr Andrea Ammon, director of the ECDC, said: “We must be proactive and implement measures as a precaution to buy time until we gain more knowledge.” A selection of countries in north Africa and the Middle East have joined those imposing restrictions on arrivals from southern Africa. Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, and Morocco have introduced varying bans on travellers from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Eswatini according to AFP. Egypt has suspended direct flights to and from South Africa. Iran said it will ban foreign travellers from six countries, including South Africa. Iranians will be admitted after testing negative twice for Covid, state broadcaster IRIB reported. On Friday it reported 86 deaths. Novavax, the US company that is among those to have produced a Covid vaccine, said it is working on a version of its jab to target the Omicron variant detected in southern Africa. The company said it could be ready for testing and manufacturing in the next few weeks, according to Reuters. Its shot contains a version of the virus’ spike protein that can’t cause the disease but triggers the immune system. Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson &amp; Johnson have also said they were checking the effectiveness of their inoculations against the new strain. German officials say the new coronavirus variant hasn’t yet been found in the country, according to a government report. Reuters says an interior ministry document says it is likely to have spread to more countries. On the back of the announcement of new rules for people travelling into the US from southern Africa, Joe Biden has said it makes it “clearer than ever” that global vaccinations are needed to end the pandemic. The president called for people to get their booster vaccination dose for additional protection over the festive period. “For the world community, the news about this new variant should make clearer than ever why this pandemic will not end until we have global vaccinations. The United States has already donated more vaccines to other countries than every other nation combined. It is time for other countries to match America’s speed and generosity,” he said. Biden added that nations at the World Trade Organization ministerial meeting next week to waive intellectual property protections for vaccines. “This news today reiterates the importance of moving on this quickly,” the US president said. US president Joe Biden will restrict travel from eight southern African countries after the emergence of the new Omicron variant, as of Monday. New rules will apply to passengers from South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and Eswatini, meaning non-US citizens and permanent residents will not be able to fly into the country. Over the border, Canada said it would ban the entry of foreign nationals who have travelled through southern Africa in the last fortnight. The restrictions applies to the same countries as new rules in the US, apart from Malawi. Testing on arrival will be mandatory for Canadian nationals who have been through the region in the previous 14 days, and must quarantine until they get a negative result. Officials said no cases of the new variant had been detected. The Netherlands will be “effectively closed from 5pm to 5am” according to remarks by caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte, announcing new Covid restrictions from Sunday. Speaking at a press conference announcing the partial lockdown, he said: “We have to be realistic, the daily figures are still too high.” Rutte added that the government had failed to get across the message that people with symptoms needed to get tested, and took the blame himself, according to AFP. Bars, restaurants and shops will be closed early to curb a spike in cases. Schools will stay open, despite the largest rise being among children. It’s been an awfully busy Friday, so here’s a quick round-up of some of the main developments: The new B.1.1.529 Covid variant, which has caused much global alarm, has been designated a “variant of concern” by the World Health Organization and given the name Omicron. The WHO said Omicron “has a large number of mutations, some of which are concerning”, and preliminary evidence suggests an increased risk of reinfection with this variant, as compared to other VOCs. The number of cases of this variant appears to be increasing in almost all provinces in South Africa, the WHO said. Scientists have described the Omicron variant as the “most worrying we’ve seen”, with it found to contain a large number of mutations that may not only make it more transmissible, but may also help it to evade the body’s immune system. Here is an explainer on what we known so far about Omicron. The new variant may pose a “substantial risk to public health” and UK “must act with caution”, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said. He said it is highly likely Omicron had spread to other countries already, though no cases have so far been detected in the UK. The government will not at this stage, however, be implementing it’s so-called Plan B winter plan. Javid said Plan A remains the policy “that I think we need at this time” but added that this is kept under review and “if we need to go further we will”. He urged everyone eligible to get their booster jab as soon as possible. Numerous nations imposed travel restrictions on South Africa and neighbouring countries including Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Eswatini. The severity of the restrictions and requirements and the specific countries impacted vary. Some of the countries to introduce measures include the UK, Italy, Germany, Spain, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Greece, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, India, Switzerland, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Israel and the Philippines. The EU has also agreed its member states should restrict travel from southern African countries. The European commission chief Ursula von der Leyen said it was important for Europe to remain united and act “swiftly and decisively”, and advised EU governments to pull an “emergency brake” to suspend travel to southern African countries. *It is interesting to note that - bar Switzerland - countries have so far only applied restrictions on southern African nations but not on Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium (the first known case in Europe), where cases of Omicron have been found (most of the cases detected so far are currently in South Africa and the variant has also been detected in Botswana). The World Health Organization cautioned countries against hastily imposing travel restrictions linked to Omicron, saying they should take a “risk-based and scientific approach”. It would take several weeks to determine the variant’s transmissibility and the effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics against it, WHO spokesperson Christian Lindmeier said, noting that 100 sequences of the variant have been reported so far. People should continue to wear masks whenever possible, avoid large gatherings, ventilate rooms and maintain hand hygiene, he added. South Africa condemned the decision of other countries to impose travel restrictions as ‘unjustified’. The health minister, Joe Phaahla, Phaahla said South Africa was acting with transparency, and that travel bans introduced by a number of countries against southern African nations are “completely against the norms and standards” of the WHO. Phaahla called on all South Africans over the age of 12 to come forward and receive the vaccine, which he said remained a “major bulwark” against infection and severe illness. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa will discuss reimposing lockdown restrictions at a meeting on Sunday, as the country scrambles to assess the potential for Omicron to unleash a deadly fourth wave. As I’ve mentioned above, the government appealed for people to get jabbed as soon as possible - only around 35% of South Africans have been vaccinated. European stocks plummeted amid widespread selling on Friday, as reports of Omicron stoked fears of a fresh hit to the global economy and drove investors out of riskier assets. In the UK, the FTSE 100 dropped 3.6% - the biggest one-day fall since June 2020, wiping £72bn off the value of the blue-chip index and taking it to its lowest level in seven weeks. Among the European stock sectors, travel and leisure plummeted 8.8% in its worst day since the Covid shock sell-off in March 2020. Germany’s top health officials raised the prospect of a national lockdown, warning that a rapidly rising number of coronavirus cases and a dramatic increase in the number of patients in intensive care meant contact reduction was the only way of tackling the crisis and avoiding “the road to chaos”. “We need a massive contact reduction immediately,” said Prof Lothar Wieler, the head of the Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s federal disease control agency. He called on political leaders to utilise all available measures to prevent gatherings in large numbers and to urge the public to avoid any unnecessary contacts with people outside their own households. “We are at a crossroads,” he said. “We have one choice. Either we choose the road that leads to chaos and to a bad end … or the one which unburdens the health system and maybe enables a peaceful Christmas.” The outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, called the situation “dramatically serious, to the extent that it has never been at any point in this pandemic”. Story here. England’s Covid weekly reproduction “R” number has risen and is likely to be above 1, with latest estimates showing it between 1.0 and 1.1, the UK Health Security Agency said on Friday. An R number between 1.0 and 1.1 means that for every 10 people infected, they will on average infect between 10 and 11 other people. Last week R was estimated between 0.8 and 1.0.The daily growth of infections was estimated between -1% and +2%, compared with -2% and 0% the previous week. Belgium brought in new restrictions including early closing of bars and full closure of nightclubs for three weeks to reduce social contact and curb a rapidly spreading fourth wave of Covid infections. The new measures come just a week after a previous package of coronavirus restrictions, including enforcing wider use of masks and more working from home. Under the new rules, Christmas markets, cultural sites, bars and restaurants will have to close at 11pm, with a maximum of six people per table. Private parties and gatherings are also banned, unless they are for weddings or funerals. That’s all from me for today. Thank you all so much for reading along - I’ll now be handing over to my colleague Harry Taylor, who will continue to update you on global coroanvirus developments. Have a nice weekend and keep safe x The World Health Organization has named the B.1.1.529 Covid variant Omicron and says an advisory group has recommended that it should be designated as “of concern” In a statement, WHO said preliminary evidence suggests the latest variant carries a “higher risk of re-infection than other variants of concern”. The WHO added: The first known confirmed B.1.1.529 infection was from a specimen collected on 9 November 2021. This variant has a large number of mutations, some of which are concerning. Preliminary evidence suggests an increased risk of reinfection with this variant, as compared to other VOCs [variants of concern]. The number of cases of this variant appears to be increasing in almost all provinces in South Africa. This is from Eric Mamer, the European Commission spokesperson Earlier, we reported that health officials from the EU 27 met and agreed “on the need to activate” an emergency break on travel from southern Africa. Mamer has now confirmed this will apply to Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe. The Swiss government has banned direct flights from South Africa and the surrounding region due to the detection of the new B.1.1.529 variant, while also imposing restrictions on travel from other countries that have recorded cases including Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium. All flights from Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa were banned for an indefinite period. “In addition, when entering the country from the region of southern Africa, Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium, all persons will have to present a negative Covid-19 test and be quarantined for 10 days starting at 8pm on 26 November 2021,” the country’s health authority said in a statement. “Entry from these countries will no longer be possible for persons who are not Swiss citizens or do not have a residence permit in Switzerland or the Schengen area.” Guatemala will impose restrictions on visitors from some southern African nations, the president Alejandro Giammattei said. Guatemala would limit entry to travelers from Lesotho, Mozambique and South Africa, the president said, although the Guatemalan Immigration Institute said it is still waiting to receive the presidential order. Cyprus also said it was banning arrivals travelling from, or through, South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Malawi and Botswana over the past 14 days. The ban does not apply to Cypriot, EU nationals, nationals of the European Economic Area, Switzerland, or permanent Cyprus residents provided they carry a negative 72 hour PCR test and are tested again upon arrival. They will also have to quarantine in specially-designated hotels for a 10-day period, the Health Ministry said. No cases of the new variant have been detected on the island, it added. Saudi Arabia has also suspended flights to and from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Eswatini due to concerns related to the spread of Covid, the state news agency (SPA) reported on Friday. The South African health minister Joe Phaahla has said preliminary studies suggest the new B.1.1.529 variant may be more transmissible, but the decision of other countries to impose travel restrictions is “unjustified”. Scientists have so far only detected the B.1.1.529 variant in relatively small numbers, mainly in South Africa but also in Botswana, Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium, but they are concerned by its high number of mutations which could make it vaccine-resistant and more transmissible. Phaahla told a media briefing that South Africa was acting with transparency, and that travel bans introduced by a number of countries against southern African nations are “completely against the norms and standards” of the World Health Organisation. “We want to reassure South Africans that some of the reaction has been unjustified,” Phaahla says. The foreign ministry said South Africa would speak to Britain to try to get it to reconsider its ban, and the president Cyril Ramaphosa will convene an advisory council on Sunday to consider evidence on the variant. “Our immediate concern is the damage that this decision will cause to both the tourism industries and businesses of both countries,” Foreign Minister Naledi Pandor said in a statement. The rand currency slumped as much as 2% against the dollar and South African hospitality stocks plummeted, as investors were unnerved. Phaahla added that foreign scientists have not presented any evidence that the new variant has the capacity to evade protection offered by vaccines, though he accepts that early signs suggest it is more transmissible. He said the UK had imposed travel restrictions on his country without prior discussion. Britain banned flights from South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia after the detection of the new variant in South Africa. European Union states have also agreed to suspend travel to southern Africa after the detection of the variant, the presidency of the EU said on Friday. However, Salim Abdool Karim, one of South Africa’s top epidemiologists, said of the new variant that it was “important to deal with it globally,” pointing out that the Delta variant had spread to 53 countries within three weeks of it being identified. “So it doesn’t really help to close borders... We’ve got to find solutions to this variant together. And part of that is not to overreact,” he told Reuters, characterising the British travel ban as a “panic reaction” that was understandable. The WHO was due to decide on Friday whether to designate the variant as being “of concern,” a label only given to four variants to date. But it could take weeks for scientists to fully understand the impact of the variant’s mutations. Phaahla called on South Africans to come forward and receive the vaccine, which he said remained a “major bulwark” against infection and severe illness. Related: Get vaccinated now, South Africans told amid new variant fears European stocks plummeted amid widespread selling on Friday, as reports of the new B.1.1.529 variant stoked fears of a fresh hit to the global economy and drove investors out of riskier assets. The benchmark STOXX 600 index ended 3.7% down in its worst session since June 2020, while the volatility gauge for the main stock market hit a near 10-month high. The day’s losses saw the STOXX 600 lose 4.5% this week. Little is known of the variant, but scientists said it has an unusual combination of mutations and may be able to evade immune responses or make it more transmissible. France’s CAC 40 shed 4.8%. UK’s FTSE 100 dropped 3.6%, while Germany’s DAX fell 4.2% and Spain’s IBEX lost 5.0%. For the UK, it was the biggest one-day fall since June 2020, wiping £72bn off the value of the blue-chip index, taking it to its lowest level in seven weeks. “With Europe and some northern parts of the US in a stretched situation due to an already high number of new cases and hospitalisations, this new virus strain comes at the worst possible time,” said Peter Garnry, head of equity strategy at Saxo Bank. “Equities are reacting negatively because it is unknown at this point to what degree the vaccines will be effective against the new strain, and thus it increases risk of new lockdowns.” Among the European stock sectors, travel and leisure plummeted 8.8% in its worst day since the Covid shock sell-off in March 2020. Britain announced a temporary ban on flights from South Africa and several neighbouring countries from noon on Friday. The European Union has also agreed similar moves. Travel stocks were the worst performers this week, down 13.6%. Concerns over rising Covid cases had pulled European stock markets from record highs last week amid fears of more restrictions. The virus scare prompted euro zone money markets to scale back bets of a rate hike from the European Central Bank next year. Odds of a 10 basis point rate hike in December 2022 almost halved from 100% earlier this week. Euro zone government bond yields dropped, pressuring European bank stocks, which lost 6.9%. Oil &amp; gas producers slumped 5.8%, while miners tumbled 5.0% as oil and metal prices lost ground as reports of the new virus variant fuelled economic slowdown worries. The technology sector had relatively smaller losses, thanks to gains in stay-at-home stocks. Defensives such as healthcare and utilities fell the least. For all the latest business updates, my colleague Graeme Wearden over on the Business live blog has you covered: South Africa has urged all citizens to vaccinate themselves against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to assess the potential for the B.1.1.529 variant to unleash a deadly fourth wave. As the president Cyril Ramaphosa prepares to discuss reimposing lockdown restrictions at a meeting on Sunday, the government appealed to all South Africans aged 12 and over to get jabbed as soon as possible. The country’s top scientists were “in intensive engagement with all established surveillance systems to understand the new variant and what the potential implications could be,” a statement on Friday said. “While this work continues, South Africans must take all measures to protect themselves against coronavirus infection, beginning with vaccination against Covid-19,” it added. Only about 35% of adults in the country are fully vaccinated. The full story from Nick Dall and Lizzy Davies is here: European Union member states have agreed on the need to temporarily suspend travel to southern Africa after the detection of the new Covid variant, the presidency of the EU said on Friday. A committee of health experts from all 27 EU states “agreed on the need to activate the emergency break &amp; impose temporary restriction on all travel into EU from southern Africa,” the Slovenia presidency of the EU said on Twitter. An EU source said the restrictions would apply to South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe, according to Reuters. Earlier, the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said it was important for Europe to remain united and act “swiftly and decisively” in the face of the new B.1.1.529 mutation. She advised EU governments to pull an “emergency brake” to suspend travel to southern African countries affected by the variant [see 2.34pm.]. A host of countries including the UK, Japan, Germany, Italy and Spain have imposed travel restrictions on South Africa and neighbouring southern African countries over concerns about the new variant. Earlier on Friday, the World Health Organization cautioned countries against hastily imposing travel restrictions linked to B.1.1.529, saying they should take a “risk-based and scientific approach” [see 1.49pm.]. It would take several weeks to determine the variant’s transmissibility and the effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics against it, WHO spokesperson Christian Lindmeier said, noting that 100 sequences of the variant have been reported so far. People should continue to wear masks whenever possible, avoid large gatherings, ventilate rooms and maintain hand hygiene, he added. The failure of the world to get vaccines to the developing world is “coming back to haunt us”, Gordon Brown has warned, as experts said the emergence of variants such as B.1.1.529 could have been avoided if jabs had been more fairly distributed. Writing in the Guardian, the Labour former prime minister said the world had been “forewarned” that a lack of vaccines in poorer countries could have serious consequences for the pandemic. He said there had been embarrassing failures to meet promises on fair distribution of vaccines by the west, highlighting figures that show only 3% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated compared with more than 60% in the rest of the world. “In the absence of mass vaccination, Covid is not only spreading uninhibited among unprotected people but is mutating, with new variants emerging out of the poorest countries and now threatening to unleash themselves on even fully vaccinated people in the richest countries of the world,” he said. Brown said world leaders now needed a global accord to ensure better distribution and accused the EU of “neocolonialism” in its approach to buying up vaccines made in South Africa. “The good news is that our medical genius has ensured that the new Nu variant has been identified quickly; is being sequenced at speed; and, if it proves not only more transmissible but immune to current vaccines, a new vaccine will soon emerge,” Brown said. He added: But given the contrast between the success of our scientists and the failure of our global leaders, only a herculean effort starting this week can allay fears that new mutations among unvaccinated people in the least-protected places will take Covid into a third year – with even fifth, sixth and seventh waves. Get the full story from Nicola Davis and Rowena Mason here: Top US infectious disease official Dr Anthony Fauci said on Friday that a ban on flights from southern Africa was a possibility and the United States was rushing to gather data on the new Covid-19 variant. No decision to halt flights had yet been made, he said. Global authorities have reacted with alarm to the new B.1.1.529 variant, detected in South Africa, with the European Union and UK among those tightening border controls as scientists seek to find out if the mutation was vaccine-resistant. The World Health Organization (WHO), however, has cautioned against hasty measures [see 1.49pm.] and South Africa said a British ban on flights seemed rushed. “There is always the possibility of doing what the UK has done, namely block travel from South Africa and related countries,” Fauci said in an interview on CNN. “That’s certainly something you think about and get prepared to do. You’re prepared to do everything you need to protect the American public. But you want to make sure there’s a basis for doing that,” he said. “Obviously as soon as we find out more information we’ll make a decision as quickly as we possibly can.” Fauci said US scientists would speak with South African counterparts on Friday about the new variant, called B.1.1.529, which has raised concern about its transmissibility and whether it might evade immune responses. He added that there was no indication that the new variant was already in the United States. Greece will allow in travellers from the southern African region only for essential reasons and after negative testing amid rising concern about the new B.1.1.529 Covid variant detected in South Africa, its health ministry said on Friday. All travellers from South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, Lesotho, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Eswatini, Zambia and Malawi will undergo a second test upon their arrival to the country and will be quarantined for 10 days, the ministry said in a statement. There are no direct flights from Greece to those countries. Ireland, one of the world’s most vaccinated nations, will make Covid booster shots available to all adults in a sharp ramping up of plans to provide additional protection, the health minister said on Friday. Almost 90% of Ireland’s eligible 3.9 million people over the age of 12 have been fully vaccinated and booster shots had previously been approved for those over the age of 50 and for those with underlying health issues. Some 670,000 boosters have been administered to date. “We continue to prioritise boosters because we know they are having a positive impact on the level of hospitalisation, severe illness and mortality from Covid-19 in those aged over 70,” the health minister Stephen Donnelly said in a statement. Like most of Europe, Ireland is battling a fresh wave of coronavirus which ministers have said may be plateauing at a high level. Hospitalisations have also stabilised over the last week but intensive care capacity remains very tight. The government reimposed a midnight curfew on hospitality venues last week, less than a month after nightclubs were allowed to open their doors for the first time since March 2020. Ministers have said that while some additional restrictions may be needed over the coming weeks, they do not envisage following Austria’s example of reimposing a lockdown. The UK has reported another 50,091 Covid cases and a further 160 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares to 47,240 infections and 147 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. It is likely that the new coronavirus variant B.1.1.529 that is spreading in South Africa will end up in the UK, the head of the Covid-19 Genomics UK Consortium said on Friday, but efforts to buy time and reduce transmission would help. “I think buying time is important and it’s worthwhile, because we can find out what we need to know about that particular variant,” Sharon Peacock told reporters, saying that the health service might need to make preparations. “This is part of important planning and preparation for something that I would guess is likely to be transmitted into the UK at some point, but it buys that time.” Hong Kong’s government has said it will ban non-Hong Kong residents arriving from eight southern African states from entering the territory if they had stayed in those countries within the past 21 days. The measure, effective from Saturday, affects people arriving from Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe, the government said in a statement on Friday. “Along with South Africa which is already a specified high-risk place, non-Hong Kong residents who have stayed in these places within 21 days will not be allowed to enter the city”, it said. The new B.1.1.5.2.9 coronavirus variant detected in South Africa has prompted the European Union, UK and other countries to tighten border controls as researchers sought to find out if the mutation was vaccine-resistant. The emergence of new variants such as B.1.1.529 could have been avoided if wealthy countries had ensured poorer nations had access to Covid jabs, experts have said. Scientists have described B.1.1.529 , detected in countries including South Africa, as the “most worrying we’ve seen”, with it found to contain a large number of mutations that may not only make it more transmissible, but may also help it to evade the body’s immune system. Experts such as Tim Bierley, a pharma campaigner at Global Justice Now, said the rise of the variant had been “entirely avoidable” and that conditions for its emergence had been created by low- and middle-income countries being “actively prevented” by the UK from having equitable access to vaccines. For more than a year, South Africa, Botswana, and most countries have been calling for world leaders to waive intellectual property on coronavirus vaccines, tests and treatments, so they can produce their own jabs. It’s a vital measure that will be discussed at next week’s World Trade Organization conference. But, so far, the UK and EU have recklessly blocked it from making progress. If and when this new variant starts to tear through the world, remember that the British government has led opposition to the plan that could have stopped it. Dr Ayoade Alakija, a co-chair of the Africa Vaccine Delivery Alliance, said: I am so angry right now. Even if the moral argument didn’t work for them, if we had lost sight of our common morality, and common humanity, then even from an enlightened self-interest perspective, surely, surely, they understood that if they did not [vaccinate] the world as equitably and as quickly as possible, that what we were going to see was variants springing up that we don’t know whether we’re going to be able to control. However, Prof Azra Ghani, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said new variants are likely to establish in any setting where the virus is circulating at high levels, including in the UK. Read more on this story here: The Guardian’s science correspondent, Hannah Devlin, has put together this explainer tackling what scientists know so far about the new B.1.1.529 variant: People who are severely immunosuppressed can book their third Covid jab online from today, as the NHS England national booking system opens up to more people. In line with JCVI guidance, those who are classed as severely immunosuppressed as a result of treatment, for conditions such as cancer or for those with long-term chronic conditions where their immunity is affected by medication, are eligible for a third dose eight weeks after their second dose. NHS England said that so far more than three quarters of those who are severely immunosuppressed have had a third Covid vaccination. From today, adults who are eligible for a third dose of the Covid vaccine and have received a clinical referral letter from their doctor can go online and book an appointment, as the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme continues to protect those most at risk from the virus. Prof Stephen Powis, the NHS national medical director, said: Decisions on when to get a third dose remains between a patient and their clinician who knows about their ongoing treatment – more than three quarters of people who are severely immunosuppressed have had their third dose so far, and from today people can also book in online with a letter from their GP or clinician. It’s incredibly important that people get the full recommended course of Covid vaccines, especially those most at risk from the virus – boosters and third doses are not a nice to have, they are the best way to protect you and your loved ones this winter. The new B.1.1.529 variant could put even greater strain on an already stretched NHS, especially as it enters its traditionally tricky winter period, hospital bosses warned today. NHS Providers and the NHS Confederation, which represent hospital trusts in England and (in the latter’s case also) Wales, welcomed the travel ban on South Africa and five other countries. But both urged the public to do more to protect themselves and others from Covid, for example by wearing a face mask and ensuring they are fully vaccinated. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said: If this variant is as dangerous as suggested, it would be particularly concerning as spread could coincide with what we are expecting to be an extremely difficult winter and when NHS pressures are greatest. Trust leaders will be reassured that the government has said it will do whatever is necessary to keep people safe. Making decisions based on the scientific evidence, and putting in place tougher restrictions if and when necessary, will be absolutely critical. In the meantime, it is important that we all continue to play our part in containing Covid-19, by using taking up vaccinations when offered, following rules on self-isolation, using lateral flow tests, and wearing a mask, especially in crowded and indoor spaces, as well as ventilating rooms. Dr Layla McCay, director of policy at the NHS Confederation, said: It is, as yet, too early to know whether this new variant will be more transmissible or less responsive to the vaccines currently available to help combat coronavirus. Eighteen months into this pandemic healthcare leaders will however be watching this development with concern as we head into one of the most challenging winters the NHS has ever faced. Last month the NHS Confederation urged ministers to move to their Plan B for managing the high rates of Covid being seen in the UK in order to reduce the risk of the NHS becoming overwhelmed this winter. In a separate move today, the British Medical Association – the doctors’ union – has urged ministers and NHS leaders to take a series of emergency measures to help the service as it prepares for the next few months, with hospitals, GPs, ambulances and mental health care already under intense pressure. “We are braced for what will likely be the worst winter in the history of the NHS”, said Dr Trevor Pickersgill, the BMA’s chief officer. He went on: One of the biggest impacts on the health service remains Covid. If all governments across the UK strengthened infection prevention and control in public settings, such as making mask-wearing mandatory in indoor public spaces, improving ventilation, and providing better public messaging around the continued risk of Covid, plus the importance of taking up the vaccine and booster jabs, we could cut infection rates and relieve some of the pressure on staff and hospital beds. The Catalan regional government, which had ordered Covid passports to be shown to gain entry to bars, restaurants, gyms and care homes, has suspended the requirement until at least Monday after “very intense” demand crashed the system for downloading the passes. Meanwhile, the Spanish government has said plans to restrict flights from South Africa and Botswana will be proposed at the next cabinet meeting, which is scheduled for next Tuesday. “We’ll see about other countries but for now those two,” the health minister, Carolina Darias, told state broadcaster TVE. “We will also imminently adopt a resolution ... to require passengers from high-risk countries to provide, in addition to vaccination [proof], either an antigen test or a PCR.” Ursula von der Leyen, the European commission president, said she had advised EU governments to pull an “emergency brake” stopping travel to countries in southern Africa in light of the emergence of the B.1.1.529 variant. She said: We are taking the news about the new highly mutated Covid variant very seriously. We do know that mutations could lead to the emergence and spread of even more concerning variants of the virus that could spread worldwide within a few months. It is now important that all of us in Europe act very swiftly, decisively and united. The European Commission has today proposed to member states to activate the “emergency brake” on travel from countries in southern African and other countries affected to limit the spread of the new variant. All air travel to these countries should be suspended until we have a clear understanding about the danger posed by this new variant. And travellers returning from this region should respect strict quarantine rules. Von der Leyen did not refer to the identification of a first European case of the new variant in Belgium [see 1.30pm.]. The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, has said it is important that Europe remains united and acts “swiftly and decisively” in the face of the new B.1.1.529 mutation – as she recommended member states to suspend all air travel from southern African countries affected by the variant. Addressing a news briefing in Brussels following the emergence of the new Covid variant, Von der Leyen said: The European Commission has today proposed to member states to activate the emergency brake on travel from countries in southern Africa and other counties affected to limit the spread of the new variant. The first European case was confirmed earlier in Belgium [see 1.30pm.]. Von der Leyen had earlier tweeted in this vein: She told the briefing travel should be suspended until “clear understanding” of the danger posed by this new variant emerged. Travellers returning from these regions should respect strict quarantine rules. It depends on all of us as citizens to contribute to better control of the pandemic. She also stressed the importance of vaccinations, hand-washing and mask-wearing in the face of the pandemic. A host of countries including the UK, Italy, Japan, Germany and Spain have imposed travel restrictions on South Africa and neighbouring southern African countries over concerns about the new variant. Earlier on Friday, the World Health Organization cautioned countries against hastily imposing travel restrictions linked to B.1.1.529, saying they should take a “risk-based and scientific approach” [see 1.49pm.]. It would take several weeks to determine the variant’s transmissibility and the effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics against it, WHO spokesperson Christian Lindmeier said, noting that 100 sequences of the variant have been reported so far. People should continue to wear masks whenever possible, avoid large gatherings, ventilate rooms and maintain hand hygiene, he added. Germany’s top health officials have raised the prospect of a national lockdown, warning that a rapidly rising number of coronavirus cases and a dramatic increase in the number of patients in intensive care meant contact reduction was the only way of tackling the crisis and avoiding “the road to chaos”. “We need a massive contact reduction immediately,” said Prof Lothar Wieler, the head of the Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s federal disease control agency. He called on political leaders to utilise all available measures to prevent gatherings in large numbers and to urge the public to avoid any unnecessary contacts with people outside their own households, as the incidence rate in Germany rose by 75,400, a week-on-week increase of 44%. “I expect right now for the decision-makers to trigger all measures in order that we can bring down the incidence rate together,” Wieler said, adding: We are at a crossroads. We have one choice. Either we choose the road that leads to chaos and to a bad end … or the one which unburdens the health system and maybe enables a peaceful Christmas. Germany’s outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, called the situation “dramatically serious, to the extent that it has never been at any point in this pandemic”. He added: It is half an hour after midnight, but some people have still failed to hear the alarm. Of 22,000 available intensive care beds in Germany, 4,000 are occupied with coronavirus patients, 85% of whom need breathing assistance. Their average age is between 50 and 79 years. Wieler said while the figure might not seem that high to some, it marked an increase of 100% in a week, and even if there were no new infections, 1,000 more patients could be expected to end up in intensive care within the next 10 to 14 days. Elective surgery around the country has been cancelled to free up beds and staff, and Germany’s air force is on call to transport patients from full hospitals to those with capacity. Spahn called for decision-makers on the federal and state level to recognise the urgency of the situation and bring forward a meeting planned for 9 December. He said it would be foolhardy to wait for 10 days, as the participants had said they planned to do, in order to see whether the current measures in place were working. Spahn added: The medical staff don’t have 10 days to wait and see. He criticised the fact the Christmas markets were in full swing in Berlin while the city’s university hospital, the Charité, was full. “It is just not appropriate at this time,” he said. Get the full story here: Merck &amp; Co said on Friday updated data from its study on its experimental Covid-19 pill showed the drug was less effective in cutting hospitalisations and deaths than previously reported. The drugmaker said its pill showed a 30% reduction in hospitalisations and deaths, based on data from over 1,400 patients. In October, its data showed a roughly 50% efficacy, based on data from 775 patients. Merck’s shares fell 3% to $79.80 in premarket trading, amid a fall in the broader markets. The company filed for a US authorisation of the drug molnupiravir on 11 October, following the interim data. Merck said on Friday the data on molnupiravir, developed with Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, had been submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration ahead of a meeting of its expert advisers on Tuesday. The FDA’s scientists are expected to publish their briefing documents ahead of the meeting as early as Friday. The panel is expected to vote whether to recommend that the agency authorise the oral capsules for the treatment of mild-to-moderate Covid in adults who are at risk of severe disease. A planned interim analysis of the data last month showed that 7.3% of those given molnupiravir twice a day for five days were hospitalised and none had died by 29 days after the treatment. That compared with a hospitalisation rate of 14.1% for patients on placebo. In the updated data, 6.8% of those given molnupiravir were hospitalised and one person died, while the other placebo group had a hospitalisation rate of 9.7%. The latest data from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs taken from randomly selected UK households, suggests that the decline in infection levels seen in recent weeks has ended. The results reveal the percentage of people testing positive for Covid increased in Northern Ireland and Scotland in the week ending 20 November, while the trend was uncertain in England and Wales. The findings echo daily case data which is based on results from people who come forward for tests – in recent weeks these figures have suggests an uptick in Covid cases in the UK. Among other insights the ONS data suggests infection levels have risen in the North East, East Midlands and South East of England, and among older teens and young people with rises seen in school Year 12 up to age 34 years. Sarah Crofts, head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 Infection Survey, said the picture across the UK is mixed. “The uncertain picture across England is as a result of different trends in different parts of the country and among people in different age groups. School age children still have the highest levels of infection despite a decreasing trend over the last few weeks for those of secondary school ages,” she said. England’s Covid weekly reproduction “R” number has risen and is likely to be above 1, with latest estimates showing it between 1.0 and 1.1, the UK Health Security Agency said on Friday. An R number between 1.0 and 1.1 means that for every 10 people infected, they will on average infect between 10 and 11 other people. Last week R was estimated between 0.8 and 1.0. The daily growth of infections was estimated between -1% and +2%, compared with -2% and 0% the previous week. The World Health Organization has cautioned countries against hastily imposing travel restrictions linked to the new B.1.1.529 variant of Covid, saying they should take a “risk-based and scientific approach”. A closed-door experts’ meeting from Geneva, convened by the WHO, began at midday on Friday to assess B.1.1.529 and to designate it as either a variant of interest or a variant of concern, spokesperson Christian Lindmeier said. Global authorities reacted with alarm on Friday to a new coronavirus variant detected in South Africa, with the EU and UK among those tightening border controls as scientists sought to find out if the mutation was vaccine-resistant. “At this point, implementing travel measures is being cautioned against,” Lindmeier told a UN briefing in Geneva. “The WHO recommends that countries continue to apply a risk-based and scientific approach when implementing travel measures.” It would take several weeks to determine the variant’s transmissibility and the effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics against it, he said, noting that 100 sequences of the variant have been reported so far. People should continue to wear masks whenever possible, avoid large gatherings, ventilate rooms and maintain hand hygiene, Lindmeier said. “We don’t know very much about this yet. What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is when you have so many mutations it can have an impact on how the virus behaves,” said Maria Van Kerkhove, an epidemiologist and WHO technical lead on Covid-19. “This is one to watch; I would say we have concern. But I think you would want us to have concern,” she told viewers of an event on social media on Thursday. Van Kerkhove said that it was good that variants were being detected, adding: “It means that we have a system in place.” Lindmeier said that the UN agency’s technical advisory group and other experts on virus evolution were conferring with South African researchers. The Belgian government brought in new restrictions on Friday including early closing of bars and full closure of nightclubs for three weeks to reduce social contact and curb a rapidly spreading fourth wave of Covid infections. “We are confronted with a situation now that is worse than the most pessimistic view of the experts from only two weeks ago,” the Belgian premier Alexander De Croo told a news conference. He said strain on the health service was mounting. The new measures come just a week after a previous package of coronavirus restrictions, including enforcing wider use of masks and more working from home. Under the new rules, Christmas markets, cultural sites, bars and restaurants will have to close at 11pm, with a maximum of six people per table. Private parties and gatherings are also banned, unless they are for weddings or funerals. Israel has imposed a travel ban covering most of Africa after the detection of the new B.1.1.529 variant in South Africa that could be more contagious than the Delta strain. “We are currently on the verge of a state of emergency,” the prime minister Naftali Bennett said on Friday, according to a statement from his office, before expanding a ban he announced on Thursday on the entry of foreigners from seven African countries and Israelis’ travel to them. Under the broader restrictions, all African nations, except those in north Africa, were added to Israel’s red list of high-risk countries. Bennett, who met Israeli health experts before the edicts were announced, said there were a few cases of the new variant reported in Israel. A first case in Europe of the new variant of Covid-19 has been identified in Belgium in an unvaccinated young adult woman who developed mild flu-like symptoms 11 days after travelling to Egypt via Turkey. The patient did not report any links with South Africa or other countries in southern Africa. None of her family members have developed symptoms. The patient was said to have a high viral load at the time of diagnosis by researchers at the universities, KU Leuven and UZ Leuven. The Dutch government is set to announce new measures including early closure of bars, restaurants and retail to stem a record-breaking wave of Covid infections that is threatening to overwhelm the healthcare system, Reuters reports. The caretaker prime minister, Mark Rutte, was meeting his Cabinet on Friday to make a final decision on what measures are needed to ensure that hospitals, stressed by a flood of patients with coronavirus, do not run out of capacity in intensive care units. Rutte is due to hold a televised news conference announcing the decision at 6pm GMT. The wave of cases in the Netherlands, running above 20,000 infections per day for the past week, has continued despite restrictions including the reintroduction of face masks and closure of bars and restaurants after 8pm imposed by the government earlier this month. The surge in the Netherlands, one of several European countries to be hit by a wave of infections, is also occurring even though 85% of the adult population have been vaccinated, with infections now rising most quickly among schoolchildren, who are not vaccinated. A report on Thursday by national broadcaster NOS said the country’s top healthcare panel had advised Rutte to close restaurants and non-essential stores by 5pm – and against closing schools. But some experts argue that school closures are needed as part of a short, near-total lockdown to regain control of the situation. A government proposal - not yet policy - to restrict unvaccinated people from public places prompted three nights of rioting last weekend. National security officials were meeting Friday to prepare for possible protests after the new measures are announced. Dutch hospitals have been steadily curtailing care amid the rising coronavirus cases, with non-essential operations being cancelled or postponed from this week in order to free up beds in ICU units. Some patients have been transferred to neighbouring Germany. The Dutch associations of house doctors and neighbourhood nurses said on Friday they too are becoming overwhelmed. We “are doing everything we can to continue to offer the most necessary care,” they said in a joint statement. “That’s only possible if we postpone or don’t give some normal care.” Spain will suspend flights to South Africa and Botswana from Tuesday over concerns about the new Covid variant B.1.1.529, state broadcaster TVE reported on Friday, following similar decisions by other European nations. The Health Ministry did not respond to a Reuters request for comment. The report came shortly after the European Commission recommended an EU-wide travel ban to and from southern Africa due to the rapid rise of the B.1.1.529 variant in South Africa, which scientists fear could evade vaccines. The Philippines has also suspended inbound international flights on Friday from South Africa and other countries with cases or the likelihood of cases of a new coronavirus variant - South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Eswatini, and Mozambique - until 15 December, the presidential office said. England, India, Japan, Italy, Germany, Singapore and the Czech Republic are among a number of countries who have rapidly imposed a range of travel restrictions on southern African countries. BioNTech, the German company that developed the first Covid vaccine, has said it is closely studying B.1.1.529, the new variant from South Africa, and will have conclusive data from laboratory tests in two weeks at the latest. A spokesman for the company told the German daily Bild that it would then be in a position to see whether or not its current vaccine had to be adjusted to tackle it. The spokesman said: Pfizer and BioNTech started several months ago to ensure that in the case of an escape variant, the mRNA vaccine can be adapted within six weeks, the first doses of which would be ready to dispatch within 100 days. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said that, with regards to the new B.1.1.529 variant, it would be “premature to ‘press the panic button’” and it is too soon to say if it will lead to further restrictions. Neverhteless, it is the “most significant and concerning” Covid development of recent months, so action must be taken on a precautionary basis, she said, referring to restrictions on travel from people from affected countries and asking for isolation. That is the appropriate action to take at this stage, but we will be looking carefully at developments over the days to come. The World Health Organization, I know, is very concerned about this variant and is meeting itself to consider how it categorises the threat. The number of excess deaths occurring in England and Wales during the winter of 2020/21 were over six times higher than the same period the year previous, the Office for National Statistics estimates. According to the ONS, the growth was mostly driven by the large number of coronavirus deaths during April to July of 2020, and the winter months of 2021 (December to March). Coronavirus was also found to be the leading cause of excess winter mortality in 2020 to 2021, accounting for 84% in England, and 82.9% in Wales, of all excess winter deaths. A new variant of Covid, B.1.1.529, has been causing global concern after it was discovered in Hong Kong, having emerged in southern Africa. It has been detected in both South Africa and Botswana. The World Health Organization’s Technical Advisory Group on Virus Evolution (TAG-VE) is meeting in Geneva to assess whether the variant should be designated a “variant of interest” or “variant of concern”. B.1.1.529 has a very unusual constellation of mutations, which are worrying because they could help it evade the body’s immune response and make it more transmissible, scientists have said. Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said in a press briefing on Thursday: “We don’t know very much about this yet. What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is that when you have so many mutations, it can have an impact on how the virus behaves.” England, India, Japan, Italy, Germany and the Czech Republic are among a number of countries who have rapidly imposed a range of travel restrictions on countries including South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. UK transport secretary Grant Shapps described the move as “a safety-first approach”. South Africa’s foreign ministry said Britain’s decision to ban flights from South Africa because of the detection of a new Covid-19 variant “seems to have been rushed” UK health secretary Sajid Javid has described the new variant as “of huge international concern” and “may pose substantial risk to public health.” Israel’s prime minister Naftali Bennett called a meeting with public health officials and his government to take stock of the Covid situation in the country after a case of the new variant was discovered there. “We are close to an emergency situation... we must act strongly and quickly,” Bennett said in a statement from his office. “When we have a clearer picture of the situation, we will take decisions accordingly,” he added. Australia’s border is set to remain open to South Africa despite emergence of new Covid variant. Australia’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said officials were assessing the threat posed by the strain and would not yet introduce restrictions on arrivals from southern Africa. Shares in travel and aviation businesses plummeted over fears that the new coronavirus variant described as potentially the worst so far identified could lead to a new wave of global pandemic restrictions. Prof James Naismith, director of the Rosalind Franklin Institute, told BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme the new variant will “almost certainly” make the vaccines less effective, but “it is bad news but it is not doomsday.” Germany’s health minister Jens Spahn. He said the country needs to take decisive action now or else face drastic measures in the coming weeks that could include a complete reduction in contacts between people. “Everything we don’t decide now, everything we don’t reduce now in terms of contacts, will require even more drastic measures in two or four weeks’ time,” Spahn told a news conference in Berlin. Hungary needs to increase the number of people taking booster shots against Covid-19 to curb infections, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán told state radio this morning. China is continuing to pursue its strict Covid-zero policy in light of three new cases detected in the city of Shanghai. Hundreds of flights have been cancelled while some schools were shuttered and tour groups suspended. Six Shanghai hospitals have also suspended outpatient services. One member of the police forces was injured during violent clashes overnight with anti-Covid measure protesters on the French island of Martinique. Here is a really helfpul explainer on what we know so far about the new “worst ever” Covid variant – known as B.1.1.529 – and why it is of concern: The chief medical adviser to the UK Health and Security Agency has warned that a newly identified Covid variant in southern Africa is the “most worrying we’ve seen”, with transmission levels not recorded since the beginning of the pandemic. Dr Susan Hopkins said the R value, or effective reproduction number, of the B.1.1.529 variant in Gauteng in South Africa, where it was first found, is now 2. For an R of anything above 1, an epidemic will grow exponentially. She voiced her concerns as the European Commission announced plans to stop flights from the southern Africa region. England and Scotland said on Thursday they were banning flights from six countries in the region. Hopkins told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: What we’re seeing in South Africa is that they were at a very, very low point, with a very low amount of cases being detected a day, and in a shorter period than two weeks they have more than doubled their epidemiology picture. They are saying that their transmission rates, the R value that they have in Gauteng around where this was first found, is now 2, which is really quite high and we’ve not seen levels of transmission like that since right back at the beginning of the pandemic, because of all of the mitigations and steps we’ve taken. So that would cause a major problem if you had that high transmission with this type of virus in a population where it may evade the immune responses that are already there. Read the full story here: The health secretary has now left the Commons. Share your experiences The Guardian would like to hear from those who are travelling from the southern African countries affected by the red list announcement – South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Namibia and Zimbabwe – or who have plans to travel to them. We are also interested in hearing from those who have arrived in the UK from any of the affected countries and have been contacted by test and trace. You can get in touch by filling in the form here or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Labour MP Ruth Jones asks about sporting events due to take place in South Africa this weekend, including the United Rugby Championship which Cardiff Rugby and Scarlets Rugby have travelled to. She asks what assistance is being given to them to get them home before the midday deadline for the red list. Javid says whether it’s sports teams or British tourists that find themselves in these countries, this is “very difficult news” but he hopes they understand. On the rugby teams specifically, the health secretary says: Nothing. We won’t do anything to help them get back before this deadline. Because I think anyone who’s in South Africa, the best thing to do is to come back after 4am on Sunday and go into hotel quarantine. Labour MP Meg Hillier asks whether there has been any indication from southern African countries about the impact of the variant on children – and whether there are plans to offer second doses to children in the UK. Javid says “this has moved so fast” that there have been no indications yet about the potential impact on children in particular. In the UK, the child vaccination programme is “going well” but he says we would wait for expert advice from the JCVI on second doses. Labour MP Pat McFadden says one of the lessons of the new variant is that if we do not tackle the “enormous” vaccine inequality around the world we will continue to be exposed to new variants. He asks if Javid agrees that the UK and other rich countries must ensure surplus doses are distributed to countries that do need them. Javid says he agrees “with every word”, especially around surplus vaccines. Labour MP Rachael Maskell asks if Javid can give “clear leadership” about taking further public health measures such as mask-wearing, social distancing and better ventilation. The health secretary says she makes a “good point about the need to follow guidance and the rules that are currently in place”. Plan A remains the policy “that I think we need at this time”, Javid adds – but itis kept under review and “if we need to go further we will”. Tory MP Liam Fox says there is a need to “redouble our efforts” to vaccinate populations across the globe, and asks what do we know so far about the severity of illness with the new variant. Javid says “we don’t know enough yet”, but from what we can tell it indicates there is a “possibility” it might have a different impact on someone if they get infected. On the countries added to the red list, Javid says the government is currently going primarily by countries where the new variant has been detected, he says – adding ithas been confirmed in South Africa and Botswana. The other four countries have been included as a “precaution”. He says “we are keeping this under review and there’s very live discussions going on” about adding further countries. Responding to Javid’s statement, the shadow public health minister, Alex Norris, says Labour is glad to see “swift action” and adding countries to the red list is the “right call” and the party supports it – after the government took too long to act on Delta and the variant was “allowed to run free”. He asks why these specific countries have been added and not the wider group of countries where cases of the variant have been detected, asking if they will be required to use PCR tests on arrival rather than lateral flow ones. The news today reflected a failure of the global community to distribute vaccines to low-income countries, he says. Norris adds “we need to go further and faster with vaccination at home”, adding there are “huge pockets of the country” where “significant numbers” of people remain unvaccinated. “This is a sobering reminder of the challenges that this pandemic brings,” he says. This is a reminder for all of us that this pandemic is far from over, Javid says. We must continue to act with caution and do all we can to keep the virus at bay, including when eligible getting your booster shot, he adds. The booster jab was already important before we knew about this new variant, he says, but now it could not be more important. From midday on Friday, six countries - South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Namibia and Zimbabwe - will be placed on the travel red list, Javid says. Anyone not a UK or Irish resident who has been in one of these countries in the last ten days will be denied entry into England, he says. UK and Irish residents arriving from these countries from 4am on Sunday will enter hotel quarantine, he says. Anyone arriving before those dates should take PCR tests on day two and day eight, even if they are vaccinated, and isolate at home along with the rest of their household, he says. If you have arrived from any of these countries in the last ten days, Test and Trace will contact you to take PCR tests, he says. But do not wait to be contacted - you should take a PCR test right away, he adds. We must move quickly and at the earliest possible moment, Javid says. The UK is in a strong position thanks to reopening during the summer and the ongoing booster programme, he says. We must act with caution, he says. We’re also worried about rising cases in countries in southern Africa, Javid says, especially as these populations should have significant natural immunity. In South Africa, there has been exponential growth, with cases increasing four-fold in the last two weeks, he says. In Gauteng province, which includes Johannesburg and Pretoria, some 80% of cases, when tested with a PCR test, have shown something known as the S gene dropout, which we associate with this variant, he says. So while we don’t know yet definitively if the exponential growth of cases in South Africa is directly associated with this variant, this PCR test analysis does indicate that there could be many more cases than just those so far sequenced, he says. It has many of the features of the Alpha, Beta and Delta variants, Javid says. Early indications show the variant may be more transmissible than Delta, he says, and current vaccines may be less effective against it. It may also impact the effectiveness of one of our major treatments, he says. We are concerned this new variant may pose substantial risk to public health, Javid says. The variant has an unusually large number of mutations, he says. Yesterday, the UK Health Security Agency classified the variant as a new variant under investigation, and the Variant Technical Group has designated it as a new variant under investigation with very high priority, he says. It is the only variant with this designation, Javid says, making it higher priority than Beta. Further cases have been identified in South Africa and Botswana, he says, and it is highly likely it has now spread to other countries. This is a fast-moving situation and there remains a high degree of uncertainty, Javid says. The sequence of the variant – B.1.1.529 – was first uploaded by Hong Kong from a case of someone travelling from South Africa, he says. The UK was the first to identify the threat from this new variant and alert international partners, he says. Over the past 24 hours a small number of cases of a new variant have been detected in the international genomic database, Javid says. There are no detected cases in the UK at this time, he adds. But this variant is of huge international concern, he says. The WHO has called a special meeting this morning which is taking place right now, he says. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, will deliver a statement to the Commons shortly, giving an update on the B.1.1.529 variant, which experts have called the “most worrying we’ve seen”. There is a meeting at the World Health Organization (WHO) starting very shortly over the new variant. Here is the statement they have given to the media: WHO is closely monitoring the recently reported variant B.1.1.529. So far under 100 sequences have been reported. Early analysis shows that this variant has a large number of mutations that require and will undergo further study. We are grateful for researchers in South Africa and experts on WHO’s Technical Advisory Group on Virus Evolution (TAG-VE) who are assessing this variant. WHO is convening a meeting of the TAG-VE today to better understand the timeline for studies that are underway and to determine if this variant should be designated as a variant of interest or variant of concern. There is no live press conference or anything like that planned at this moment in time, but we are expecting the outcome of the meeting to be shared with the media later today. Japan will tighten border controls for people arriving from six African nations from midnight. Reuters report that those arriving from South Africa, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Botswana and Lesotho will be required to undergo a 10-day quarantine period in government-determined accommodation, the chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, told reporters. Our community team would like to hear from those travelling or who have plans to travel from countries in the southern African region that has been affected with the sudden imposition of travel bans over the discovery of a new Covid variant. You can find out how to get in touch here: Tell us – how are you affected by the southern Africa Covid travel restrictions? A quick snap from Reuters here with some quotes from Germany’s health minister Jens Spahn. He said the country needs to take decisive action now or else face drastic measures in the coming weeks that could include a complete reduction in contacts between people. “Everything we don’t decide now, everything we don’t reduce now in terms of contacts, will require even more drastic measures in two or four weeks’ time,” Spahn told a news conference in Berlin. “That is our appeal: massive restrictions of contacts,” he said, calling for this to be supported by Germany’s regions or else there could be a “complete” reduction, he said, without using the word “lockdown”. There’s a little bit more detail emerging of the situation in Israel where at least one case of the new B.1.1.529 variant has been detected in a traveller arriving there from Malawi, and the prime minister has said “We are close to an emergency situation” Naftali Bennett called a meeting on Friday morning with public health officials and his government to take stock of the Covid situation in the country. “We are close to an emergency situation... we must act strongly and quickly,” Bennett said in a statement from his office. “When we have a clearer picture of the situation, we will take decisions accordingly,” he added. Agence France-Presse remind us that earlier this month Israel held a “war games” style drill to help prepare for the possible emergence of what they termed a lethal “Omega” variant. Portugal, which has vaccinated 86% of its population, is reintroducing a series of restrictions as cases in the country continue to rise. On Thursday the prime minister, António Costa, announced that from 1 December, face masks would once again be obligatory in enclosed spaces and that a digital certificate showing vaccination or recovery would need to be shown to enter restaurants, hotels and cinemas. All those entering hospitals, care homes, bars, clubs and sports events will need to show a negative test, while those flying into Portugal from abroad will also need a digital certificate or a negative test result. Catalonia has become the latest Spanish region to decree that Covid passports are now needed to get into bars, restaurants, gyms and care homes. The passports are also in use in Aragón, the Balearic islands, Galicia, Murcia and Navarre, but their specific use varies between regions. It has just been announced that health secretary, Sajid Javid, will make a Commons statement on the latest Covid developments at 11am in the UK Houses of Parliament. Shares in travel and aviation businesses, including the British Airways owner, IAG, easyJet and the aero-engine maker Rolls-Royce plummeted on Friday over fears that a new coronavirus variant described as potentially the worst so far identified could lead to a new wave of global pandemic restrictions. The emergence of the variant, which was identified on Tuesday and is feared to be more transmissible and poses a threat to current vaccines, prompted the government to put six southern African countries back on England’s travel red list on Thursday night. Flights from South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho and Eswatini are to be suspended from midday on Friday. Officials are also reviewing a number of travel measures, including whether there should be a limited reintroduction of the use of PCR tests for arrivals. The news prompted a sharp sell-off of travel stocks on Friday, with IAG, which also owns the airline Iberia, tumbling as much as 14% in early trading. Read more of Mark Sweney’s report here: Travel and aviation shares tumble over new Covid variant fears The new coronavirus variant found in South Africa has so far not been identified in Germany or Europe, the head of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute said on Friday, adding that some mutations linked to the variant gave reason for great concern. “There are other mutations (deriving from the new variant found in South Africa) whose biological composition is unclear. We are in fact very worried,” the RKI president, prof Lothar Wieler, told journalists in a news conference, Reuters report. “So far, I am not aware that this variant has been identified in Europe or in Germany.” Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics live blog for today up and running. He will be mostly focussed for now on the crisis in the relationship between Britain and France. I’ll be continuing to bring you the latest coronavirus news from the UK and around the world, where the main story is the emergence of a new variant in southern Africa which is causing concern to scientists and sparking a series of travel bans. Earlier this week Swiss health authorities warned of a rising “fifth wave” in the Alpine country, where vaccination rates are roughly in line with those in hard-hit Austria and Germany — at about two-thirds of the population. Infection rates have soared in recent weeks. The seven-day average case count in Switzerland went up to more than 5,200 per day from mid-October to mid-November, a more than fivefold increase — with an upward curve like those in neighbouring Germany and Austria. However, federal government has not responded with new restrictive measures. Analysts say it does not want to stir up more opposition to its anti-Covid policies, which face a crucial test at the ballot box this weekend as critics have grown increasingly loud. On Sunday, as part of the country’s regular referendums, Swiss voters will cast ballots about the so-called “Covid-19 law” that has provided billions of Swiss francs in aid for workers and businesses hit by the pandemic. The law has also imposed the use of a special Covid certificate that lets only people who have been vaccinated, recovered, or tested negative attend public events and gatherings. The Associated Press suggests in its report that if the Swiss give a thumbs-up on Sunday, that may free the government’s hand to ratchet up its anti-Covid efforts. The Swiss Federal Council, the seven-member executive branch, went out of its way earlier this week to say: “It’s not the time to decree a tightening of measures nationwide,” while opting for a region-by-region approach and calling on citizens to act responsibly through mask-wearing, physical distancing, and proper airing of indoor areas. A quick snap from Reuters that one member of the police forces was injured during violent clashes overnight with protesters on the French island of Martinique, French media reported. Authorities on the Caribbean island of Martinique ordered a curfew on Thursday after protesters looted shops and set up burning barricades as demonstrations against Covid-19 protocols spread across France’s overseas’ territories. Israel has identified a case of a Covid-19 variant with a large number of mutations first detected in South Africa, the health ministry said today. “The variant discovered in southern African states has been identified in Israel,” the ministry said, adding it was recorded “in a person who returned from Malawi”. Agence France-Presse report that two more cases were detected in “people returning from abroad”, adding that they had been placed in quarantine. The three people were all vaccinated, the health ministry said, without specifying the number of doses or the type of vaccine. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, called a meeting on Friday morning with public health officials and his government to take stock of the Covid situation in the country. Israel had already late on Thursday placed on its “red list” the southern African nations of Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe because of the discovery of the variant. Reuters has an update on the reaction in India to the new variant emerging in southern Africa. India issued an advisory to all states to rigorously test and screen international travellers from South Africa and other “at risk” countries amid concerns over a new coronavirus variant, after easing some of its travel restrictions earlier this month. The federal health ministry said reports of mutations in the new variant, identified as B.1.1.529, had “serious public health implications”. “This variant is reported to have a significantly high number of mutations, and thus, has serious public health implications for the country in view of recently relaxed visa restrictions and opening up of international travel,” the health secretary, Rajesh Bhushan, said in a letter to states late last night. While some major Asian countries rushed to tighten border controls and restrict travellers, India had not yet issued a notification, a senior government source said. “This has not been studied fully by ministry of health,” the source told Reuters, declining to be identified. Dr Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M), which advises the UK government, said it was “very, very early days” in understanding the new variant and whether it may affect vaccines, whether it spreads more rapidly or is more deadly. He earlier told BBC Breakfast: “I think there’s been fewer than 100 confirmed cases in South Africa and elsewhere so far, so it is concerning, but really important that we gather as much information as possible right now so we really understand exactly how concerned we should be.” PA Media reports he said South Africa could see a rapid spread in cases owing to the fact only 24% of the population are fully vaccinated. Addressing people in the UK, he said: “The message really isn’t changed ... it is still important that people do go out, continue to get their vaccines, continue to get their boosters because it still will provide us with protection.” He said the key thing for the UK was whether the variant would send the reproductive value (the R) significantly above one, or would potentially lead to higher numbers of hospital admissions. He said then the government would need to look at taking action but added: “There’s an awful lot of ifs at the moment and all of these needs to be clarified before I think we get there and actually think about what might be happening if we start seeing a growing number of cases in the UK.” There is a press briefing coming out from the World Health Organization (WHO) at the moment, and tit says: It will convene an experts meeting at noon in Geneva today over the B.1.1.159 variant. It will evaluate whether this new variant is a “variant of interest” or a “variant of concern”. It declined to make any comment on the rapid imposition of travel bans for people coming from the southern African region where the variant has taken hold. It is a while since the WHO last designated a “variant of concern”. So far there are four, named Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta. There are currently two “variants of interest” – Lambda and Mu. If B.1.1.159 is named today it will become Nu. As a reminder here are the definitions of those terms: Variant of interest (VOI) – a SARS-CoV-2 variant with genetic changes that are predicted or known to affect virus characteristics such as transmissibility, disease severity, immune escape, diagnostic or therapeutic escape; and that has been identified to cause significant community transmission or multiple Covid-19 clusters, in multiple countries. Variant of concern (VOC) – a SARS-CoV-2 variant that meets the definition of a VOI and, through a comparative assessment, has been demonstrated to be associated with one or more of the following changes at a degree of global public health significance: Increase in transmissibility or detrimental change in COVID-19 epidemiology; OR Increase in virulence or change in clinical disease presentation; OR Decrease in effectiveness of public health and social measures or available diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutics. Italy has also imposed an entry ban on people who have visited a group of southern African states in the last 14 days, due to the spread of a new Covid-19 variant there. Reuters reports a statement said the Italian health minister, Roberto Speranza, has signed an executive order banning entry by people who have visited South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia and Eswatini in the last fortnight. “Our scientists are studying the new B.1.1.529 variant. In the meantime, we will adopt the greatest possible caution,” Speranza said. A quick snap from Reuters that the Czech Republic is the latest country to ban travel from South Africa and other southern African countries to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus variant, foreign minister Jakub Kulhanek has said. The ban which will take effect on Saturday, applies for third country citizens who spent more than 12 hours in the past two weeks in South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia. There’s a lot of speculation on the airwaves in the UK about the new variant detected in South Africa which is already causing global concern. Prof James Naismith, director of the Rosalind Franklin Institute, told BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme the new variant will “almost certainly” make the vaccines less effective, while also conceding that there is a lot we don’t know. PA Media quote him saying: It has mutations consistent with the Delta variant, which does spread more quickly, but transmissibility and spread is not just as simple as this amino acid does this or this does that, it’s more like a team on things. So you can sometimes have the mutations all together but they won’t be effective as a team. It looks like it spreads more quickly but we do not know that. If it spreads more quickly then yes it will get here [to the UK], the travel ban will delay its arrival but if it spreads more quickly the lesson has surely been from all the variants we’ve seen before that it will get here eventually. We shouldn’t despair, vaccines will be effective, so if you haven’t had your vaccine go and get it, be that the booster, the first dose, the second dose. Secondly there are new medicines coming along. These will not be affected almost certainly by this mutation. We have got much better at controlling the disease in other ways in hospital so it is bad news but it is not doomsday. Incidentally, we have a quick Q&amp;A about the new variant, which may potentially end up being dubbed the Nu variant by the World Health Organization. Here’s one of the key bits of information from it: B.1.1.529 has a very unusual constellation of mutations, which are worrying because they could help it evade the body’s immune response and make it more transmissible, scientists have said. Any new variant that is able to evade vaccines or spread faster than the now-dominant Delta variant might pose a significant threat as the world emerges from the pandemic. Senior scientists on Thursday evening described B.1.1.529 as the worst variant they had seen since the start of the pandemic. It has 32 mutations in the spike protein, the part of the virus that most vaccines use to prime the immune system against Covid. That is about double the number associated with the Delta variant. Mutations in the spike protein can affect the virus’s ability to infect cells and spread, but also make it harder for immune cells to attack the pathogen. Read more here: What do we know about the new ‘worst ever’ Covid variant? In the UK it is transport secretary Grant Shapps who has been doing the media round for the government, and naturally he is being asked a lot about the new variant that has been detected in South Africa. PA Media quote him on Sky News saying: It is important to make sure that you do act immediately and in doing so you get to slow things down in terms of potential entry into the country. That gives us a bit of time for the scientists to work on sequencing the genome, which involves growing cultures - it takes several weeks to do - so we can find out how significant a concern this particular variant is. It is a safety-first approach. We have done that before with things like the mink variant from Denmark and we were then able to relax it reasonably quickly. Hungary needs to increase the number of people taking booster shots against COVID-19 to curb infections, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán told state radio this morning. Reuters report that Orbán said the government would extend a special campaign making vaccinations available without any prior registration to next week following a surge in Covid-19 cases. He said he would “not exclude anything” but that if the spread of the virus can be curbed with vaccines then there will not be a need for lockdown measures. Orban said the government would make vaccines available to parents if they want their children aged between 5 and 11 be vaccinated, and has ordered 2 million doses for this purpose, with the first shipment coming next month. Thursday’s data showed 5.81 million people, or just under 60% of the population, have been fully vaccinated, while 2.15 million have received booster shots. Hungary has made booster shots mandatory for healthcare workers and protective mask wearing has again been required in most indoor places since Saturday. But the changes fall short of the strict measures urged by Hungarian doctors as hospitals are filling up. Germany will declare South Africa a virus variant area later today after the detection of a new Covid-19 variant there, a health ministry source said. The decision, which will come into effect from tonight, will mean airlines will be allowed to fly only Germans to Germany from South Africa, according to the Reuters source. Returning Germans, even those who are vaccinated, will then have to spend 14 days in quarantine. “This newly discovered variant worries us. That is why we are acting pro-actively and early here,” health minister Jens Spahn said. “The last thing we need now is a new variant being introduced that causes even more problems.” Indonesia has significantly recovered from a mid-year outbreak of coronavirus cases and deaths that was one of the worst in the region, but with its vaccination drive stalling due to logistical challenges and other issues, and with holidays approaching, experts and officials warn the island nation could soon face another surge. Associated Press report that the world’s fourth most populous nation is only 33% fully vaccinated and 16% partially. Most vaccinations have been distributed in the more urban areas on the archipelago nation’s biggest islands of Java and Bali, while many on smaller, more rural islands — where health care systems are often rudimentary and the population tends to be older — have not been reached, said Dicky Budiman, an Indonesian epidemiologist and academic adviser to the government. As more people travel back to these areas over the holidays, there is a greater risk the virus will spread to those populations, some of which have been partially protected by their isolation, he said. “It will not be as bad as what we saw in July and August, but if we maybe look at the first wave, in January 2020, maybe it will be similar due to their vulnerability,” he said. Because Indonesia started early with its vaccination program, there’s also more likelihood that the effectiveness is now waning, he said. Boosters are planned but probably will not begin until early 2022. The government is urging people to avoid travel if they can and has increased restrictions in all provinces over Christmas and New Year’s, but some 20 million people are still expected to vacation on the popular islands of Java and Bali over the holidays. Prof Adam Finn, a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), said more needs to be learned about a new variant of the virus which causes Covid-19 to assess the threat it poses, but that new restrictions could not be ruled out. PA Media report he told ITV’s Good Morning Britain that a jump in cases in South Africa could be linked to the variant’s enhanced transmissibility. “We now need to wait and see just what kind of threat this new variant may pose,” he said. “If we’re lucky, it won’t be a serious one, but it could be very serious.” As you can probably imagine, the questioning immediately turned to “What about Christmas?” He said “On the one hand, I don’t want to induce unnecessary anxiety in people, but on the other hand, I think we all need to be ready for the possibility of a change in the restrictions,” he said. South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe have been put on England’s travel red list, and officials are reviewing a number of travel measures including whether there should be a limited reintroduction of the use of PCR tests for arrivals. Prof Finn said sequencing is being carried out around the UK to determine if any cases have already been imported. If you haven’t read it yet, then here is the latest news on the detection of a new variant in South Africa that has been concerning authorities: The World Health Organization will meet on Friday to assess a new variant detected in South Africa that is feared to be the worst Covid-19 variant yet identified. The meeting will determine if the B.1.1.529 variant should be designated a variant of “interest” or of “concern”. The variant, which was identified on Tuesday, initially attracted attention because it carries an “extremely high number” of mutations. Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said in a press briefing on Thursday: “We don’t know very much about this [variant] yet. What we do know is that this variant has a large number of mutations. And the concern is that when you have so many mutations, it can have an impact on how the virus behaves.” The infectious disease epidemiologist said that researchers would meet to “understand where these mutations are and what this potentially may mean” in terms of whether it is more transmissible or has potential to evade immunity. A high number of mutations does not necessarily make a variant more transmissible. In August, similar concerns emerged about a variant in South Africa, known as C.1.2, but it was never listed as a variant of interest or concern. At the meeting the WHO may decide whether or not to give the B.1.1.529 variant a name from the Greek alphabet. If it does, it is likely to be named Nu, the next available letter. Read more here: WHO to assess new highly mutated Covid-19 variant as countries ramp up health checks Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from my colleague Samantha Lock in Sydney. First off, here is a quick reminder of where we stand in the UK with the latest coronavirus numbers. The UK has recorded 303,504 new cases of Covid in the last week. Those case numbers are up by 9.5% week-on-week. Deaths are down by 14.8% on the previous week, and the number of patients being admitted to hospital is also trending downwards – 11.4% fewer than the previous week. Japan is now the latest country to tighten border controls for visitors from South Africa and five other African countries, as per a Jiji news service report. India also issued an advisory to all states to rigorously test and screen travellers from the African nation and other “at risk” countries earlier on Friday. South Africa’s foreign ministry said Britain’s decision to ban flights from South Africa because of the detection of a new Covid-19 variant “seems to have been rushed” as even the World Health Organization is yet to advise on the next steps, Reuters reports. “Our immediate concern is the damage that this decision will cause to both the tourism industries and businesses of both countries,” Foreign Minister Naledi Pandor said in a statement, adding South Africa would engage with British authorities to try to get them to reconsider their decision. Singapore will restrict arrivals from south Africa and countries nearby in an effort to keep out a new Covid-19 variant, its health ministry said in a statement on Friday. All non-Singaporean or non-permanent residents with recent travel history to Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, and Zimbabwe will be denied entry or transit through Singapore, it said. The additional border restrictions will apply for four weeks, after which the ministry will review and extend the restrictions if necessary. Welcome back to our global Covid live coverage. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be with you to report on all things coronavirus. News of the recently identified B.1.1.529 variant has raised concern among scientists and world leaders, with the WHO set to assess its severity and potential impact in a meeting today. Indian health officials on Friday put states on alert, asking them to carry out “rigorous screening and testing” of travellers who had arrived from South Africa, Botswana and Hong Kong, and to trace and test their contacts. Health secretary Rajesh Bhushan urged all states to ensure that samples from Covid-positive travellers be swiftly sent to genome sequencing labs for testing. China is continuing to pursue its strict Covid-zero policy in light of three new cases detected in the city of Shanghai. Hundreds of flights have been cancelled while some schools were shuttered and tour groups suspended, AFP reports. Six Shanghai hospitals have also suspended outpatient services. Germany reports another 76,414 Covid cases and 357 deaths, according to data released from the Robert Koch Institute. The Netherlands is set to tighten its partial lockdown today to curb soaring Covid cases. Prime minister Mark Rutte is expected to announce new anti-Covid measures which could include closing bars, restaurants and non-essential shops. Police are preparing for possible new riots against the restrictions. Portugal is set to bring back Covid vaccination certificates for public spaces including bars, hotels, restaurants and gyms and once again make face masks compulsory indoors, reports Reuters. China sees another Covid-19 outbreak with 6 cases in 3 cities in single day after a dinner with friends reportedly led to infections in Shanghai, Suzhou and Hangzhou, all in the country’s east. The source of the fresh outbreak is still being traced, the South China Morning Post reports. Hong Kong and Chinese authorities said a meeting on Thursday moved them closer to partially reopening the border between them. Hong Kong’s government said: “Good progress was made in the meeting on exploring the resumption of quarantine-free travel between the mainland and Hong Kong in a gradual and orderly manner.” Australia’s border is set to remain open to South Africa despite emergence of new Covid variant. Australia’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said officials were assessing the threat posed by the strain and would not yet introduce restrictions on arrivals from southern Africa. South Korean health authorities said a fetus has died of Covid-19 in the first case in the country, Yonhap news reports. A 24-week pregnant woman delivered the stillborn baby Monday, four days after being confirmed to have been infected with Covid-19, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). India’s daily Covid cases rose by 10,549 and deaths by 488, the nation’s health ministry said. France says it plans to give Covid booster shots to all adults but has opted against a further lockdown or curfew to help combat an uptick in infections in the country. Ministers are urging millions of Britons to get their Covid booster jab by 11 December to ensure they have “very high protection against Covid by Christmas Day” as new evidence shows the risk of infection increases with the time since the second dose. Coronavirus cases are continuing to rise in the UK, recording 47,240 new cases, and 147 more people died. Yesterday there were 43,676 new cases and 149 deaths. Brazil registered 303 Covid deaths on Thursday and 12,126 additional cases, according to data released by the nation’s health ministry. Facebook, Instagram and TikTok are launching new features to encourage people to get their coronavirus booster jabs. From Friday, users will be able to update their profiles with frames or stickers to show that they have had their top-up jab or aim to when they become eligible.With that, we will wrap up the blog for the evening. Have a lovely night and stay dry. Here were today’s major developments: Australia will close its border to nine southern African countries in response to the emergence of Omicron, a new Covid variant first detected in South Africa. Anyone who has been in southern Africa, and is not an Australian citizen, will be unable to enter, and Australians will need to quarantine for 14 days. Flights will also be suspended for a fortnight. The Northern Territory recorded two new Covid cases including a returned traveller from South Africa. Katherine’s lockdown eased from 12pm. A number of flood warnings remained in place across New South Wales and Queensland. Queensland police issued a warning to motorists following flood rescues throughout Darling Downs overnight, and the Eugowra community had been asked to evacuate. Protests on vaccine mandates continued across several major cities including Sydney and Melbourne. In Broome, Covid protesters fired off air horns outside the ABC office. And New South Wales reported 235 new Covid cases and no deaths overnight. Victoria reported five Covid deaths and 1,252 cases. The NSW SES has issued a flood evacuation warning for the community of Eugowra. Australian police and ADF personnel providing security in the Solomon Islands as rioting continues in the capital Honiara have reportedly been well received, AAP reports. Senior federal minister Simon Birmingham says the contingent is likely to be deployed to Australia’s troubled Pacific near neighbour for a matter of weeks rather than months: “At this very early stage our officials and forces on the ground are working hard to help to provide that restoration of peace,” he told reporters in Adelaide on Saturday. “They are, I believe, a respected and welcome force on the ground by the people in the Solomon Islands. The work at present is to get that stability there.” Solomon Islands police found three bodies in a burned-out building late on Friday after making more than a hundred arrests following rioting over the past several days. Many of the protesters are said to resent the government over its 2019 decision to end diplomatic ties with Taiwan and establish formal links with China. Australia initially deployed 23 Australian federal police officers, including tactical response teams. An additional 50 agents and 43 ADF members have since been dispatched as well as a patrol boat. Papua New Guinea has also sent 50 police. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said on Friday Australian forces had been armed with lethal and non-lethal weapons. The Save the Children Solomons country director, Lisa Cuatt, says there are strong fears for the safety and wellbeing of children following the destruction of Honiara High School and damage to other schools. The organisation has 47 staff across four provinces in the country. While there is no exact figure, an estimated 200 Australian citizens in total are in the country. The Solomon Islands prime minister, Manasseh Sogavare, imposed a lockdown in Honiara for 36 hours along with a curfew in a bid to quell the unrest, which ended on Friday morning. He blames foreign powers for encouraging the unrest. But the Solomons opposition leader, Matthew Wale, has accused the government of taking bribes from China, saying people are protesting the current regime’s corruption. Birmingham refused to be drawn on the reasons for the unrest. “We don’t wish to draw into the political commentary that relates to this,” he said. “Our concern is for the people of the Solomon Islands and ensuring that they can enjoy the type of peace and security that they deserve.” Cult Melbourne zine store Sticky Institute has just taken to social media to announce due to the continued weekend protests in the CBD, it will no longer be opening on Saturdays for the rest of the year. Its shop is located in the middle of the CBD, underneath Flinders Street railway station. America has just doubled its lead in the women’s soccer friendly against Australia in Sydney. Rose Lavelle scored in the 48th minute, with the US now leading 2-0. I’m not a betting man, but if I were I wouldn’t be backing the Matildas at this late stage. Catch up on our live blog here: Six people including an infant child have been rescued from flood waters in southern Queensland with a major flood warning current for the Logan and Albert rivers, AAP’s Marty Silk reports. The people were all rescued late on Friday and in the early hours of Saturday after entering flood waters despite official warnings. They were issued after the body of a man was found in a submerged ute near Rockhampton, in central Queensland, earlier on Friday. Police had to enter waters to rescue an infant and two women from a car struck in a torrent at Freestone Creek Bridge on the Cunningham Highway at Warwick about 10.40pm on Friday. About 10 minutes later emergency services were called 10km away at Swan Creek. Officers used a rope and formed a human chain, wading into strong, waist-high current to reach a woman trapped in a car on Jack Smith Gully Road. They managed the pull her through the window and carry her to safety. A man and boy stranded in rising waters in their four-wheel drive on Forest Hill Fernvale Road, Glenore Grove, were also rescued by police about 3.20am on Saturday. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a flood watch for all south-east Queensland catchments. A major flood warning is current for the Logan and Albert rivers with the town of Beaudesert set to be partially inundated. The Logan River was at 9.07 metres, above the major flood level of 8.3 metres, on Saturday morning and could peak close to 9.2 metres in the afternoon, the BoM said. Moderate flood warnings have also been issued for the Balonne, Condamine, lower Macintyre and Weir rivers in the state’s south. Police Superintendent Danny Shaw urged people and drivers to avoid flood waters with more rain predicted on Saturday. He said conditions can change quickly and heavy rain can significantly damage roads, so even if a flooded road appears safe on the surface, it may not be underwater: “It’s not worth risking the lives of yourself, your loved ones, and those of emergency services,” Supt Shaw said in a statement. “I’m urging residents to use common sense, back away from flooded roadways, delay your journey if necessary. If it’s flooded, forget it.” A flood evacuation warning is in place for Whittingham, Scotts Flat, Glenridding, Dunolly and Combo following possible flooding along the Hunter River. Launceston has a population of approximately 110,000. A quick reminder, we’re live blogging the Matildas’ game against the USA this afternoon. Sam Kerr has passed a fitness test and is playing. We’re 1-0 down. Hmmmm... Another extremely chaotic social media graphic from Palaszczuk’s office: More on that Northern Territory case. Genomic sequencing is under way to see if the person who tested positive after arriving from South Africa has the Omicron variant of concern. Disturbing development in Broome today: The NT has recorded two new Covid cases including a man on a repatriation flight from South Africa. Katherine’s lockdown will ease to a “lockout”, which solely restricts the unvaccinated from activities, at 12pm. Queensland police have issued a warning to motorists following a number of flood rescues throughout Darling Downs overnight. Late Friday evening police and emergency services were called to the Cunningham Highway at Warwick, where water had risen half a metre over Freestone Creek Bridge. Police entered the fast-flowing waters to remove two women and a baby from a car and bring them back to safety. The same night, officers were called out to Jack Smith Gully Road at Swan Creek, where another car had become inundated by flood waters. Police waded through waist-high currents to retrieve a woman through the driver’s window and carry her back to dry land. A man and a boy were also rescued from a four-wheel-drive stranded in flood waters along Forest Hill Fernvale Road at Glenore Grove early this morning. The Darling Downs district superintendent Danny Shaw said: As we can see from these incidents overnight, flash flooding can occur very quickly and without any notice, even on roads that you usually travel on without any issues. It’s not worth risking the lives of yourself, your loved ones, and those of emergency services. Still in Victoria, the opposition leader, Matthew Guy, has vowed there will be no more lockdowns under a government led by him. A bold line to push on the day we’ve shut the border to nine countries over a new Covid variant. Here’s Benita Kolovos with AAP: Guy made the pledge at an event in Dandenong South on Saturday morning to mark one year until the state election: The Liberals and Nationals are here 12 months out to give a very clear commitment to Victorians for the next election. No ifs, no buts, no more lockdowns. Guy said Victorians were sick of the “negativity” of the Labor government, which had imposed six lockdowns on the state totalling 263 days. Lockdowns have hurt our community, they’ve hurt people, our kids, our state. Over 90% of us are fully vaccinated and that number will only increase. So as far as we’re concerned, lockdowns should be a thing of the past. In his speech, Guy said he had a “positive” plan for the state’s future, which included reigning in budget blowouts on infrastructure projects, creating more jobs by supporting small businesses, reducing hospital waiting lists for elective surgery and ending the mental health crisis. The opposition needs to win 18 seats at the 26 November poll to form government. However, the most recent opinion polls show Labor is in a near impregnable position. A Roy Morgan survey published on Thursday has Labor leading the coalition 59.5 to 40.5 on a two-party preferred basis, while last week’s Newspoll has them leading 58 to 42. Guess who’s back, back again! The NSW SES has provided an update from Denman. A number of flood warnings remain in place across the state. Good afternoon and many thanks to Ben Smee for guiding us through this morning’s news. I’ll be keeping you company for the rest of the day. And with that, I’ll pass you on to your afternoon blog host, Caitlin Cassidy. She’s going to be driving for most of the afternoon. Thanks for your company this morning! OK, so a more detailed recap from the federal health minister Greg Hunt’s press conference. Australia will suspend flights and ban foreign arrivals from nine southern African nations in response to concern about a new Covid variant of concern, Omicron. The decision follows similar measures taken by the US, UK and European nations overnight. Hunt says the decision was precautionary but necessary given emerging knowledge about Omicron. “We’ve taken [precautionary] action in the past. We’ve taken early action in the past. We are doing that again,” Hunt said. “The difference is that we now have strong vaccines, we have one of the highest levels of coverage in the world, we have one of the most recently vaccinated populations in the world, and we have strong public health and social measures, and we also have, most significantly, as well-prepared hospital system.” The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, says authorities have been working back through arrivals records since 1 November to identify people coming to Australia from southern Africa. He says there are “less than 100” people. Hunt has flagged that those restrictions could change – for better or worse – in the coming days as the world learns more about the risk – and the extent – of the Omicron variant. Let me be absolutely clear. I said yesterday, if more actions are required, we will not hesitate. Today, we have taken those actions. Today, I’m saying, if the medical evidence shows that further actions are required, we will not hesitate to take them. And that may involve strengthening or expanding the restrictions. It may involve reducing the restrictions and the temporary measures which we’ve put in place. The world will learn a lot over the coming weeks. So just to recap the measures announced today by the Australian government: Australia’s borders are closed to anyone (except Australian citizens) arriving from nine southern African countries: South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, the Seychelles, Malawi and Mozambique. Australians attempting to return from those countries will be subject to hotel quarantine. All flights from those nine countries to Australia are suspended. Restrictions will apply to international students and skilled migrants arriving from travel bubbles, and who have been to those countries in the past 14 days. Anyone who has already arrived in Australia from one of the nine listed countries must quarantine and get tested immediately. Greg Hunt says the government’s measures are “strong, swift, decisive and immediate actions”. “They’re taken on the best medical advice. And they include the suspension of all flights from the nine southern African countries.” The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, is now speaking about Omicron: At this point, other than understanding that it is transmissible between humans and is transmitting particularly in SouthAfrica, but also in those surrounding countries, we do not, at this point, have any clear indication that it is more severe, or any definite indication in relation to the (efficacy of the) vaccine. They’re crucial points. It’s the reason why we’re taking this precautionary approach, which is proportionate to that risk, and putting in place the measures that the minister has outlined in relation to that. The health minister, Greg Hunt, says: There are currently no known cases of the Omicron variant in Australia. And we’d just note that there are 20 people in quarantine in Howard Springs in the Northern Territory who’ve arrived from South Africa in the last week. I’ve consulted with Natasha Fyles, the health minister of the NT, this morning. They have all been tested – 19 negative, one positive. The nature of that positive will be considered, and I understand the Northern Territory’s saying more today. But at this stage, there are no known cases of the Omicron variant in Australia. We’ve taken precautious action in the past. We’ve taken early action in the past. We are doing that again. The difference is that we now have strong vaccines, we have one of the highest levels of coverage in the world, we have one of the most recently vaccinated populations in the world, and we have strong public health and social measures, and we also have, most significantly, as well-prepared hospital system. The countries concerned are: South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, the Seychelles, Malawi and Mozambique. Australia will also suspend all flights from nine southern African countries for a period of 14 days as a matter of precaution. Anyone who has already arrived in Australia and who has been in any of the nine listed southern African countries within the past 14 days must immediately isolate themselves and be tested for Covid-19 and follow jurisdictional quarantine requirements Australian citizens and residents and their dependents arriving from these countries will need to go into immediate supervised quarantine for 14 days. Australia will close its borders to anyone who has been in southern Africa, and is not an Australian citizen, in response to the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant, the health minister, Greg Hunt, has announced. OK, so pending another delay, Greg Hunt should be up very, very shortly. The health minister Greg Hunt’s Covid press conference has been rescheduled (again), from 12.15pm to 12.30pm to 1pm AEDT. So we’re 30 minutes away. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has called for Australia to close the border to southern African countries. He said: The Omicron outbreak is a major concern that should be of concern to all Australians. We know the impact that Delta had when it came here. And we can’t afford to be complacent. I make this point, Scott Morrison always waits until a problem becomes a crisis. And then he waits until a crisis becomes a political issue before he acts. He must act today. Australia should place restrictions on our border with southern African countries to make sure that this variant is not able to enter Australia. And that needs to happen today. The prime minister can’t afford, once again, to wait for a problem to become a crisis. He needs to act. We should close the border with southern African countries, just like our counterparts in advanced economies in the northern hemisphere have done. This is a variant that is of real concern. The health authorities are still examining the detail but what we should have is an attitude which mitigates risk. There is a risk here and it should be shut down and minimised and that requires strong action from the federal government. Police officers from Australia and Papua New Guinea have been deployed to the Solomon Islands in response to unrest in the capital, Honiara. The foreign ministers of Australia and Papua New Guinea, Marise Payne and Soroi Eoe, have released a joint statement expressing concern “about the violent turn that protests have taken” in Honiara. The countries have “jointly emphasised the importance of resolving tensions peacefully”. As part of our close working relationship, the Australian federal police (AFP) and Royal Papua New Guinea constabulary (RPNGC) are deploying together in response to the request by the Solomon Islands government. We are aiming to help restore calm and allow normal constitutional processes to operate. On 26 November, 50 RPNGC officers arrived in Honiara on a chartered flight from Port Moresby. They are accompanied by the RPNGC commissioner, David Manning, and AFP commander of the Australia-PNG policing partnership, Jamie Strauss. The AFP, Australian Defence Force and members of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade deployed from 25 November. Australia and Papua New Guinea share a joint commitment to regional security and stability and an enduring economic and security partnership with our Pacific family. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, will be speaking at 12.15pm AEDT. Anti-vax mandate protesters are gathering again in Melbourne and Sydney this morning. It will be interesting to see, when the prime minister steps up later today, whether concern about this new Omicron variant prompts any sort of change in language about vaccination mandates. The hermit kingdom of Queensland is keeping its powder dry on the Omicron variant. Queensland recorded one new Covid case today, in hotel quarantine. New South Wales Health says it is “working closely” with the federal government and other states and territories “to rapidly understand the implications of the new Covid-19 variant of concern, Omicron”: No cases of the Omicron B.1.1.529 variant of concern of Covid-19 have been identified in NSW to date. NSW Health is urging all travellers who have been in southern Africa, including South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, and Eswatini, in the 14 days before arriving in Australia to get a Covid-19 test and isolate immediately. All people in the household should also isolate until further notice. Travellers who have been in southern Africa are asked to call NSW Health on 1800 943 553. NSW Health is also contacting all international travellers who have arrived in the last 14 days by text message and phone asking anyone who has been in southern Africa to get a test and isolate and to remind all other travellers of their testing requirements. The emergence of this new variant reinforces the critical importance of all fully vaccinated travellers who return from overseas complying with the NSW Health guidelines; there are requirements to be tested and restrictions on attending certain high-risk premises. People who have arrived from overseas must have a Covid-19 PCR test within 24 hours of arriving and another test around day six. Travellers who have not been in southern Africa are not required to isolate while waiting for their results unless they have symptoms. If symptoms present at any time after arrival travellers should get tested at a PCR drive-through clinic or other Covid testing facility. The Australian Capital Territory (which now has 96.7% of people aged over 12 double-vaccinated) has recorded seven new Covid-19 cases. We expect to hear from the federal government at 12.30pm (AEDT). We’re expecting an announcement from the Australian government in the coming hours to detail measures in response to the newly discovered Omicron variant of Covid-19. Health minister Greg Hunt said yesterday there were no plans to restrict flights from South Africa or elsewhere in response to the development. Overnight, US, the UK, Europe and a host of other jurisdictions placed travel restrictions on southern Africa. The Sydney Morning Herald and the Age are reporting that the prime minister, Scott Morrison, Hunt, the health department secretary, Brendan Murphy, and the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, met early this morning to discuss what measures might now be necessary. Some significant flood warnings for NSW rivers from the BOM. Stephen Sondheim, the master craftsman of the American musical, has died at the age of 91. A big loss. Burrendong’s storage level rose 10 percentage points in 24 hours – including a 0.5% rise per hour for five hours – requiring overnight dam releases that reached 30GL/day before being scaled back to 5GL/day this morning to avoid increasing downstream river levels already rising due to high tributary inflows, WaterNSW said. Keepit Dam has cut releases almost entirely to avoid adding to a record flood peak in the Mooki River, due to reach Gunnedah later today. Elsewhere, Chaffey Dam on the Peel River continues to spill in large volumes, while WaterNSW teams are monitoring inflows into Burrinjuck and Blowering Dams on the Murrumbidgee, where successful storage operations are expected to have created sufficient capacity to capture the majority of inflows, WaterNSW said. The rain should back off for a few days but return for most of eastern NSW by mid next week. Some more info about flooding alerts in NSW. The state’s inland rivers are a concern. WaterNSW say flows down the unregulated Mooki River in northern NSW appear to be twice the height of any previous flow. That is headed towards the Namoi River, which is already a major flood threat in places. Towns like Gunnedah and Narrabri may be in for some flood activity. WaterNSW said it is also continuing to monitor storage levels at the state’s major regional supply dams, almost all of which are receiving constant inflows and are in excess of 90% of storage capacity. “WaterNSW dam personnel are on round-clock flood operations at several dams, with the Keepit Dam on the Namoi River and Burrendong Dam on Macquarie River the primary regional focal points overnight,” the agency said. Burrendong Dam (at about 140% full) received huge inflow volumes on Friday which have pushed the storage to almost filling the dam’s 500GL flood mitigation zone. New South Wales double-dose vaccination rates have hit 94.5% for people over 16. For those 12-15, the rates are also increasing rapidly. 81.2% have had a single dose; 76.2% are fully vaccinated. Victoria’s numbers are for all people, aged 12 and over. They hit the 90% double-dose rate earlier this week. New South Wales has recorded 235 new cases and zero deaths. Victoria has recorded 1,252 new Covid-19 cases and five deaths. With so much rain in recent weeks and widespread falls lately there are many flood alerts current in NSW. Warragamba Dam is spilling this morning at a peak rate of about 60-80 gigalitres a day. That pace, though, is well shy of the 500GL (or about one Sydney Harbour) that spilled at the height of the March floods. And the rain should ease up today and for a few days so any flooding on Sydney’s outskirts should be minor for now at least. There’s also some news around for football fans this morning. If the Socceroos end up (as looks likely) finishing third in their World Cup qualifying group, the path to Qatar next year will go through a playoff with a South American country. At this stage that could be Colombia, Uruguay, Chile or Peru. They’re all good. We are ... well, not blessed with our best ever generation of players, frankly. But then again, who cares about the men’s side when the Matildas have their best ever crop. They play the USA in a friendly this afternoon. Here’s hoping Sam Kerr is passed fit. Here’s a helpful explainer – everything you need to know about Omicron. The Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, says the commission has received a spike in inquiries due to confusion about the state’s Covid border rules. McDougall said that in the past few weeks, since the Queensland government announced its plans to reopen the state border, more than a third of inquiries had been about Covid issues as a lack of detail had “created a vacuum where misinformation is able to be spread”. “We’re very much aware of the confusion and the lack of clarity for people trying to make sense of our border reopening plans,” McDougall told Guardian Australia. “Since they were announced a couple of weeks ago Covid issues have been the subject of over a third of all our inquiries – at times nudging 40% – and almost all those are in relation to the restrictions after borders reopen. Given the emergence of Omicron, it’s worth reflecting on this piece from Nyasha Chingono about how some of southern Africa’s “white garment” churches have undermined vaccination rollouts. We should hear more about the Australian government’s response to Omicron later today. Meanwhile the European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has followed the World Health Organisation and classified it a “variant of concern”. A report published by the ECDC says: “[It] is the most divergent variant that has been detected in significant numbers during the pandemic so far, which raises concerns that it may be associated with increased transmissibility, significant reduction in vaccine effectiveness and increased risk for reinfections.” Good morning everyone and welcome to Saturday. This is Ben Smee in Brisbane bringing you the weekend version of Guardian Australia’s live news blog. As always, there’s a bit to get through. All eyes are on Australia’s reaction to the new and stronger Covid variant threatening to spread from southern Africa. The latest variant, given the name Omicron by the World Health Organisation and listed as a variant of concern on Saturday morning, first emerged in Botswana and has been detected in South Africa, Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium. It has double the number of mutations as the Delta variant that sparked a third wave of outbreaks and lockdowns in Australia this year. Australian health minister Greg Hunt previously said “the world is looking and learning about the strain ... if the medical advice is that we need to change, we won’t hesitate.” Parts of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria are on flood watch for the second weekend in a row. A Queensland man died in floodwaters yesterday, and authorities have issued some fairly serious warnings. Severe thunderstorms are likely to lash most of the east coast. WaterNSW confirmed this morning that Warragamba Dam started spilling shortly after 9pm last night. “Preliminary estimates are that the spillway outflow could peak at a rate of approximately 100 gigalitres per day (GL/day), one-fifth of the March spill event that peaked at 500GL/day. “Inflows to the dam storage are rising as a result of multiple recent rain events, with latest rates of &gt;38 GL/day expected to rise and showers to persist.” It’s Saturday, so that can only mean one thing. That’s right, it’s anti-vaccination rally day. There are a few protest marches scheduled, including the Gold Coast, the Sunshine Coast and Canberra. We’re not expecting anything on the same scale as last weekend, but will keep you abreast of anything relevant.Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, said on Friday there was “no indication” the new “Omicron” coronavirus variant discovered in southern Africa had reached the US. Nonetheless, the Biden administration – along with the UK, Canada and Australia governments – said it would restrict travel from South Africa and seven other countries in southern Africa, starting on Monday. In a statement from Nantucket, the island off Massachusetts on which the president was spending the Thanksgiving break, Biden said: “This morning I was briefed by my chief medical adviser, Dr Tony Fauci, and the members of our Covid response team about the Omicron variant which is spreading through South Africa. “As a precautionary measure until we have more information, I’m ordering additional air travel restrictions from South Africa and seven other countries. These new restrictions will take effect” on Monday. The Washington Post quoted an unnamed official as saying the restrictions were being imposed “out of an abundance of caution” . They will apply to travelers from South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Mozambique and Malawi but not to US citizens or permanent residents. Other countries moved quickly to enact travel limitations due to variant fears. Britain has banned flights from South Africa, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana, Eswatini and Zimbabwe. European Union states agreed to introduce restrictions on travel from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Singapore, Japan and Thailand also restricted travel. Canada is banning foreign travellers to the country from seven African countries, and Australia has announced similar measures. The World Health Organization gave the variant B.1.1.529 a name, Omicron, and said an advisory group had recommended it should be designated as “of concern”. The WHO also said preliminary evidence suggested the latest variant carried a “higher risk of re-infection than other variants of concern”. Some health officials expressed concerned over whether present vaccines could protect against the Omicron variant. The new variant has more than 30 mutations on the virus’s “spike protein”, by which the virus unlocks cells, more than twice the number of spike protein mutations carried by the highly transmissible Delta variant. That has spurred fears antibodies from vaccination or previous infection might not be well matched, and thus become less protective. BioNTech, which produced a Covid vaccine with Pfizer, said it would know in two weeks whether the shot works well against the Omicron variant, based on lab-based experiments. “Pfizer and BioNTech have taken actions months ago to be able to adapt the mRNA vaccine within six weeks and ship initial batches within 100 days in the event of an escape variant,” the company said in a statement. In remarks to reporters, Biden said: “We don’t know a lot about the variant except that it is a big concern and seems to spread rapidly, and I spent about a half-hour this morning with my Covid team led by Dr Fauci, so that was the decision we made.” Biden said he was not considering any other orders “at the moment”. In his statement, the president said US adults who are fully vaccinated should get a booster shot. Those not yet fully vaccinated, he said, should “get vaccinated today”. “This includes both children and adults,” Biden said. “America is leading the world in vaccinating children aged five to 11 and has been vaccinating teens for many months now. But we need more Americans in all age groups to get this life-saving protection. If you have not gotten vaccinated or have not taken your children to get vaccinated, now is the time.” The president also called on “other countries to match America’s speed and generosity” in donating vaccines to poorer nations and said he would “call on the nations gathering next week for the World Trade Organization ministerial meeting to meet the US challenge to waive intellectual property protections for Covid vaccines, so these vaccines can be manufactured globally”. The Omicron variant has been found in South Africa and Botswana, as well as in a person who traveled to Hong Kong from South Africa. Belgium was the first European nation with a confirmed case. Israel has also confirmed the presence of the variant. Experts said the public should not panic. Sajid Javid, the British health secretary, said: “More data is needed but we’re taking precautions now.” Fauci spoke to CNN. He said the variant was “raising some concern, particularly with regard to possibly transmissibility increase, and possibly evasion of immune response”. Fauci said Omicron appeared to be spreading at “a reasonably rapid rate” and said US scientists were in “very active communication” with their South African counterparts, seeking to learn more. “Right now, we’re getting the material together with our South African colleagues to get a situation where you could actually directly test it,” he said. “So, right now you’re talking about sort of like a red flag that this might be an issue – but we don’t know. “Once you test it, you’ll know for sure whether or not it does or does not evade the antibodies that we make – for example against the virus, through a vaccine. The answer is we don’t know right now, but we’re going to find out for sure. He continued: “This is really something that’s in motion – and we just arranged, right now, a discussion between our scientists and the South African scientists … to really get the facts. We want to find out scientist-to-scientist exactly what is going on.” Fauci said research work was necessary to “find out if in fact [the Omicron variant] does evade the vaccines that we’re doing. You’re prepared to do everything you need to do to protect the American public, but you want to make sure there’s a basis for doing that.” US stocks tumbled significantly on Friday in the wake of news about Omicron. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell around 905 points, marking its worst day of the year, according to NBC News. The S&amp;P 500 fell 2.3% and Nasdaq Composite dropped 2.2%. Airlines and aviation company stocks took significant hits.Normal, Illinois, a town of just 55,000 people, could be the future of car manufacturing, according to Wall Street traders, at least. Six hours’ drive away in Detroit, home of the US auto industry for more than 100 years, they are not so sure. The town gained international attention earlier this month after the Amazon-backed Rivian, an electric vehicle startup, went public in one of the biggest stock market debuts since Facebook. Despite the fact that the company has delivered only about 150 trucks, Rivian is now valued at about $100bn, more than either Ford or General Motors, which produced about 10m vehicles between them in 2020. Investor enthusiasm for Rivian – especially after its electric vehicle rival Tesla hit a $1tn valuation – has once more raised questions over whether Detroit’s century-long reign over the auto industry is under threat. But not everyone is convinced. “People have been quick to dismiss the old guard as new players have come in and tried to take over, but I don’t think that’s going to happen because Ford and GM are positioned to do so well with their logistical chain of production,” said Jessica Caldwell, executive director of insights at the automotive analyst Edmunds. Still, the upstart’s momentum shouldn’t be dismissed and the company’s clear vision, cult-ish “cool factor” and potential are legitimate forces driving the stock’s ascent. Rivian’s stylish R1T electric trucks have garnered rave reviews and orders are in for another 55,000 more. The company announced plans for a second plant in the days following its initial public offering (IPO), will roll out an electric SUV next month, and is ambitiously aiming to boost production to 1m vehicles per year within a decade. The company has powerful support. Amazon, Rivian’s biggest backer, owns a 20% stake in the company and has an order for 100,000 electric vans to deliver packages to e-commerce customers, while Ford’s 12% stake lends even more legitimacy, although the two have ended plans to develop vehicles together. But skeptics say simple back-of-the-napkin math raises doubts. Rivian has attracted some of the industry’s top manufacturing logistics talent to guide its growth, but scale-ups are exceedingly difficult, and the company is planning to move at an unprecedented pace that would outperform Tesla in its early years, said Brett Smith, technology director at the Michigan-based Center for Automotive Research. “Actually getting this into the hands of customers in some kind of volume – that’s not a small thing,” Smith said. At a price of $70,000 per truck, the company’s valuation at its peak implied that within 10 years it would be selling around 3m vehicles, or about 12% of the auto market, said David Trainer, founder of the investment research firm New Constructs. That’s more than BMW sold last year. New Constructs estimate Rivian’s value at $13bn “at best”, and Trainer called the IPO “crazy”. “The underlying business model may work, but there’s no reason to pay a price [for stock] that implies that they’re going to effectively put Ford out of business,” he said. It took Tesla about five years to start production on a second line and it is on pace to produce fewer than 1m cars 12 years after its IPO. Tesla also captured its share of the market while it was the only real player in electric vehicles (EVs). A week after the Rivian IPO, GM rolled out its electric Hummer, while Ford’s F-150 Lightning, the first electric version of its bestselling truck, introduced earlier this year, already has 150,000 preorders. Tesla customers comprise 11% of those sales. The EV market is expected to take off in the coming years. GM and Ford are each aiming to sell 1m EVs annually by 2025 and will probably do so at a lower price point that appeals to the mass market more than the “early adopters” and luxury buyers who make up most of Rivian’s customers. Traditional automakers also have the infrastructure in place to ramp up production much quicker than Rivian – Ford announced plans for the Lightning in late 2020 and is delivering the first batch by early 2022, a process that took Rivian about six years. That’s coupled with Ford’s built-in brand loyalty and an established marketing operation that is selling products with household names, Caldwell noted. “The Ford 150 Lightning – it’s hard to compete against that with its price, brand, and the sheer marketing and advertising muscles that Ford has,” Caldwell said. The traditional automakers also have in place a network of dealerships to service new products when the inevitable hiccups hit, Smith noted. That could create frustration with Rivian and presents a costly logistical challenge when a car breaks down. “Rivian is exciting, Rivian has a lot of positives, but they don’t have proof that they can support their vehicles on the road yet,” Smith said. “That’s not to say they won’t, but for consumers and commercial buyers, that could be a huge problem.” Though Rivian’s IPO infused it with an impressive $11bn-plus in cash, Ford and GM’s coffers somewhat negate that advantage, Trainer said. Capital can be a huge plus for a tech company such as Netflix, but it is “not nearly as effective as a weapon in old-line manufacturing because your competitors also have a lot of capital”, he added. Still, there are reasons for Detroit to be concerned, and the automakers’ legacy cuts both ways, Smith said. Companies have to figure out how to efficiently wind down combustion production while scaling up EV production, a challenge Rivian doesn’t have to face. “If you don’t have to worry about spending money on the legacy, all you have to do is develop the new product, technology and processes, and if you have access to cash, then you could be at an advantage,” he said. Though Ford appeared somewhat unprepared for the EV transition several years ago, analysts say the F-150’s swift mobilization shut down any skepticism, and the company was “able to keep their eye on the competition” in a way that showed it was ready. And by the week’s end, Rivian’s stock price dropped as investors took profits and the number of unanswered questions weighed on its future. “I could be wrong about this, but like any hype, any bubble, and this is a bubble, there will be some huge winners, and there will be a lot more losers,” Smith said. “I suspect that’ll be the case here. There have been a lot of startups over 125 years of the automotive industry … and most of them have failed.”A mortgage offering fixed monthly payments for 40 years was launched this week – and it could mean that some homebuyers will be able to borrow more money than with a standard deal. The Flexi Fixed for Term deal from Kensington Mortgages allows borrowers to fix their interest rate for the full term of the loan, which can be set anywhere between 11 and 40 years. It is similar to one launched earlier this year by the lender Habito, which is still available and also offers a fixed rate for up to 40 years. The Kensington deal rates on a 60% loan-to-value (LTV) mortgage start at 2.83% for a 15-year term and go up to 3.34% for a 40-year fix. The loan is available up to 95% LTV for new purchases or 85% for remortgages. Rates are higher on the larger LTVs. The launch comes amid expectations that the era of ultra-low interest rates is coming to an end and the only way is up. Many economists are predicting there will be a succession of interest rate increases, starting with one next month, which could affect millions of mortgage borrowers. Kensington says the fact the monthly payments will not change will give borrowers “certainty and peace of mind”. No early repayment charges apply if you are moving home, selling, or a critical illness or death occurs. Kensington says the affordability assessment is based on the fixed interest rate, not on a higher standard variable rate that you might well go on to after a few years if you had taken out a standard shorter fixed-rate deal. “Many clients may therefore be able to borrow more as a result – a significant benefit for first-time buyers or those looking to buy a more expensive property,” it added. David Hollingworth of the broker L&amp;C Mortgages said that while the idea of locking your rate down at a fairly low level may be appealing, “you need to understand what you’re getting into”. It is partly about “weighing up the stability [offered by this type of mortgage] versus the lower rates you can get on a five-year deal, for example”, he added. Nick Mendes, a mortgage technical manager at the broker John Charcol, says there are risks that need to be considered when you look at a longer-term fixed rate. “It is difficult to predict any future rate rises over the fixed rate period,” he said. “They could continue to increase or fall, as we have seen in the last 10 years.” A lot comes down to “what price you are willing to pay” for the security that long-term fixes offer.Wearing suits and ties, the two men give the camera smiles and thumbs up. One is Donald Trump, former president of the United States. The other is Kyle Rittenhouse, who killed two people at an anti-racism protest. And behind them is a framed photo of Trump meeting the North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un. The mesmerizing tableau emerged from the ex-president’s Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida earlier this week. It was, in effect, the coronation of Rittenhouse as a future star of the rightwing media, Republican party and “Make America great again” (Maga) movement in their crusade against liberalism. “Kyle Rittenhouse has become the poster child for a general feeling among some in this country that White America is under siege,” Eddie Glaude, chairman of the department of African American studies at Princeton University, wrote in the Washington Post. “Rittenhouse defended himself, this argument goes, and White America must do the same.” Rittenhouse was 17 last year when he travelled 20 miles from his home in Antioch, Illinois, to Kenosha, Wisconsin, where racial justice protests had been held since the shooting of a Black man, Jacob Blake, by a white police officer. Rittenhouse joined others who said they wanted to protect private property. Armed with an AR-style semiautomatic rifle, he shot and killed two people and wounded a third. In court he argued that he fired in self-defense after he was attacked and in fear for his life. When a jury acquitted Rittenhouse on all charges earlier this month, progressive activists urged fresh debate on gun safety and vigilantism. But Republican members of Congress wasted no time in lionising Rittenhouse as a victim turned hero. Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina, Matt Gaetz of Florida and Paul Gosar of Arizona floated the idea of offering Rittenhouse an internship in their offices on Capitol Hill. Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia trumped them by sponsoring a House bill to award Rittenhouse a congressional gold medal for protecting the community of Kenosha. Not to be outdone, Ron DeSantis, the governor of Florida tipped as a potential presidential candidate in 2024, declared: “Kyle Rittenhouse did what we should want citizens to do in such a situation: step forward to defend the community against mob violence.” And in light of Rittenhouse’s meeting with Trump at Mar-a-Lago, it would come as no surprise if the now 18-year-old is given a speaking slot at next year’s Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) or a future Republican National Convention (RNC). Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee, said: “It’s very clear that they’re trying to make him their mascot. Any time that your mascot is someone who thought that it was an acceptable form of protest to show up at a political event with an AR-15, that is glorifying violence. And that’s a very dangerous thing to prop up and promote.” In the week of Rittenhouse’s acquittal, all but two House Republicans refused to censure Gosar for posting an animated video that depicted him killing Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Biden. Bardella, a former Republican congressional aide and spokesperson for rightwing Breitbart News, added: “It is a pattern. These aren’t isolated incidents. One is following the other and it’s not an accident and it’s not a coincidence. It’s a deliberate strategy.” The sanctification of Rittenhouse, who was photographed in a bar before his trial with apparent members of the far-right Proud Boys, fits a tried and trusted playbook. Mark and Patricia McCloskey, a white couple in St Louis who pointed guns at Black Lives Matter protesters marching past their house, addressed last year’s RNC a day before Rittenhouse opened fire in Kenosha. Mark McCloskey is now running for the US Senate in Missouri and welcomed Rittenhouse’s acquittal by stating: “Liberals want to defund the police and prevent you from defending yourself, your family, your home, and your businesses. I will never stand for that. I stood for Kyle Rittenhouse and his right to self-defense.” Nicholas Sandmann, a high school student from Kentucky who sued media outlets for their depiction of his interaction – wearing a Maga cap – with a Native American activist on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington also came to personify grievances on the right. And the pro-Trump mob that stormed the US Capitol on 6 January in an attempt to block certification of Joe Biden’s election has received similar treatment. Taylor Greene visited accused insurrectionists in what she called the “patriot wing” of a Washington prison, condemning its conditions as she tweeted: “I have never seen human suffering like I witnessed last night.” Trump himself has praised Ashli Babbitt, a Capitol rioter fatally shot by police, as “a truly incredible person” and recorded a video to mark what would have been her 36th birthday in what many regard as an effort to turn her into a martyr. Each cause célèbre is typically magnified by conservative media. On Monday more than 5m viewers watched Rittenhouse interviewed by Tucker Carlson, the Fox News opinion host’s biggest audience since the night of the 6 January attack. Carlson told viewers: “During the course of our long conversation, Kyle Rittenhouse struck us as bright, decent, sincere, dutiful and hardworking … exactly the kind of person you would want many more of in your country. He’s not especially political. He never wanted to be the symbol of anything.” He also described Rittenhouse as a “sweet kid”. In the interview, Rittenhouse claimed that he had been “extremely defamed” during the case, fuelling speculation that he will take legal action against the media and politicians. Sandmann urged him to do so, writing in the Daily Mail: “The parallels between me and Kyle Rittenhouse are impossible not to draw … The attacks on Kyle came from the national news media, just as they came for me.” Other Fox News presenters have revelled in an opportunity to “own the libs”. Laura Ingraham tweeted: “The Left is going wild. Enjoy,” ahead of a show captioned: “Kyle and the liberal mind.” Sean Hannity interviewed Trump, who after meeting Rittenhouse made the provocative claim: “He should not have had to suffer through a trial. He should never have been put through that.” Such comments imply resistance to a leftwing tyranny that assails individual rights, such as the right to bear arms. Dan Cassino, a political scientist at Fairleigh Dickinson University and author of Fox News and American Politics: How One Channel Shapes American Politics and Society, said: “This is where the energy in the party is. “If you ask people on the right or look at rightwing media, they’ll tell you all the people Kyle Rittenhouse shot were criminals, they were terrible, they were going to kill everybody and these people are heroes for standing up, especially for using their second amendment rights. “That’s a big part of this narrative, that having guns allows you to stand up to disorder and is a necessary thing to do in order to protect your community. It’s not Kyle Rittenhouse himself: he was protecting his community, and that’s what the second amendment is about as far as they’re concerned.” But the normalisation of violence represented by Trump’s remarks at rallies, Gosar’s tweet and Rittenhouse’s valorisation is likely to be politically polarising, firing up the Maga base but turning off certain constituencies in elections. Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota, said: “The challenge for Republicans who are running in competitive seats is, is that who you want? He’s a guy who is not cheered by a lot of people, including suburban and better educated women. The idea of people running around with automatic weapons in street? That doesn’t really excite them. “I expect the Trumpians to grab on to him, bring him out, have him smile and wave and say a few things. But I think the candidates may be more selective.”If you are thinking of switching bank accounts to grab the £100-£130 cash incentives on offer, you had better get your skates on as the best deals are fast disappearing. The financial data firm Moneyfacts warned this week that consumers only had a few days to take advantage of NatWest’s £100 cashback offer, which is to be withdrawn on 2 December. There are fewer than three weeks left to grab the £125 cash incentive to switch to Halifax’s Reward Account. This offer ends on 14 December. Santander continues to offer £130 cashback on its paid-for 123 Current Account, and Nationwide is still offering £100 for new accounts and £125 for existing account holders on selected current accounts, it says. Virgin Money is offering switchers a £150 Virgin experience gift card or a 12-bottle case from Virgin Wines after recently tweaking its offer. Earlier this week, First Direct withdrew its £130 switching incentive. HSBC and Lloyds dropped theirs in October. One other option to consider is the US bank Chase’s newish Reward account. While it is not offering a sign-up cash bonus, customers receive 1% cashback on everyday spending for the first 12 months, free card use abroad, including at ATMs, and 5% interest on limited savings, which could exceed the bonuses above if used adroitly. Rachel Springall, a finance expert at Moneyfacts.co.uk, says customers typically have to use the official current account switching service to gain the bonus. “Banking customers looking to switch their current account will find a variety of cash switching perks on offer today to entice them but some offers will vanish over the next three weeks,” she said.The questions 1 What was stolen from China by botanist Robert Fortune? 2 Which palace is known as the Viennese Versailles? 3 Carolyn Shoemaker found 32 examples of what? 4 Who were Spengler, Venkman and Stantz in a 1980s film? 5 Reintroduced to the UK, what is the heaviest flying bird? 6 Who changed his middle name from Winston to Ono? 7 The Kalevala is the national epic of which country? 8 The torch relay was devised for which Olympic games? What links: 9 Dijon department; rode through Coventry; Spartan king; mother of God? 10 Motion; planetary motion; thermodynamics; robotics? 11 Darién Gap; Bering Strait; Bosphorus; Suez Canal? 12 Gillian Lynne; Harold Pinter; John Gielgud; Noël Coward? 13 Marbles; tug of war; honeycomb; green light, red light? 14 Where the Light Enters; Becoming; Spoken from the Heart? 15 Artist Lubaina Himid; singer Freddie Mercury; novelist Abdulrazak Gurnah? The answers 1 Tea plants and seeds. 2 Schönbrunn. 3 Comets. 4 Ghostbusters. 5 Great bustard. 6 John Lennon. 7 Finland. 8 Berlin, 1936. 9 Belgian chocolate brands: Côte d’Or; Godiva; Leonidas; Mary. 10 Things with (so-called) three laws. 11 Areas or waterways separating continents: South and North America; North America and Asia; Asia and Europe; Africa and Asia. 12 Gave names to West End theatres. 13 Games played in Netflix’s Squid Game. 14 Books by US first ladies: Jill Biden; Michelle Obama; Laura Bush. 15 Born in Zanzibar.Buying festive gifts used to be so simple but the march of technology, Covid and other factors have shaken things up and led to a dizzying array of payment options. Buy something on the fashion website Boohoo, for example, and you can choose from seven ways to check out: credit and debit cards, PayPal, Amazon Pay and four different “buy now, pay later” companies. But in some cases, payment methods are being taken away. Earlier this month Amazon announced it is banning people from using UK Visa credit cards from 19 January. And when it comes to physical shops, Covid transmission worries mean some are steering clear of notes and coins. Here, we look at the pros and cons of different payment methods. Credit cards One big plus is that you usually get up to 56 days’ interest-free credit from the moment of purchase. However, some providers are offering new customers 0% interest on purchases for up to 23 months. Some credit card holders never pay any interest because they settle up in full each month. Using a credit card for large purchases offers protections if things go wrong. Under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, if a retailer goes out of business or fails to deliver goods as promised and the items cost £100-£30,000, the credit card company is “jointly and severally liable”. So if you buy a big item and the retailer goes bust, the card company should cover the cost. On top of that, some credit cards offer decent rewards such as cashback, air miles or money-off vouchers. American Express’s Platinum Cashback Everyday card is currently offering new customers 5% cashback on purchases for the first three months (up to £100). But, as the government’s MoneyHelper website says, if you only make the minimum payments or run up a bill you can’t pay back, “credit cards can be costly and can lead to a spiral of debt”. Many charge more than 20% interest. You could also damage your credit score. Debit cards With these, the money comes directly out of your bank account. The protection you enjoy isn’t as good as that offered by credit cards, although some banks offer something called chargeback, which means they might be able to get some or all your money back if there’s a problem. Some banks offer rewards linked to spending: for example, the new digital bank Chase is offering its current account holders 3% cashback on Amazon.co.uk spending until 31 December. It was already offering 1% cashback on all eligible debit card spending for 12 months. Store cards These are a form of credit you can only use to pay for items at a particular retailer or group. There are still a few around offered by retailers such as Argos. The interest rates are often quite high: the Argos one has a representative APR of 34.9%, for example. Buy now, pay later These services let you delay payment for an item, with no interest or charges – unless you fail to pay back on time, at which point some firms impose late fees. The three main BNPL firms are Klarna, Clearpay and Laybuy. Klarna lets shoppers “pay in 3”, where the cost is split into three equal interest-free payments, the first taken immediately and the next two 30 and 60 days later, or they can pay in 30 days’ time. With Clearpay you can pay in four fortnightly instalments, and with Laybuy it’s six weekly instalments. PayPal and the digital bank Monzo have also launched their own BNPL services. Klarna doesn’t impose late fees but some others such as Clearpay do. There have been claims that those falling behind with their payments are experiencing more than just debt – some say they have seen their credit score drop, while others believe they have been rejected for loans after missing repayments. PayPal Lots of big and small retailers, including John Lewis and Marks &amp; Spencer, allow people to pay online via PayPal. It offers a “buyer protection” scheme covering all eligible purchases that entitles you to reimbursement of the full price plus shipping costs when you don’t receive your item or it isn’t what you ordered. However, even if your PayPal account is attached to your credit card you will lose out on the, arguably stronger, safeguards offered by section 75. Some retailers have Zettle payment terminals, which allow people to pay in-store with PayPal via QR codes. Apple Pay You can use this to buy items in shops, on the web and in apps – you just add a credit, debit or prepaid card to the Wallet app on your iPhone. You can add your card(s) to other Apple devices (Apple Watch, Mac, iPad) you want to use with Apple Pay. Devotees like the fact that Face ID, Touch ID or your passcode are required for purchases, making it arguably more secure than using a physical card, and that your card number isn’t stored on your device or on Apple’s servers, or shared by Apple with retailers. It works in any physical outlet that takes contactless, and you can use it to pay online in Safari or within apps when you see it listed as an option. Google Pay This has a lot of similarities to Apple Pay. It lets you make purchases in stores and on websites and apps. You download the app and add a payment method such as a credit card. If a physical store accepts contactless, you can pay with your phone. In apps and on websites you can pay wherever you see the logo. When you pay in stores, Google Pay doesn’t share your card number. Amazon Pay If you have an Amazon account, you can use this service wherever you see the Amazon Pay button, which includes the online checkouts of many retailers. It uses the information and payment methods stored in your Amazon account. And you can use Alexa to pay by voice. It says eligible purchases of physical goods are protected by its “A-to-Z guarantee”. But campaigners have long urged shoppers to boycott Amazon over its tax avoidance, among other things. Interest-free credit This lets you spread the cost over a set period (which might be as little as three months or as long as five years) via monthly payments. That’s all fine if you stay up to date with your repayments, but if you don’t, you could be hit with interest and additional fees, and your debt could mount up rapidly. Cash Notes and coins are still hanging on in there despite the UK seemingly hurtling towards becoming a cashless society. Pluses include the fact that you can’t go into the red, you know exactly what you have spent, and there are no hidden fees or interest. However, some places have stopped taking cash or never did in the first place.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereAlmost as soon as it was locked in, Saturday afternoon’s meeting between Australia and the United States Women’s National Team (USWNT) was positioned as a celebration of the present and future of Australian women’s football. But in downing the Matildas 3-0 the United States provided another potent reminder to Australian football that, despite the great expectations it holds with a home World Cup on the horizon, the future is never guaranteed. As 36,109 fans watched on - the highest ever crowd for a women’s football match in Australia - the United States proved quite happy to spoil their hosts’ party, proving to be simply the better team in the moments when it counted; taking advantage of some calamitous errors and naivety in approach to claim a clinical win behind goals from Ashley Hatch, Rose Lavelle and Lindsey Horan (who made good on her goal of “shutting up” a hostile home crowd). It was a performance that was hardly dominant in nature. Australia enjoyed a 15-minute patch towards the end of the first half when they could have tipped the game in their favour had they been more clinical. In the absence of first-choice centre-back pairing Alanna Kennedy and Clare Polkinghorne, 19-year-old Courtney Nevin and 17-year-old debutant Jessika Nash were tapped by Tony Gustavsson to start at the heart of his side’s defence; Nash was the 13th debutant in 2021. Alas for the teenage pair, this bow as a defensive duo turned less than auspicious within seconds – they were rendered naught but helpless observers as Hatch stole in behind to collect a pass from Lynn Williams and fire beyond keeper Teagan Micah. Arriving just 24 seconds after referee Hyeon Jeong Oh blew the opening whistle, it was the second quickest goal the Matildas have conceded in a competitive fixture – only Canada’s 20-second effort at Rio 2016 was delivered in a more rapid fashion. The issue of centre-back has proven a constant and vexatious one for the Matildas; a problem area whose solution, despite best efforts, remains frustratingly ambiguous. Since commencing his tenure at the start of 2021, Gustavsson has chopped and changed both personnel and formation in an attempt to address a backline that has now conceded 36 goals in 15 games. Yet the issues that were on show in the first friendlies the Swede was in charge of at the beginning of the year – which included a 5-2 loss to Germany and a 5-0 defeat to the Netherlands – continue to challenge at its conclusion. Disquietingly, they have been present against both the technical proficiency of European opposition and the pace and power of the United States. Somewhat obscured by the foibles in the backline, however, has been a midfield that, outside of phases of transition, has struggled to break down set defences and control the tempo of games. Not only does this carry obvious ramifications for the side in attack, placing an increased reliance on forwards to produce individual, game-breaking moments, it also adds pressure to the defence behind it by ceding control of the pace of games to their foes and by virtue, the areas on the park that the ball is lost. An opportunity to show some form of improvement, and source a bit of redemption, will arrive on Tuesday when these same two sides meet in Newcastle, before the Matildas shift back into what Gustavsson has come to call “performance mode” when they begin their Asian Cup campaign in January. The pressure of World Cup qualification removed by virtue of their hosting, the next year and a half can then be wholly devoted to improving the Matildas trajectory. Indeed, within fiction, there are two overarching tropes that generally govern a protagonist’s relationship with the future, perhaps best surmised as the ‘Back to the Future’ paradigm or the ‘Terminator’ approach. In the latter interpretation, the events of the future are an unflinching and inescapable reality: no matter how many steps one takes, no matter how many things one changes, Judgement Day arrives all the same. In the former approach though, events yet to pass are not yet set in stone but, instead, can be shaped and moulded by those armed with the knowledge of what needs to be done. Having styled the game as a dress rehearsal for the World Cup final at the same venue in 631 days time, Gustavsson could now be said to have been given his own copy of a Grays Sports Almanac; a glimpse of what lies ahead for his side should they stay on the path that they are on. Now he can work to change it – lest Judgment Day for this group arrive.In the sweltering heat of the late-morning west African sun, Aminata Jamba slashes at golden rice stalks with a sickle. “The rice is lovely,” she says, music playing in the background as her son, Sampa, silently harvests the grain. But even if the quality is high, the quantity is not. While once Jamba could have expected to harvest enough rice to last the whole year, this year she reckons it will last three to four months. After that, she will have to look elsewhere for a way to feed her family and make enough money to live. “Things are different now,” explains Manding Kassamah, a fellow farmer and mother of nine, fresh in from the rice fields, empty water can in hand. “The rains used to come in plenty. People would work and have a good harvest. Now, we work hard but we don’t get as much rice as we used to.” Traditionally, rice farming in the Gambia has been mostly done by women, while their male counterparts look after the groundnuts. But for years now the female farmers have watched as the land around them becomes increasingly difficult to manage. Here in Kerewan, on the north bank of the Gambia River, they are battling the climate crisis on two fronts. Rising sea levels are pushing saltwater further and further along the river, which snakes its way across the length of the low-lying country, and prolonged dry spells mean less freshwater to flush out the salinity. The result is that the water in the fields that used to produce rice is now too salty, and the much of the land – more than 30 hectares (74 acres) – has had to be abandoned. For women such as Jamba and Kassamah, that is a disaster. “These women are pushed out and they don’t have many other livelihoods to turn to like men,” says Muhammed Ceesay, 27, from the youth-led organisation Activista. “It pushes them into poverty. They are very vulnerable.” The women here are relatively lucky, as they do have an alternative source of food and income in the form of a vegetable garden. They can grow aubergines, tomatoes, peppers and onions, and know that, even if they have dwindling rice supplies, they will have something to sell or eat. “It’s our tomorrow,” says Binta Fatty. “It helps us in so many areas because it helps us stay healthy and to be able to buy small things for our children. That’s why we focus on the garden after the rice fields.” This backup is essential. Last year’s rice harvest only lasted Fatty about six months before she had to do what in Kerewan would once have been unthinkable: buy imported rice. In the past 10 years, this has become the norm across the Gambia. “In this community there was a time when, if they saw you buy rice from the shop, they would know there was hunger in your house. Now, it’s the order of the day,” says Almamo Fatty, 63, no close relation of Binta, although the two joke that they are brother and sister. “I don’t think you will see anyone in this community [now] who will say: I can farm enough rice to feed my family for longer than six months,” he says. His own is no exception. His son, Kemo Fatty, a climate activist who was part of the Gambian delegation to the Cop26 climate summit, has seen how his mother has become gradually less self-sufficient. “She has to depend on my pay cheque to actually buy rice that comes from China, and this has been happening for the past couple of years now,” he says. “Imagine, from having our own rice that we grew and ate all year round to having no rice at all.” The Gambian government knows more needs to be done to protect its farmers from the impact of the climate crisis: agriculture is the most important sector of the economy, accounting for about a quarter of GDP and employing about 75% of the labour force. But, from low technological capacity to poor energy supplies, the challenges for farmers are daunting. Almost all food in the country comes from rain-fed fields, making farmers particularly vulnerable to changes in precipitation. And female farmers – who are expected to shoulder the burden of caring for their families as well as earning their keep, risk domestic violence as poverty bites, and are often unable to access the contraception they need to control how many children they want – are arguably the most vulnerable of all. The Gambian climate activist Fatou Jeng, who was also in Glasgow for Cop26, says that although they make up about 70% of the country’s agricultural workforce, women and girls “face inadequate access to basic natural resources needed for farming”. Writing for the International Rescue Committee website, she adds: “There is a great injustice at the heart of all of this. All too often, these under-represented groups, such as women living in fragile states, understand most about what is at stake and, therefore, the solutions needed to tackle climate change. Yet women in particular have been systematically excluded from the decision-making table.” In short, if women like Jamba, Kassamah and Fatty are left out of the climate crisis solution, the solution may never be found. Standing on the boggy banks of a tributary of the Gambia River, Almamo Fatty gestures to the ground, the clay sparkling in the sunshine. “This stuff you see shining? That is salt,” he says, shaving off a thin layer with a machete. “If you taste this, it is salty.” And it is. “Twenty years ago, if you grew rice here it would grow like this,” he says, gesturing to his shoulder. One field would have produced 20 bags of rice. Now, there are plans for a dyke to stop the saltwater, but he knows life will never go back to the way it was before the climate crisis arrived. “This land here, it was all rice fields,” he says. “Now it’s all abandoned.” • Additional reporting by Omar WallyState Emergency Service volunteers staged two dozen flood rescues and responded to almost 600 requests for help across New South Wales over the past 24 hours as residents in Eugowra prepared to evacuate. The SES advised river level rises had been observed along the Mandagery Creek upstream of Eugowra. The creek was approaching a peak of around 8.2 metres with further rises to the major flood level of 9.10 metres expected from Saturday afternoon. Residents had been asked to monitor river heights and be prepared to evacuate should conditions deteriorate. A flood evacuation warning had also been issued for Whittingham, Scotts Flat, Glenridding, Dunolly and Combo. It came as Warragamba Dam spilled slightly after 9pm on Friday and was spilling at a peak rate of about 60-80 gigalitres a day on Saturday morning, shy of the 500GL that spilled at the height of the March floods. The dam was 100% full on Saturday afternoon. “On current projections the spill could continue for up to a week,” WaterNSW said, adding “downstream impacts are likely”. The SES assistant commissioner, Dean Storey, said it had been a hectic 24 hours throughout the state but particularly in the Upper Hunter, where new flood warnings have been issued. “That continues to be where our focus is today,” he told the ABC on Saturday morning. “Scone and Muswellbrook were affected by floodwaters over the last 24 hours and will continue to be to an extent today, with the focus shifting downstream.” Flooding is on the cards in Singleton on Saturday evening and then at Maitland into Sunday, Storey said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning However, the statewide situation remains volatile, with more than 20 watches and warnings active following a month of heavy rainfall. WaterNSW said flows down the unregulated Mooki River in northern NSW appeared to be twice the height of any previous flow. The flows were headed headed towards the Namoi River, which was a flood threat for Gunnedah, Boggabri, Narrabri, Wee Waa, Bugilbone and Goangra. Major flooding was occurring at Jemalong along the Lachlan River where river levels peaked around 7.94m on Monday and remained steady over the major flood level. Downstream, Nanami was seeing moderate flooding, with further rises possible as flows from Canowindra arrived. Further rain and thunderstorms were forecast across the Lachlan catchment into Saturday evening, which may cause further flooding at Jemalong, Condobolin, Eubalong, Nanami and Hillston. Elsewhere, major flooding was occurring along the Belubula River at Canowindra and at Mandagery Creek. Major flooding was also continuing at Wee Waa, Gunnedah and Jemalong with Narrabri, Coonamble and Singleton expected to exceed major flooding overnight and into Sunday. Moderate flooding was possible at Yarraman by Saturday evening following a flood warning issued for Gwydir River. Minor flooding continued at Bathurst. The SES warned that, with already saturated catchments and full dams, there was a “high chance” communities could experience riverine and flash flooding over the weekend. WaterNSW said it was continuing to monitor storage levels at the state’s major regional supply dams, almost all of which were receiving constant inflows and were in excess of 90% of storage capacity. “WaterNSW dam personnel are on round-clock flood operations at several dams, with the Keepit Dam on the Namoi River and Burrendong Dam on Macquarie River the primary regional focal points overnight,” the agency said. Burrendong Dam (at about 130% full) received huge inflow volumes on Friday which pushed the storage to almost filling the dam’s 500GL flood mitigation zone. Burrendong’s storage level rose 10 percentage points in 24 hours – including a 0.5% rise per hour for five hours – requiring overnight dam releases that reached 30GL/day before being scaled back to 5GL/day this morning to avoid increasing downstream river levels already rising due to high tributary inflows, WaterNSW said. Keepit Dam cut releases almost entirely to avoid adding to a record flood peak in the Mooki River, due to reach Gunnedah later today. Elsewhere, Chaffey Dam on the Peel River continued to spill in large volumes, while WaterNSW teams were monitoring inflows into Burrinjuck and Blowering dams on the Murrumbidgee, where successful storage operations were expected to have created sufficient capacity to capture the majority of inflows, WaterNSW said. “This is quite a large statewide flood risk at the moment,” Storey said. “We are urging all communities and those flood prone areas to be aware of the risk and monitor the local conditions and follow the advice.” The Bureau of Meteorology said some areas of the state had been hit with more than 100mm of rain on Friday. The downpour was likely to ease over the weekend but the risk of flooding persists. Wee Waa could be cut off for more than a week due to the flooding, while a Rural Fire Service helicopter was called in to rescue a man trapped on the roof of his car in flood waters at Caroona on the Liverpool Plains on Friday. Storey said it was a good time to stay off the roads. The Oxley Highway was closed in both directions between Carroll and Gunnedah and the Kamilaroi Highway between Curlewis to Breeza. At Muswellbrook, the New England Highway was closed in both directions. Police say a Landcruiser was swept from a small causeway and carried 200 metres downstream by rising waters at Burrell Creek, west of Taree on Friday afternoon. Two men waded in to rescue the 65-year-old trapped driver but also became stranded. The trio were eventually hauled to safety by five police officers who fashioned a lasso from a length of rope. Hunter Valley police also dragged a 52-year-old man from a spillway at Muswellbrook after his Toyota Hilux was swept 400 metres away by the current on Friday evening. An RFS helicopter was called in to rescue a man trapped on the roof of his car in flood waters at Caroona on the north-eastern Liverpool Plains earlier on Friday. The SES had responded to more than 3,000 requests for assistance since severe weather started earlier in the month – many for storm-related damage including leaking, damaged roofs and fallen trees. In southern Queensland, six people including an infant child were rescued from flood waters as police issued a warning for motorists to avoid flooded roads. Conditions were expected to ease by Sunday with little rain forecast across the nation.Huma Abedin hadn’t been working in the White House long when the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke. Although she would eventually become like a second daughter to Hillary and Bill Clinton – most visibly as the former’s right-hand woman during the 2016 presidential election campaign – she was then just a distant junior aide to the first lady. Perhaps that explains why, as she writes in her new memoir, she initially assumed the rumours couldn’t possibly be true. Everyone in politics was young and starry-eyed once. Unusually, however, Abedin seems to have stayed that way. Even when the president actually confesses to the affair she was sure hadn’t happened, she resolves sternly to “put my judgments and emotions aside” and focus on the bigger picture. Hadn’t she been taught as a child that “slander, gossip and exploiting people’s personal weaknesses are among the worst forms of conduct for any Muslim”? It’s at this point – well before the story of the older senator who lunged when she went back to his place for what she genuinely assumed was coffee, or the husband who betrayed her – that some readers may wonder whether the author is almost too pure for her chosen world. But then, in her telling, so is half the White House. Bill Clinton comes across as thoroughly avuncular. The first lady’s office is a sisterly utopia where the boss instantly apologises for getting even mildly tetchy under pressure. “Hillaryland is ‘how is your mom feeling?’ and ‘you should talk to my allergist’,” Abedin writes. “Hillaryland is ‘Happy birthday!’ and ‘amazing job!’ and ‘get some rest’! Hillaryland is all of those things because Hillary Clinton is all of those things.” Working up close with politicians means getting to know them warts and all, and most aides have their moments of doubt or despair. But either Clinton is uniquely inspirational or Abedin uniquely generous. It’s the dynamic between the two women that makes this book compelling. It opens with a fascinating exploration of a childhood spent between two worlds. Abedin is the daughter of two professors: an Indian-born father, and a mother whose family moved from India to Pakistan after partition. They emigrated to the US separately on academic scholarships before meeting and starting their family in Michigan. When Abedin was a toddler, the family took what was meant to be a sabbatical in Saudi Arabia, and ended up staying. She had to get used to covering up, and watching her mother relinquish the right to drive. Yet in the book, Abedin argues that growing up overseas in a culture supportive of her family’s Muslim faith built her confidence: “I’d never had to be the brown kid in an American school who was teased for bringing ‘weird’ ethnic food in my lunchbox … I was never ‘the other’ and I found I could fit in everywhere.” Returning to New York for university, she slips comfortably enough back into American life, though she steers warily clear of dating. It’s this ability to move between cultures – the most obvious both/and of the title – which makes her stand out, first as an intern at the White House, and later in her first big job organising foreign travel for the globe-trotting first lady. What also sticks in the mind, however, is her promise at the job interview to do “whatever it takes” to help the woman she idolised succeed. The next section of the book is the only one that drags a little. More glorified bag-carrier at this stage than strategist, Abedin offers little deep insight into the Clinton presidency or Hillary Clinton’s subsequent career as a New York senator, despite some intriguing glimpses behind the scenes. (At one point she overhears Clinton calling home, telling the now ex-president where to find cleaning materials under the sink.) The story crackles back to life, however, when Anthony Weiner enters it. He is a confident, and suspiciously smooth, young congressman a decade her senior; she is a virgin with a tendency to see the best in everyone. Reading about their courtship is like watching a horror film and screaming at the heroine not to go into the haunted house, while knowing that, of course, she will. When Abedin finds a flirty email from a stranger on Weiner’s phone not long before their wedding, she accepts his explanation readily enough. Even when her husband is caught sexting other women, having accidentally posted an indecent photo on social media, a newly pregnant Abedin initially believes that his account must have been hacked. Besides, having lost her own father young, she desperately wants their baby to grow up with a daddy. Thus begins a painful spiral recognisable to anyone ever sucked into a toxic relationship. Abedin is often asked whether, in standing repeatedly by her sexually transgressive man, she was simply copying Clinton. Yet the book suggests that is too reductive an explanation. Weiner was her first ever lover, and she believed he could change. By the time she realised he wouldn’t, she had a toddler to consider and a job reliant on a spouse taking care of everything at home. (After his political career ended in scandal, Weiner became a house-husband.) The final chapters see her worlds colliding messily as she attempts to reconcile being both vice-chair of Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign and a wife embroiled in a scandal. Despite pressure to fire Abedin and protect her own career from the fallout, Clinton resisted. She stood by her closest aide even when Weiner did it again, this time in such grim circumstances – sending indecent photographs of himself with their sleeping son in shot – that Abedin finally filed for divorce. Both Clintons emerge from this episode as unfailingly kind, particularly to Abedin’s son, and true to the feminist principle that a woman shouldn’t pay for her husband’s crimes. (A year after the election, Weiner was jailed for sending explicit pictures to an underage girl.) But this story raises the haunting, hard-nosed question of just how wise that was. True to form, Abedin apparently didn’t see her boss’s defeat coming. She understood some voters didn’t warm to Clinton; she knew how damaging an eve-of-election FBI investigation into her boss’s use of a private email server was, having been dragged into it after her own emails were discovered on Weiner’s laptop for reasons she cannot explain. Yet she still couldn’t quite believe Donald Trump would beat a better-qualified woman. Does that make her naive, or merely human? Perhaps for Huma Abedin, it’s always a case of both/and. • Both/And: A Life in Many Worlds by Huma Abedin is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Who weeps for Neymar? Not many people. Except perhaps Neymar himself, who cries a lot and not always out of sadness. A quick internet search of “Neymar tears” reveals 4.73 million hits, from Brazil tears to Barça tears, to brave tears, sad tears, tears as Neymar greets [insert celebrity friend], to full, cinematic hot salty snot-washing tears. So, so many tears. The good news is you can also get a more cheering 18 million hits for “Neymar happy”: cue for a series of wonderful beaming grins and winks and million-dollar smiles. Some people have that glow about them. I once saw a woman faint in an airport departure hall after coming unexpectedly face to face with Bill Clinton – please, no comments – who has the same sense of human event glamour. Clinton just kind of giggled, a laugh of recognition – yes siree, ma’am, that’s what I do – as his victim was led away. Neymar has this quality too: presence, destiny, a kind of light. Or at least he had it. Because something is up. And the day is starting to dim a little. The world’s longest-serving next-best footballer turns 30 in three months. He was in Manchester on Wednesday night with Paris Saint-Germain, one third of the costliest, most celebrified attack ever seen on a football pitch. It wasn’t pretty. He was listless and blunt, spending large parts of the evening mooching about the pitch like a man looking for his keys in a field. It is of course fashionable to dislike Neymar, to accuse this consistently brilliant footballer of theatrics, flashiness and all the rest. But for anyone who has loved watching him play, the idea that spark might be waning is a genuine note of sadness. There were glimpses at the Etihad. When he moves with purpose Neymar still looks like he’s made of candyfloss and millefeuille pastry, floating about in unicorn-down boots. He made a nice decoy run for the PSG goal. There was one wild slaloming run, capped with an appalling finish into the blue stanchion pole to the side of the goal. Mainly he looked reined in, cast as a support act when he has got so used to driving the entire creative end of his club and national teams. An overlooked fact: Neymar has often done this very well for PSG and Brazil in big games. His best chance to win the Champions League as chief creative star came and went two summers ago under Thomas Tuchel, but Neymar was excellent leading up to the final. Had Kylian Mbappé buried one key sitter against Bayern Munich we might have reached a different point in that arc. Instead this has been a first real dead spell. Neymar has almost 200 goals in European club football. He hasn’t scored in the Champions League for a year. It doesn’t help that he is playing in a jerry-built celebrity pseudo-team. Watching Messi in Manchester was like catching brief glimpses of a street entertainer on a busy pavement, a one-man Lionel Messi tribute act. There is a plan here, starting positions and basic roles. But at times you could have thrown a mournful comfort blanket over those three star attackers as they wandered about various untended parts of the pitch. It is easy to worry a little for Neymar in the middle of this. There is a tendency to assume that because footballers are wealthy and famous they are immune from normal human pain and anxiety, that their suffering has no meaning. But Neymar has struggled with Being Neymar, with the relentlessness of the life that has been made for him. This is a man who has spent almost all of his career as the next in line, an oddly draining status as other stars rise, as the players ahead of you refuse to decline until your own mortality has begun to bite. Neymar may not have missed his window yet. But the real sweet spot, his shot at ultimacy, is flattening out. What will his legacy be? Right now his key role is as a pawn of big football money. There is a toxic flow chart you can draw, from Neymar’s absurd, transgressive £200m move to PSG, through the self-destruction at Barcelona, the smart, hedge-funder’s play at Liverpool, the distorted career paths and spending splurges, ripples that are still circulating. It wasn’t meant to be this way. This is a footballer whose talent is, at bottom, a joyful thing. I saw Neymar live for the first time at the Arena São Paulo in 2014. He didn’t have a great game. But we all left cooing over what a joy he was in the flesh, this lovely little sprite made from sherbet and feathers. Seven years on there he was again, a parable of talent mangled through the machinery of big sport, and wreathed in a kind of sadness as he wandered across the grass in east Manchester. Look how they massacred my boy. There are, of course, choices in this, and Neymar has been drinking from a strange cup. The PSG project, founded in nation-state PR ambitions, is one of those forces working away at the edge of this sport, stretching its limits, its robustness. There is a sense in Paris now that Zinedine Zidane is the man to solve this team, that only Zizou truly knows how to make the postmodern galáctico team function. That may be the case. Talent trumps everything in the end. Load enough of it into the chamber and you’re bound to hit something. But from Super Leagues to sport as a celebrity vehicle that model will ultimately do for those sharp edges, the part that keeps this shared obsession as a thing of play, jeopardy and human drama. Sport is resilient. But there is something sickly about the direction of travel; and a sense, even in the glare of centre stage, that something will be lost along the way.In the middle of last winter’s lockdown, while still adjusting to the news of their newborn son’s Down’s syndrome diagnosis, Matt and Charlotte Court spotted a casting ad from BBC Drama. It called for a baby to star in a Call the Midwife episode depicting the surprising yet joyful arrival of a child with Down’s syndrome in 60s London, when institutionalisation remained horribly common. The resulting shoot would prove a deeply cathartic experience for the young family. “Before that point, I had shut off certain doors for baby Nate in my mind through a lack of knowledge,” Matt remembers. “To then have that opportunity opened my eyes. If he can act one day, which is bloody difficult, then he’s got a fighting chance. He was reborn for us on that TV programme.” It’s a fitting metaphor for the larger shift in Down’s syndrome visibility over the past few years. While Call the Midwife has featured a number of disability-focused plotlines in its nearly decade-long run – actor Daniel Laurie, who has Down’s syndrome, is a series regular – the history of the condition’s representation on screen is one largely defined by absence. A watershed moment came in 2019 with the premiere of The Peanut Butter Falcon, starring newcomer Zack Gottsagen, who has Down’s syndrome, opposite Shia LaBeouf and Dakota Johnson. After meeting film-maker friends Michael Schwartz and Tyler Nilson at Zeno Mountain Farm, a theatre camp for disabled and non-disabled adults in Vermont, Gottsagen asked them to write a feature-length drama in which he could star, given the total absence of leads with Down’s syndrome in Hollywood. It proved a herculean (and financially draining) task to get the resulting movie into cinemas, with several streaming services claiming that Gottsagen was not a “marketable” face. “Mike and Tyler put their lives on the line,” Gottsagen’s mother, Shelley, shares affectionately from her Florida home. “They were both homeless in the process [of making the film].” The Peanut Butter Falcon’s legacy can be felt in the growing numbers of characters with Down’s syndrome appearing on screen. Dakota Johnson is looking to create a TV show for Gottsagen through her production company TeaTime, while Netflix has partnered with the BBC on a five-year programme to get more talent with disabilities in front of and behind the camera. Then there’s Brad Ingelsby’s Emmy-sweeping Mare of Easttown for HBO, which cast teenager Kassie Mundhenk as Moira Ross, the daughter of detective Mare’s best friend. “Children with Down’s syndrome were always part of my life growing up,” Ingelsby reflects over the phone from Los Angeles. “If you’re creating a ‘portrait’ of a community, it just makes sense to have someone with Down’s syndrome as part of the ecosystem.” Kate Winslet, who starred as Mare, goes one step further .“We were proud that our storyline included a young person who may not typically be cast because of their different abilities,” she tells me. “I don’t like the word ‘disability’ – I never have. To me, Kassie is differently able, and she was as capable as any other member of the cast or crew in coping with being part of an intense team on a buzzing set. She took it in her stride like any other professional would.” Writers are asking leads with Down’s syndrome to tackle difficult plotlines – including ones focused on their marginalisation – rather than shying away from awkward topics. Take the last season of Line of Duty, which saw Tommy Jessop’s character Terry Boyle mistreated by police over the course of a brutal investigation. Far from struggling to handle the material, according to the show’s creator, Jed Mercurio, Jessop “empowered us all to give him greater responsibilities”. Co-star Vicky McClure adds that he remained “a true professional” throughout even their most “challenging scenes”. Jessop’s mother, Jane, who has always championed her son’s talents and founded Winchester’s Blue Apple theatre for those with disabilities, seconds the hard-to-watch plot’s necessity: “It highlighted things that needed highlighting.” She says that actors with Down’s syndrome “don’t have to accept everything” if a part is triggering for any reason. It is a revolution that Los Angeles-based agent Gail Williamson has worked for decades to precipitate as head of KMR Talent Agency’s dedicated diversity division – a rarity in Hollywood. As the mother of a son with Down’s syndrome, Williamson witnessed the dramatic impact representation can have after the historic casting in the 90s sitcom Life Goes On of actor Chris Burke, who has Down’s syndrome. In the late 80s, she remembers going to dinner “with my son on my hip, and just silencing the restaurant”. With the introduction of Burke’s character, Corky, on one of America’s most-watched TV channels, waiters began speaking to her little boy directly. Among Williamson’s most high-profile clients are Glee’s Lauren Potter and American Horror Story’s Jamie Brewer. (Tellingly, both series are Ryan Murphy projects; Williamson credits the producer’s interactions with her young son during a bit part on Nip/Tuck with opening Murphy’s eyes to the possibility of hiring talent with Down’s syndrome.) The numbers alone speak volumes. When Williamson joined KMR in 2013, she had about 25 clients with disabilities who made approximately $50,000 (£37,000) in a year. Today, she looks after more than 700 individuals, with KMR’s disabled clients collectively bringing in $3m in 2019. The world of theatre is a different story. While organisations such as Blue Apple theatre and Zeno Mountain Farm have been staging elaborate productions starring performers with disabilities for years, the mainstream industry has been slower to embrace the Down’s syndrome community. Jamie Brewer became the first actor with Down’s syndrome to play a lead in a Broadway or off-Broadway production in 2018, when she starred in Amy and the Orphans, which depicts three siblings reunited at their father’s wake. Playwright Lindsey Ferrentino’s telling note to directors when she submitted the work? “Finding a talented actor with Down’s syndrome isn’t difficult. So please do it.” Netflix is adapting the work into a film, with Ferrentino set to direct. “There’s less of a safety net for performers in theatre due to a lack of funding, and you need those mechanisms in place,” says Ben Weatherill, an alumnus of the Royal Court Young Writers Programme, who in 2018 wrote the acclaimed romcom Jellyfish. Its staging – starring Sarah Gordy – at the Bush theatre and the National Theatre proved a learning experience (and another first for an actor with Down’s syndrome), with Weatherill making each performance as accessible as possible: commissioning sign language interpreters; producing simplified guides to the material; and maintaining quiet spaces for anyone who felt overwhelmed. “Most of the people who came through the National’s doors for Jellyfish had never been there before,” Weatherill enthuses. “It’s the clearest argument for representation I’ve ever seen.” Meanwhile, choreographer Daniel Vais has taken a build-it-and-they-will-come approach since founding his inclusive performing arts studio, Culture Device, in London in 2010: he staged The Rite – an interpretation of Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring – at the Royal Opera House, and toured the world with Drag Syndrome, with troupes of dancers and drag kings and queens with Down’s syndrome. “Everyone assumes that what we’re doing is like an after-school club,” he says, “These are artists. My choreography is surreal and abstract, and I realised that talent with Down’s syndrome could simply perform it better than anyone else.” His next project, Radical Beauty, is a series of high-fashion photographs of individuals with Down’s syndrome taken around the world, which will be released as a coffee-table book and major touring exhibition in 2022. His simple words of counsel when his artists face marginalisation? “Listen, this is avant garde – and the world is a bit slow.” It seems it may be catching up at last. New faces: meet the game changers Zack Gottsagen, actor ‘You can do anything you have in your mind, and I always have something in mine’ At the 2020 Academy Awards, Zack Gottsagen became the first actor with Down’s syndrome to present an Oscar, eliciting a roaring standing ovation the moment he appeared on stage in a crystal-studded bow tie and tuxedo. “I met all the famous people around,” he says, his face lighting up at the memory. “Adam Driver, Jamie Foxx, Brad Pitt.” It’s a lesser-known talent who inspired his career, though. “I got into acting because of Corky,” he says, referring to a character from the 90s American sitcom, Life Goes On, played by Chris Burke, who has Down’s syndrome. “I saw him as a five-year-old, and I still remember it. He made me realise that I could do it.” He quickly committed to training at school and at home. (His parents would give him three VHS copies of Grease every year for his birthday, knowing he would wear them out within a few months while practising his Danny Zuko impression in their living room in Florida.) Yet, as an adult, Gottsagen felt disheartened about the lack of Hollywood parts for actors with Down’s syndrome, so he challenged his friends at Zeno Mountain Farm, an acting camp in Vermont, to write and direct a movie in which he could star – despite their total lack of experience, Hollywood connections, or financing. Through Gottsagen’s sheer force of will (not to mention cooperation from Shia LaBeouf and Dakota Johnson), The Peanut Butter Falcon finally hit cinemas in 2019, and became one of the highest-grossing indie films of the year. “You can do anything you have in your mind, and I always have something in mine,” says Gottsagen, who plays a young man who escapes from a care home to follow his dream of wrestling. Not only did the 36-year-old improvise many of his lines, he also did every one of his own stunts, from plunging off a 21ft dock into a river, to being wrenched backwards off his feet after shooting a gun. Up next? A turn as a drag queen in the comedy God Save the Queens, starring Drag Race’s Michelle Visage. Madeline Stuart, model ‘The fashion show runway is my happy place, where I truly feel alive’ Few fashion careers begin quite as auspiciously as Madeline Stuart’s did. After making her first appearance at New York fashion week in 2015, the Australian model found herself one of the most tweeted-about people in the world that day. “I felt amazing,” enthuses Stuart, who studied with a coach from Juilliard before her debut. “Preparing was a little stressful, and there was a moment when I needed a quiet space to try to relax, but now I don’t need to prepare. The runway is my happy place, where I truly feel alive.” Her journey to the catwalk began a few years earlier, when the now 25-year-old lost a lot of weight for health reasons. (For certain people with Down’s syndrome, a slower metabolism can contribute to heart problems, which Stuart has struggled with since childhood.) When her mother uploaded a self-styled before-and-after photo on Facebook in celebration of her progress, it quickly racked up 7m views, earning her a devoted following and requests to model for global brands in the process. “Social media has shown us that people want to hear people’s stories,” she says now. “It is not enough just to be pretty; you need to be authentic and caring for people to embrace you.” Today, Stuart has walked for more than 100 designers, everywhere from Paris to Dubai, occasionally pausing to high five the “frow”. But she has had to fight to be treated, and compensated, as any other model would be. “About 15% of the world’s population has some sort of disability,” she says. “I don’t think we should just talk about people with Down’s syndrome. All of those people deserve to be included and represented.” George Webster, presenter ‘It’s really important for children to see me on the TV – I never had anybody like me on the telly growing up’ Perched in front of a vast CD collection at home in Leeds, George Webster is every bit as cheerful and animated as his CBeebies persona. “I loved CBeebies when I was really young,” the 21-year-old explains, beaming. “My inspiration, my hero, was Mr Tumble, because if I spoke, I used Makaton [a language programme incorporating speech, signs and symbols], and he helped me to learn it.” These days Webster is, as he gleefully puts it, “really, really, really busy”. After making his debut in the channel’s rainbow-coloured, polka-dotted house as a guest presenter in September, he quickly got promoted to a regular slot after lighting up social media. The five-minute clip, which sees Webster making a fruit smoothie and hosting a kitchen disco, has racked up nearly 100,000 views, with everyone from Strictly Come Dancing champion Oti Mabuse to Doctor Who’s Jodie Whittaker messaging him their congratulations. “I had to do a screen test, and then a month later I got a phone call saying I had the job,” he says. “I was squealing with excitement. My first day on set I worked with Dodge the dog, who is hilarious. I’m loving making connections with a young audience, and hearing from parents of children with Down’s syndrome. It’s really important for children to see me on the TV, and for me to be a positive role model. I never had anybody like me on the telly growing up. More people with Down’s syndrome and other learning disabilities need to be given spaces on programmes to help everyone understand what Down’s syndrome really is. Everyone in the world is talented in their own way, and nobody deserves to be judged.” Fittingly, a TV special with Mr Tumble is in the works. And when George is off CBeebies duty? You can find him “going t’ pub” with friends; whipping up his speciality, a tuna pasta bake; or watching a favourite film from his extensive library. Kassie Mundhenk, actor ‘My favourite TV series will always be Mare of Easttown’ Like more than 3 million other people around the world, Kassie Mundhenk sat enthralled by the finale of Mare of Easttown when it dropped this summer – attracting such record-breaking viewing figures that HBO Max proceeded to crash just as Kate Winslet’s Detective Sheehan apprehended the series’ murder culprit. “I’m still kind of upset,” the 19-year-old says of the twist ending. “How could it be him? How could he do it?” She has more reason to be invested than most: the Pennsylvania teenager beat more than 50 girls for the part of Moira Ross, the daughter of Sheehan’s best friend, Lori (Julianne Nicholson), in the Emmy-winning hit. The Philadelphia set proved an excellent training ground for Mundhenk, who settled on becoming an actor as a little girl, with Winslet popping into her trailer to check in during filming. She’s currently in the middle of rewatching Mare of Easttown and analysing everyone’s performances. “I like the acting from Detective Zabel in episode five,” she says, a note of the Hollywood critic in her voice. While Mundhenk, like many of the cast, never learned the killer’s identity on set, she had bigger concerns than trying to decipher red herrings. Moira’s experience of bullying is central to her storyline, and Mundhenk felt determined to represent that element of the Down’s syndrome experience properly on camera. “I was embarrassed,” she admits of a scene in which Moira is tormented in the school cafeteria, but pushed through with filming regardless, “because it happens”. Her next goal? A Disney contract – although, she stresses: “My favourite TV series will always be Mare of Easttown.” In fact, she’s as keen for another season as the rest of the world, frequently checking in with showrunner Brad Ingelsby about any progress on fresh material. “He doesn’t have anything yet!” she says exasperatedly, with a little of Moira’s winning sassiness, before a determined look comes over her face. “Well, I’ll help him.” Ellie Goldstein, model ‘Do I like being the centre of attention? Oh my God, yes!’ “Who’s ready to let the dogs out?” Ellie Goldstein quips to the photography team assembled for her Guardian shoot, before breaking into an infectious cackle. The 19-year-old may have started modelling only three years ago after signing with Zebedee Management, but she’s in her element in front of the camera – instinctively striking poses and making asides that have the crew in fits of laughter. (Her thoughts on her makeup? “Cake it on.”) Although she’s in hot demand with major fashion brands these days, she’s perhaps best known for her viral Gucci campaign, where she became the first model with Down’s syndrome to star in an advertorial for a luxury fashion house. “It was faaabulous,” she says in her Essex twang after the shoot wraps up, explaining that she decided to go into modelling after spending hours poring over a coffee-table book about the lives of old Hollywood stars. “I felt proud and excited about the Gucci campaign. To make the world more inclusive, you need more people with disabilities – and more people like me – as models.” At the moment, she’s busy working on a “top-secret” project with Adidas, and has just released her first Victoria’s Secret campaign, while her ultimate dream is to be on the cover of Vogue. And though she loves being the centre of attention – “Oh my God, yes!” – she finds her newfound status as a role model a bit odd, particularly when it comes to interacting with her thousands of Instagram followers. “To be honest, it’s really weird. I didn’t expect that. To everyone, I would just say, ‘Be yourself. Never give up. You can do it. And I hope your dreams come true, whoever you are.’” As for her favourite social media comment from a fan thus far? She pauses, turning serious for a moment, before breaking into a grin. “Your eyebrows are on ‘fleek’.” Tommy Jessop, actor ‘This series of Line of Duty was a bit like being on a James Bond set’ “Never judge a book by its cover,” Tommy Jessop counsels while sitting for his Guardian portrait in an east London studio. In the 16 years since he helped his mother, Jane, launch Winchester’s Blue Apple theatre company for people with learning disabilities, Jessop has collected a garland of firsts within the Down’s syndrome community, including becoming a voting member of Bafta and playing Hamlet in a major touring production. “It’s one of the highlights of my career,” he says of the latter. “I learned how to sword fight, and how to ‘punch’ someone. Brilliant.” The 36-year-old is best known for his nail-biting performance as Terry Boyle in Line of Duty, most recently in series six, broadcast this spring. “It was a bit like being on a James Bond set,” he says, his deliberate enunciation betraying his years of Shakespeare training. “I enjoyed doing the infamous interrogation scenes. I do like to make an audience laugh and cry, shout and swear.” His verdict on the episode in which his character is nearly drowned in a lake? “Like being in a freezer in the Arctic.” He’s keeping details about a rumoured next season under his hat (“hashtag no spoilers”) but admits his favourite moments from the shoot included trading football stats with Vicky McClure – he’s a devoted Newcastle United fan. Now, Jessop’s talent has caught the attention of Hollywood, with Steven Spielberg casting him in his forthcoming second world war series, Masters of the Air, for AppleTV+. “I’m optimistic about the future, because people are talking about us now rather than hiding us away,” Jessop adds. “We’re people first, with different skills and interests. Don’t let the label get in the way.”Collapsed energy supplier Bulb Energy appears to have used its role advising ministers on green business to exaggerate its own environmental credentials, while playing down rivals’ progress. Bulb’s chief executive, Hayden Wood, used a meeting of the Council for Sustainable Business (CSB), attended by key government officials and MPs, to highlight its green progress ahead of the Cop26 climate talks and boast about £4.5m it has donated to organisations fighting climate change. Bulb this week became the biggest energy supplier casualty of the gas price spike, when it was taken over by the British government via a so-called “special administration”. That means the effective nationalisation of the company, which has 1.7m customers, and could cost the taxpayer more than £1.7bn over the winter, as the government underwrites its power purchases. Wood, 38, who co-founded Bulb in 2015, is still running the company during the administration on a salary believed to be £113,000 – something that has stoked further controversy given that he was the architect of Bulb’s meteoric but heavily loss-making growth. The briefing paper, seen by the Guardian and dated January 2021, has infuriated rival energy companies which claim that Bulb Energy was effectively able to use its privileged role at the CSB to gain special access to ministers and “brief against” its rivals. The CSB is made up of senior business figures and led by Severn Trent’s boss, Liv Garfield. It reports to Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). It is understood that Bulb, which played a key role in a number of government-led business initiatives and hosted Boris Johnson at its headquarters in July, presented directly via video link to a number of key policymakers within the government’s environment department, including Zac Goldsmith, Rebecca Pow and George Eustice. Other energy companies were invited to give their views on progress towards the UK’s climate goals to the CSB at a later date, in a process moderated by the industry trade body Energy UK. Bulb briefed the MPs on the plans of nine of its rivals, including Scottish Power and Octopus Energy – but failed to mention their multibillion-pound investments in renewable energy projects vital to meeting the UK’s net zero projects and appeared to criticise the absence of net zero targets. One senior energy industry source, who asked not to be named, said: “It’s a bit rich for a company which presented itself as a ‘disruptor’, acting for the benefit of their customers, to be taking shots at rivals which invest billions in clean energy while it spends its money on expanding overseas and leaving UK taxpayers in the lurch when the gamble doesn’t pay off.” Bulb has been accused of greenwashing because it does not invest directly in renewable energy projects such as wind turbines, and relies on controversial green energy certificates and carbon offsetting to market its energy as clean. The source added: “It’s not the case that you need to be a big supplier to invest in the renewable energy projects which supply your customers. Good Energy has been a great example of a small company which plays its part. But Bulb has not spent a penny on building new renewable energy capacity so why has the government handed it a platform to run down the companies which do?” Bulb Energy said the company was asked to present information about initiatives “to encourage more businesses to set net zero targets in the energy and technology sectors”. “The information in the presentation looked specifically at companies’ net zero strategies, based on information publicly available on their websites at the time,” said the statement. Bulb used the briefing paper to issue Scottish Power, one of the UK’s biggest renewable energy investors, a red mark against its name for not setting a target to reach net zero and said it had “published blogposts sharing their intention to increase ambition by 2030” and “eventually set milestones for 2040 and 2045”. A spokesman for Scottish Powersaid the company “is proud to invest £6m every day in the UK’s green energy infrastructure to help the government meet its goal to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050”. Bulb issued another red mark against Octopus Energy, which has developed bespoke software to make using renewable energy easier for consumers, because it had not yet set a net zero target. Bulb appeared to criticise Octopus for publishing a “blogpost about ‘meaningful ways’ it’s ‘supporting a green future’”. Greg Jackson, the chief executive of Octopus, said: “We’re pushing system-wide change to end all reliance on fossil fuels in energy through investment in heat pumps, electric vehicles, green hydrogen and smart tariffs.” The company also generates 2.8GW of renewable energy across Europe via Octopus Renewables which was set up in March this year. A Defra statement said the CSB’s role was “to advise government on how businesses can help achieve the 25-year environment plan goals and be mobilised to take further action in a positive and immediate way”. “This involves collaborating with fellow business leaders and scrutinising and comparing their own plans, to ensure that UK business are on the way to achieving net zero by 2050 or earlier,” the department said. • This article was amended on 27 November 2021 to remove content which had been wrongly included due to a misunderstanding.When World Rugby announced that eligibility laws would be changing this week I found myself joking that I’m actually available to play for Nigeria now. Joking because it’s just a little bit too late in the day for me – I’m not sure I’d be selected! – but it got me thinking whether there is something I can do to help grow and develop the sport in a country I have huge affection for, the place where it all started for me. I hope I’m not the only one because the change opens up so many possibilities for current players but also for people to help in other ways. I hope this rule really instigates a positive mindset in people. The world is a smaller place – more and more players and ex-players will have roots or heritage in more than one country – and it is something to be celebrated. Since rugby went professional there has not been much diversity in the teams at the top end of the world game but hopefully this is the start of something that can change that. My other hope is that the rule does not become exploited in some way. It is a professional sport and in professional sport there are rarely any rules where loopholes are not looked for and where the system is not gamed. There are always unintended consequences but if this rule is put to proper use it can be hugely beneficial for developing nations. On a basic human level it will be heartwarming to think of supporters in Tonga, Samoa or Fiji, who have followed players from afar, getting to see them coming “home”, as it were. It must be such an exciting time for them and I’m sure they’re already picking their dream teams for the 2023 World Cup. It is ironic that, for reasons well beyond their control, Samoa are severely depleted when they take on the Barbarians at Twickenham on Saturday. At least their supporters have been brought some cheer this week, knowing that in the not too distant future their ranks will be considerably bolstered. It’s important to consider both the short- and long-term impacts of this decision and, in the short-term, there is a World Cup on the horizon. It is also important to recognise that it is not only the Pacific Island nations who stand to benefit, but there are many reasons why they provide the best examples. And if you think of World Cups, no one wants to be drawn in the same pool as Samoa, Tonga or Fiji anyway – all the more so now. They will be boosted by some players who are perhaps no longer in their prime but who can bring with them so much extensive knowledge, insight and intelligence into what it takes to perform at the highest level in an elite environment. That will be just as valuable as what they can do on the field. On top of that, you have a tranche of players who have been left in the wilderness. Players who perhaps are in their prime but have been capped once or twice by one nation and so, while they are of international quality, they’ve been frozen out. It isn’t quite a restraint of trade but now a huge opportunity has been opened for them. They probably had to make a huge decision over the rest of their careers at a young age but now they’ve been given a second chance because it is just sad when you see players take that leap, get a handful of caps and then get left in the cold. This is an opportunity for players to resuscitate their careers and for some developing nations to get players back who will bolster their ambitions and hopefully make the World Cup a lot more competitive. In the long term, however, the key is to build on this and try to implement pathways for players so they don’t just want to play for their country while being based in a foreign league. That means unions in developing nations getting their houses in order, using good governance to make their domestic competitions more enticing. One of the potential issues with this ruling is that players who were signed by their clubs on the basis that they wouldn’t be lost to the international circuit now find themselves in a difficult position. It is far less of a problem, however, if the clubs in their own countries are an attractive proposition. It is also important to acknowledge that while the change has on the whole been well received, there will always be downsides. The cynical part of me sees how the system can be taken advantage of and my concern would be that players from developing nations look to join clubs in established leagues, chance their arm and try and have a shot with the national team. They might go on to have a prosperous career with that nation or they might win one or two caps, then sign a three-year deal – with the added bargaining chip that they will be off the international circuit while they stand down – and then head home. That is a situation I can unfortunately envisage but in rugby sometimes we can focus on the problems and the negatives too much and on the whole this change can be a force for good.The romantic serials have gone after the Taliban warned against racy content, the popular women’s call-in shows were axed after the militants said they didn’t want female journalists on air, and news investigations were cancelled after officials demanded oversight before anything was broadcast. So perhaps unsurprisingly, most people who used to tune into Radio Sanga, once one of the most popular stations in southern Afghanistan, have turned off. “There is still some fun content but I’m not sure if we can continue,” said owner Agha Sher Munar, who has lost nearly 80% of his 1.5 million listeners and laid off a third of his journalists, including all three women who worked there. Also gone is a lot of his passion for journalism. “The Taliban asked us to share anything before we broadcast it, so now we just repeat news that has gone out on official stations. Recently I heard about an incident in the city, and I wasn’t even interested in sending anyone to check it out.” Afghanistan’s thriving media sector was seen as one of the few success stories of the past two decades, a standout in a region where censorship, arrests and even murders of journalists are more common than support for a free press. But with the return of the Taliban, the industry is in freefall. Dozens of journalists terrified of reprisals for their reporting fled the country, others went into hiding, and many women were forced from their positions. The economic collapse has pummelled smaller outlets too. Over 250 newspapers, radio and TV stations closed in the first 100 days of Taliban rule, and about 70% of journalists have lost their jobs, according to Afghan press watchdog NAI. That means far less news coming out of Afghanistan, just when the country is on the brink of a catastrophic humanitarian crisis, and the expansion of the regional Islamic State franchise makes its security an international concern. “When I meet friends, they say ‘the media is finished’,” said Habibullah, a photographer in the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif who is planning to become a taxi driver. “Either we have to leave the country, or we have to get another job.” There is no money to pay his salary, but even more of a problem is informal Taliban regulations that make working as a news photographer virtually impossible. “If there is an accident, or an attack, you can’t go there directly to take photos, you have to speak to the Taliban first to get approval,” he said. “But then we miss showing the reality. It takes four or five hours to get permission and by then everything has been cleaned up.” The Taliban for years targeted reporters for assassination and abduction but in August spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid promised press freedom campaigners RSF that “no threat or reprisal will be carried out against journalists” under the group’s rule. They have largely given foreign correspondents free rein, allowing critical reporting and prompting social media praise of the troops’ willingness to engage. For Afghan media though, work is much more complicated and dangerous. A tangle of new official regulations and informal local controls – often handed down verbally – have made news reporting far more risky. High-profile assaults like the vicious beating of two journalists covering a protest have a chilling impact on other reporters. The censorship goes beyond official reports. One journalist who posted something critical on a personal Facebook account was summoned to Taliban offices and warned not to post negative things again. For managers, the Taliban’s austere approach to entertainment makes it hard to find engaging programmes, and some of the best talent has fled the country, gone into hiding, or quit. “There hasn’t been an official ruling that we can’t employ women or play music, the Taliban just told us that,” said Sayed Satar Mahtabi, manager of Zma radio station in Kandahar, who said editors are pushing back against new controls where they can. “We asked for some kind of official regulation banning music, and when we didn’t get it we carried on playing it,” he added. But people are frightened to drive around with music on their radio in case they are stopped at a checkpoint by Taliban soldiers and punished for it – fighters killed guests at a wedding where music was played in eastern Afghanistan. Shops and other businesses no longer dare play music either. So listener numbers continue to fall. And editors are wary of violating even informal Taliban regulations when their journalists’ safety might be at stake. “I had three women journalists, who still want to work, but they are frightened of the Taliban,” said Mahtabi. At Zma radio he laid out a separate women’s office to make it easier for women to work in this conservative town. It now sits empty, a reminder of the particularly high toll the Taliban rule is taking on female reporters. “Our team is working inside of Afghanistan but their identities are hidden,” said Zahra Joya, editor in chief of Rukhshana media, an all-women online news site for Afghanistan, who went into exile herself after Kabul fell. “I’m not very optimistic about the future of female journalists in Afghanistan. If the Taliban stay in power for a long time, I think we will lose female journalists, because they will not be allowed to work.” Tolo TV, perhaps the country’s most influential station, has kept its female anchors on air, and their prominence, size and international connections may offer some immunity. “We are the canary in the coalmine. We use our size to try and secure freedom for others as much as possible,” said Saad Mohseni, head of the Moby media group that owns Tolo. “We have made it point of principle to have more women on air, professional women in front of and behind the camera. The need to employ more women has taken on a new urgency.” This week the central government put out harsh new guidelines that barred any drama series with female actors – so far largely ignored – and barred female reporters from the air unless they met unspecified Taliban standards on “hijab”, or covering up. Many reporters see rulings like this as a step towards pushing women out of the sector entirely. In Kabul at the end of July more than 700 women worked as journalists; a month later only a few dozen were still writing or broadcasting, according to a report from press freedom group Reporters Without Borders (RSF), and the Centre for the Protection of Afghan Women Journalists (CPAWJ). Some of them have fled the country, including Beheshta Arghand who rose to international prominence and raised hopes of a genuine shift in Taliban attitudes to women when she grilled a spokesman on live TV in August. Others have gone into hiding, particularly across the provinces where the Taliban victory unleashed threats from men who never joined the militants, but always resented the success and visibility of female journalists. Neda was a television anchor, but she has left her home city and is now living alone in another part of the country, because she feared for her own life and her family’s safety. Her phone is now filled with terrifying messages from strangers, threatening to hand her over to the new authorities. “I will send all of your pictures to the governor. The Taliban should punish you. You should be put on public trial, you barefaced woman,” read one of the anonymous messages. “You should know the consequences of your work.”While European governments weigh up new mandates and measures to boost the uptake of Covid jabs there is on the slopes of Sicily’s Monte delle Rose a village with a vaccination rate that defies mathematics: 104%. The figure is in part a statistical quirk – vaccine rates are calculated by Italian health authorities on a town or village’s official population and can in theory rise above 100% if enough non-residents are jabbed there – but Palazzo Adriano, where the Oscar-winning movie Cinema Paradiso was filmed, is by any standards a well-vaccinated community. A good portion of the population has already taken or booked a third dose and since vaccines were first available it utilised its close-knit relations to protect its people. “It seems like an impossible statistic,” said the mayor, Nicolò Granà, proudly. “But, in fact, at Palazzo Adriano, those inhabitants who live in our town, even though they are not official residents and other people who live in neighbouring villages have also been vaccinated.” With a population of 2,100, Palazzo Adriano is one of more than 5,500 Italian villages with fewer than 5,000 inhabitants. Most have been severely affected by young people leaving to look for work in other countries or large cities and have an average age of over 60. If Covid were to spread among these populations, these villages would risk being wiped off the map. “Last March, we feared the worst,” says Salvatore Spata, 54, the village’s councillor for culture. “Two persons, who came from another town and who did not know they were positive, infected some residents, causing an outbreak that affected about 16 inhabitants. Fortunately, in those days, the vaccination campaign had started.” He described the vaccination effort as “an extraordinary word of mouth campaign” making the most of Palazzo Adriano’s human networks. “At least one representative of each family in the village passes through this square, every day. We took advantage of those intense relationships between relatives and friends to spread the vaccination campaign. All we had to do is inform every person we met, reminding them to get vaccinated, and, the next day, their relatives showed up in the lab for the jab.” “There was almost an air of celebration at the vaccination hubs,” said Granà. “It was like being at a popular town festival. People understood that, with vaccines, they were creating a shield that would protect their community, safeguarding the very survival of the village.” Where there were concerns over the vaccine, the village set up a WhatsApp group of hundreds of residents to discuss them. “In this group, we responded to fake news and reassured people about vaccine safety,” Granà said. “I am convinced that, if we had spread the wrong information about the dangers of jabs, today we would be here to tell you another story – that of dozens of deaths from Covid that would have risked halving the inhabitants of this village.” And, while, across Italy, protests against Covid passes continue to rage, incited by far-right movements, at Palazzo Adriano, Nicola Longo, 64, and Francesco Cuttonaro, 73, are preparing for their third doses. “We all know each other here,” says Longo. “And it was easy to convince people. By vaccinating ourselves we safeguard others, and, here at Palazzo Adriano, safeguarding others means safeguarding your children, your friends’ children and your relatives.” There are many small villages in Italy that have reached vaccination rates close to 100%. In Brinzio in the northern region of Lombardy, nearly 97% of its 789 inhabitants are vaccinated. In Premana, in the province of Lecco, 100% of its 2,000 inhabitants are jabbed. In Palazzo Adriano’s main square, where fresh water flows directly from a mountain spring into an old water fountain, older people walk, play cards, sip an espresso, while young people chat at the bar. “Some will say that, in other European countries, people have resumed doing what they did before,” said Granà. “But, I think, going back to doing what you did before, knowing that the person by your side, your friends, the people who are with you at the bar, are vaccinated, makes you feel more protected and therefore more free.”When fixing an iPhone screen, you have to be careful with the heat gun – the clue is in the name. If you overheat the handset you can damage the insides even before you can lever off a cracked screen, let alone replace it with another. And then you have to remember which screw is which. Right-to-repair campaigners may have won a victory when Apple said it would make repair kits for iPhone 12 and iPhone 13 handsets available to the public next year, but I am learning it will not be straightforward for the rest of us. Apple itself stressed that its new service would not be for have-a-go enthusiasts but for “individual technicians with the knowledge and experience to repair electronic devices”. Junaid Syed, 31, and his brother Jawad, 33, have the knowledge and experience to fix an iPhone. They run Sarasfix in central London and do their best to keep phones out of the bin. The brothers kindly let an unskilled Guardian reporter into their shop to try to replace the screen on an old iPhone 12, with Junaid patiently supervising what soon becomes a jumble of tiny screws and pinch-eyed concentration. First of all, you must don some protective goggles and a pair of latex gloves (to shield yourself from the broken screen’s glass). There are other basic equipment needs: three different screwdrivers; a magnetic mat; a heat gun (to loosen the glue that attaches the screen to the phone); and plectrum-like plastic pieces to lever out parts. For a well practised technician like Junaid the process takes 20 minutes. For the Guardian it takes an hour, even with supervision. The screws are fiddly and the engineering is intricate, which becomes apparent as soon as I’ve swapped a pen for a miniature screwdriver. Once you’re in the innards of the phone, you have to undo more screws and detach connectors – which link the screen to the main body of the phone – as well as the face ID sensor. The process is then reversed (reattaching the connectors to a new screen, putting back in the right screws, pressing the new screen into place) before pressing the power button to see if the process has worked. Apple encourages people taking the official route – through sites that use official parts such as an affiliated independent shop or an Apple store – because the unofficial parts used by third party outlets can be unreliable. Syed backs the right-to-repair movement, which urges manufacturers to give people the parts and manuals to repair their own phones, tablets and laptops. He also volunteers at community repair projects where he teaches people how to fix anything from handsets to headphones and turntables. “We try to do our best to fix any devices to prevent e-waste. We always try to repair or replace a part and if not we recycle it. It definitely should not end up in landfill.” According to a poll commissioned by right-to-repair campaigners at the Restart Project, 78% of British adults want the same access to parts and repair manuals as repair shops like Junaid’s. “It is easy. But because it’s your first time doing it, it’s complicated,” says Junaid. Next year, iPhone owners will be able to find out for themselves. The process Repairing a mobile phone handset is a tricky business for first-timers. Here is an approximation of the steps required to fix a broken iPhone 12 screen. 1. Under a bright light, lay out a magnetic mat to stop screws from rolling away and make it easier to identify them (label the screws on the mat with a wipe-clean pen). Put on protective goggles and latex gloves. 2. Take out the two screws next to the charging port (these help attach the screen to the phone). 3. Hold the screen under a heat gun at 50-60C to loosen the glue that attaches the screen to the phone and then, using a suction cup and a plectrum, lever off the screen (which will still be attached to the phone by connectors). 4. Holding the screen open with a plastic separator, unscrew the shields for the connectors (touch screen, backlight and front camera). Detach the connectors. You can now lift off the screen. 5. Detach the Face ID sensor from the broken screen by removing four screws and then heating up the glue that partly attaches it, using the heat gun. You can now discard the screen. 6. The process is now reversed, starting with reattaching the face ID sensor. But before you press the new screen into place, press the power button to see if it works.Very little is known about the 27 people who drowned trying to cross the Channel in an inflatable boat on Wednesday, other than that many are thought to have come from northern Iraq. In the Kurdish village of Ranya, families had been waiting for days for news from loved ones they knew were planning to attempt the perilous crossing on Wednesday, but whose phones had gone silent. Some hoped their sons, brothers, daughters and sisters had made it across the Channel and were now in detention centres in the UK. Others feared the worst. One man showed the Guardian a map on his phone with a red pin halfway across the Channel – a location marker sent from his son’s phone before it went dead. A text exchange between another, Twana, and his brother Zana was even more ominous. “Now we are going to the boat,” Twana wrote. “How is the weather, is it good? How many people are you?” Zana asked. “The weather is not good,” came the reply. There had been no messages from Twana since. Kurdish Iraq has spawned thousands of migrant journeys, with many of its people ending up in the European Union or the UK. But the recent exodus has been different. “It was really dangerous and really desperate,” said one London-based Kurd who spoke with a relative in Dunkirk on Wednesday and has not heard from him since. “We think at least one boat made it here, but no one has confirmed anything.” In Ranya, worried families had been in constant contact with their relatives in Dunkirk before the phones went dead. “My brother left home in August 2021 and he went to Turkey, then Italy, and on the 1 November he arrived in France,” said Zana. They tried to cross to the UK six times. This attempt was the seventh. “I was in touch with him until their boat engine stopped working and also the front of the boat was losing air. The boat was inflatable and it was grey. They then called French police and the police told them you are outside our border. Then they called the UK police and the police said, ‘We will come to rescue you.’ The police asked them to turn on their mobile flashlights. “I was in touch with him for 20 minutes after they called the British police and then I lost connection with them. He sent me the location of where their engine stopped. Since then I have no information about him. “He was always with 10 other people from Ranya and I was in touch with all of them. None of their families know anything about them.” Zana said those who had previously crossed the Channel had thrown their phones in the sea as the police approached, to prevent UK authorities discovering who else might be attempting the same journey. “If the police see that they are in touch with people in the UK, then they make problems for people there who are helping them. We wish we knew something. Even the smallest thing.” He described the mood in the family home as “funereal”. The same solemnity was evident in another home not far away, where dozens of cars were parked in front of a small house, full of sombre guests. “We believe this tragedy happened after the UK government conspired with the French to stop these crossings happening,” said one of the guests. “Usually the sea is full of ships and that’s why the six earlier attempts failed. But on that night it was empty and over 250 people took advantage of it. There were no police on the water. And the search and rescue drone wasn’t flying.” One man cried as a list of missing Ranya men – mostly aged 18 to 25 – was written out and passed around. By evening, there were 10 names of people whose phones had gone silent. “We really want to hear something,” said a villager from nearby Pashdar, who spoke to a relative in London. “We know that some of these boys are likely in a UK prison and we are thankful for that. But we know in our hearts that others are not coming home. In our culture it’s early to say this. But may God rest their souls.”During much of the pandemic, the repeatedly delayed release of the new James Bond film was held up as some kind of Covid-era holy grail: each time it got booted to the next season, it seemed a renewed marker of when things might be “normal” again. The film’s eventual big-screen release two months ago was no cure-all; for anyone still wary of heading back to cinemas, the recent VOD release of No Time to Die is surely the more notable event. Does this big, brash, handsome entry in British cinema’s most long-in-the-tooth franchise lose a little something on a TV screen? Perhaps. Does it work grandly enough just the same? Certainly. The great appeal of the Bond films is that, give or take the odd plot pivot – and there’s certainly a large one here that I didn’t see coming – you more or less know what you’re getting each time, and that kind of comfort viewing will always be well suited to the couch. With its balletic succession of neatly choreographed action set pieces, all assembled with sleek brushed steel, Cary Joji Fukunaga’s film might be the most elegant of the Daniel Craig era, if not the most propulsive. It’s classy comfort alright, though I was most excited by an emergent perverse streak in its apparent business-as-usual approach: it gives us a Bond less capable and less unflappable than usual, working towards a plot twist that actually exposes the superspy’s limitations. Perhaps the highest compliment I can pay No Time to Die is that it made me realise what I actually value in James Bond – who is, on the face of it, a strange figure to have lasted this long in the public’s affections. He’s a sharp-suited blank slate, a stiff, a cypher in a strangely human kind of way. Someone who gets away with not being especially lovable or sympathetic because he’s stoically good at his job, Bond speaks to the antisocial arsehole in all of us. That he actually gets to fail more than usual in No Time to Die doesn’t reduce this appeal. In an age of blockbusters dominated by superheroes with few fallibilities and dull moral convictions, Bond is the kind of antiquated antihero we need more of. What other characters are this elusive yet oddly endearing? Bond’s memory-challenged CIA counterpart Jason Bourne, certainly, though a lot of that comes down to Matt Damon’s bluff everyman charisma. In The Bourne Identity (Netflix) and its various sequels, he permits us to root for a character who, by narrative necessity, is a void even to himself. I’ve been wondering how long it’ll take British cinema to revive Len Deighton’s Harry Palmer character, a secret agent as scruffy and shambling as Bond is suave: easier to relate to, though similarly hard to read. As played by a faintly sullen, sceptical Michael Caine in The Ipcress File (BritBox), Funeral in Berlin (Apple TV+) and the strangely unstreamable Billion Dollar Brain, he’s a rather good spy who doesn’t much want to be a spy at all: that’s what we like about him. Palmer is the espionage equivalent of film noir’s great weary gumshoes: like Humphrey Bogart’s brisk lone wolf Sam Spade in The Maltese Falcon (Amazon), he takes no great pleasure in his work, but shrugs his way through it anyway. Women, meanwhile, are rarely permitted to be this valiantly blank on screen. Female-driven genre cinema is heavy on “strong”, straightforwardly virtuous leads or antiheroines laden with trauma and backstory. Perhaps the closest we ever got to a female Bond was Angelina Jolie’s relentlessly proficient, coolly imperilled CIA operative in Salt (Netflix), a nifty, underrated potboiler that never inspired the franchise it deserved. Perhaps audiences found it too remote: in Hollywood, aloof heroism is still a man’s privilege. Also new on streaming and DVD The Trouble With Being Born (Mubi) Austrian director Sandra Wollner’s brilliant, startling sliver of arthouse sci-fi drew controversy last year over its premise involving a child-sized AI sex robot. But while it’s deeply unnerving, the film’s most sensationalistic details prove a springboard for a substantial inquiry into the limits, possibilities and mutability of android identity, assembled with a cool but human touch. Emphatically not for everyone, but not to be dismissed either. Candyman (Universal) The idea behind Nia DaCosta’s reimagining of the landmark 1992 horror – putting Black perspectives at the centre of a story that always hinged on racial inequality and white gentrification – is strong, and executed with gleaming visual finesse. But her script, co-written with Jordan Peele, doesn’t trust its own best ideas, bulldozing subtext with repetition and explication. Swallow (Second Sight) Often an intriguing presence in thankless secondary roles, Haley Bennett shows us what she’s really made of in this shivery domestic psychothriller. As a model housewife whose anxieties emerge in the form of the eating disorder pica (a compulsion to swallow inedible objects), she’s quite remarkable: fragile but gutsy, resisting the material’s potentially exploitative pull. Reminiscence (Warner Bros) In Lisa Joy’s glossily absurd romantic fantasy-sci-fi-noir Frankenfilm, Hugh Jackman is a shabby mind detective, burrowing into people’s brains to retrieve lost memories, and stumbling into obsession when an alluring client disappears. Conceptually a sort of Eternal Vertigo of the Spotless Inception, it’s dopier than all those components, though not unenjoyable.As a lawyer and managing director of a company that specialises in culture, law, and diversity and inclusion, I investigate allegations of harassment, bullying and discrimination often. The nature of my work means that I’m no stranger to the discourse surrounding racism and how it manifests in the workplace. “Banter”, as we’ve seen played out in the Yorkshire cricket scandal, is routinely badged as fun and a laugh, but the boundaries between banter, bullying, microaggressions and racism are thin. Racism is not banter. While some believe that no intent to be racist equates to an absence of racism, this is not the case. Not meaning to crash into someone’s car doesn’t erase the crash, or the resulting damage. Intent is a tricky issue to overcome. Unconscious bias is just that – unconscious – and, without the right tools or environment to deconstruct learned behaviour, change is quashed by shame and defensiveness. This kind of toxic culture prevents the growth of employees, who may never have had the opportunity to understand what unconscious bias is, and the harm it can do. It’s important to note, however, that, while some people’s actions can be understood by their lack of knowledge and understanding, there are groups of people who are intentionally racist and use the veil of misunderstanding, or “banter”, to excuse their behaviour. People can be tentative and often fearful of addressing behaviour – not wanting to put a foot wrong, cause more distress or be branded racist – but this inaction is unhelpful. I have seen first-hand how opening up a compassionate, constructive dialogue can heal and improve workspaces. This is only a starting point, though, and must always be scaffolded by expert strategies, investigations, better internal procedures, change management and much more. It’s not as easy as having a heartfelt conversation and moving on. What has happened at Yorkshire County Cricket Club appears to be, so far, an example of what not to do when tackling allegations of racism in the workplace. The club seems to have had a root-and-branch issue for some time that was left woefully unaddressed, allowing negative behaviours to develop. The remarks allegedly made by Michael Vaughan to a group of Asian players at Yorkshire in 2009 strike me as being learned behaviour, reflective of an attitude and culture woven into the fabric of the club before the start of his tenure. He denies making these remarks, but if he did so, his failure to acknowledge their root causes will not allow him to reflect and will undoubtedly cause more harm. After watching the interview with Joe Root, who denied witnessing any instances of racism, I found it interesting how he placed the focus on “the way forward”. There was little pause and reflection about the magnitude of Azeem Rafiq’s testimony. Rushing into action without deep reflection of impact, why and how this happened, and who Yorkshire intends to be as a club, will not change its behaviours and structures. In contrast, I have personally had the pleasure of supporting employers who are committed to action and change, who have recognised their flaws and identified where improvements must be made. Part of the work I do is about creating safe spaces to examine what and where things are going wrong, and how issues such as racism take hold in structures, policies and behaviours. Only through this honest reflection and assessment can we help companies and organisations make the necessary changes. Many business structures were created without inclusion, anti-racism and equality in mind. They were chosen for operational, or financial, purposes, and employers are not prioritising deconstructing them, or don’t know how to do so safely. Without structures that support recognising and addressing racist behaviours in the workplace, training and discussions about racism will only go so far. Hard policy lines need to be drawn that are reflective but, most importantly, best suited to supporting an anti-racist work culture, supported by accountability and sanction measures. In its most simple form, this means allowing anonymous and identifiable complaints of racism to be made and assessed objectively. Support should be provided to the complainants, followed by an investigation, then a decision as to what the most appropriate action might be. It may be disciplinary action whereby someone is fired, it could be mediation to bring the parties involved together to resolve and find a way forward, or it could also be a coaching conversation. There is no one fixed solution. This is all subject to context and employers need definitive clarity. What is defined as racism, microaggression, bullying and harassment? Where is the line? Ultimately, a consistent approach that is reflected upon routinely is essential, because, in my experience, every person has a different understanding, a different viewpoint and a different resolution need. The issues surrounding racism are becoming increasingly more complex and these exposés will continue until real action is taken. It’s time to stop reactive statements and box-ticking. The longer this continues, the greater the risk for employers and their employees. Charlene Brown is a lawyer, diversity and inclusion expert and MD of Howlett BrownI have just completed my twice-yearly wardrobe changeover, when linen shirts and gauzy skirts go on sabbatical to the loft, handing the baton to big coats and chunky knits until next spring. What never goes into hibernation, though, is my bronzer. Bronzing powder or cream is used ostensibly to mimic the more desirable effects of summer sun exposure, by adding a slightly deeper glow to the cheeks and temples, but that’s not a look I believe has a seasonal deadline. I wear bronzer all year round because I always want what the French call bonne mine – that appealing, outdoorsy flush of good health that can be faked on all skin tones and ages. The trick is to simply dial down the colour and coverage for increased plausibility in the cooler months. Glossier’s Solar Paint (13ml, £17) is an ideal choice for anyone fearful of autumn bronzing. I’m unexpectedly impressed by these compact, super easy wands of bronze in four shades, suiting skins from pale to deep. Shimmer’s not typically my bag (my most-used bronzer is Fenty’s sparkle-free Cheeks Out), but I’m enjoying the playful novelty of the very fine and restrained pearlescent finish to Glossier’s whipped gel cream, smeared quite carelessly on to the cheeks then smooshed in easily with fingertips or a brush. It gives the instant impression of dimension when one’s face looks a bit flat and lifeless, without ever becoming stripy and “made-up” looking. Similar in effect (and without the shimmer) is Victoria Beckham Beauty’s beautiful new Cheeky Posh (5g, £36) in Playground, so named because the warm, sheer terracotta is an approximation of the lipstick Beckham’s mother would hurriedly smear into Victoria’s cheeks at school drop-off whenever she “looked a bit peaky”. And I must direct those of you wedded to powder bronzers towards Dior Beauty, a brand that is, to give credit where it’s due, currently on quite the gold run. Dior Forever Natural Bronze (9g, £40) imparts as natural-looking a glow as is possible – light, smooth, non-chalky and non-shimmery and realistic for all skin tones. (There’s a shade for everyone, but if you are very, very pale and usually struggle with bronzer, be advised that shade 01 Fair Bronze is your holy grail.) Its effect is so natural that application is a breeze, but fingertips won’t do – swirl a fat, fluffy brush across the powder and stroke along cheeks, temples and nose after any foundation and before blusher.After more than two decades at inner-city secondary schools, Helen Roberts*, a headteacher, resigned from the job she loves earlier this month. It was not the intense pressure of the pandemic that tipped her over the edge – though that has been tough – but an Ofsted inspection. “Our inspector was intimidating, raising his voice and making accusations. There was not one apology each time I proved his accusation unfounded. He just swiftly switched to another accusation, then another,” she says. The inspection also unnerved some students. “They felt they were being interrogated and pressured to give negative feedback.” Roberts says her deputy went home after being given “a pounding” by the inspector – and has yet to return. Another “outstanding” teacher, who was “loved and respected by colleagues and pupils”, resigned last week, saying she never wanted to experience an Ofsted inspection again. Roberts feels the same way. Since the pandemic, attendance at her school has been poor and there has been a 40% increase in referrals to social care. Roberts says criminal child exploitation, mental health problems, children going missing and substance misuse problems have all “exploded”. Staff absences have rocketed because of Covid and few supply teachers are available. Some staff are on long-term leave and those who are still working say they are exhausted. Roberts insists she welcomes scrutiny, but says the Ofsted inspectors showed no desire to understand what her school is still living through. “If only that time could have been used supporting me, being another pair of eyes and ears, offering ideas to deal with what we’re experiencing,” she says. “I love my job and I never thought my career would end like this. Recruiting teachers in inner cities is tough, which adds to my guilt. But I just can’t go through this again.” While many schools are dealing with more pupil and staff Covid cases than ever, the government has given Ofsted an additional £24m to accelerate inspections. All schools and FE colleges in England are to be inspected in the next four years, and Amanda Spielman, Ofsted’s chief inspector, has said she expects the number of “outstanding” schools to be halved from one in five to one in 10. Heads are sharing stories of “brutal” inspections on social media. Many admit they aren’t coping with the dread of Ofsted arriving when their school is in crisis mode. Some, like Roberts, have resigned. Experts say many more will follow. Ruth Swailes, an adviser to primary schools, says: “I’ve been told inspectors are using phrases like ‘Covid is no longer an excuse’. In one instance where a member of the school community had died of Covid, the headteacher was told: ‘I don’t want to hear the word Covid’.” A primary school she works with was downgraded to “requires improvement” because inspectors felt the curriculum had not moved on enough in the two years since the last inspection. Swailes says Ofsted apparently “completely ignored the fact that there had been a pandemic in that time”. Another primary head she works with had 10 staff off with Covid when she got the call to say the inspectors were coming. They came anyway, and announced a “deep dive” detailed assessment of a subject whose lead teacher was off sick with Covid. The teacher did an interview with the inspector in bed “because they were so terrified of letting the school down”. Swailes says one of the most brilliant heads she has ever worked with has told her that she will not be in the job next year because “she just can’t go through another inspection”. Swailes feels Ofsted is driving the sector into a deep crisis. “A lot of people are barely holding it together in what has been the most challenging of times to be a headteacher.” John Hicks*, the head of a primary school in the north of England currently rated “outstanding”, resigned last week and says it is because of what Ofsted is doing. “Since I was 15 all I’ve wanted to do was teach. But now I’m leaving because I really feel the kids aren’t being put first and staff are being pushed to breaking point – and I don’t want to be part of it.” Throughout the pandemic Hicks has been telling his staff to focus on pupil wellbeing and getting children back into school, reassuring them that small gaps in the curriculum would not matter. Now he knows heads of “outstanding” schools who have been inspected and dropped two levels to “requires improvement” and he thinks this may be used against the school. “Inspectors are coming in with an agenda,” he says. Since the pandemic started, there has not been a day when every member of his staff has been in, and he says it is “not even worth trying” to find replacements. Four staff are having counselling; two have been told by doctors they should not be working but are coming in anyway. “I’ve got amazing staff and they are doing so much more than I could possibly expect of them,” Hicks says. “There is a huge issue here and it feels like no one is listening. It feels like no one cares.” Rachel Swan*, the head of an inner-city primary school that was rated “requires improvement” in 2019, says she is using sleeping tablets because she is so anxious about being inspected again. Advisers have told her that Ofsted will want to see improvements in attendance, but many of her pupils are off with Covid. During the last inspection, she recalls: “The inspector rattled off a list of our staff she didn’t like. One was because she didn’t think her Dr Martens shoes were appropriate. She said our local authority rep was a waste of time. She was very rude about people she had met for a matter of minutes.” Beverley Cotton’s* primary school, which is in the south of England and prides itself on being inclusive, was rated “good” in an inspection in 2019, but the process was so bruising that she is now taking early retirement rather than face another. “I won’t be spoken to like that again,” she says. Inspectors then were “disrespectful”. She is usually good at standing up for herself, but says it felt impossible to challenge “someone who holds your career in their hands”. “I had senior staff who said they stood in their classroom during the inspection and thought ‘If I walk out of that door now all this will just stop,’” she says. “I love my job but I just can’t stand the pressure from outside any more.” Last year Andrew Morrish, a former headteacher and an ex-Ofsted inspector, co-founded Headrest, a confidential telephone support service for headteachers, to help leaders who were struggling in the pandemic. Today he says their many calls from desperate heads – and worried partners – are “almost entirely” about the pressure of inspections. Morrish says: “Heads have kept schools open and walked the streets with emergency food parcels to make sure kids are fed. This is the thanks they get. It shows a complete lack of humanity.” Paul Garvey, a former Ofsted inspector who has written books on how to survive inspections, says inspectors should have been given a substantially rewritten set of guidelines taking account of the pandemic. “Headteachers have done such a marvellous job throughout all of this and no one is recognising it,” he says. “I’m talking to heads who have already handed in their resignations because of the pressure of these inspections, and I think there will be more.” A spokesperson for Ofsted said: “We are well aware that this isn’t ‘business as usual’ for schools. But children have had their education seriously disrupted, so it’s right that we look at what is happening to get them back on track.” Ofsted’s policies had recently been updated so that it may postpone an inspection so as to “respond sensitively when schools are facing particularly acute challenges”, the spokesperson added. She said inspectors always discussed the impact of the pandemic with school leaders. She added: “Just as before Covid, the vast majority of schools tell us that inspections are constructive and likely to help them improve. And our latest inspections show that many schools are improving.” * Names of headteachers have been changed to protect their identity and that of their schools.Fresh and dried seasonal fruits such as quinces, cranberries, figs, apples, pears, raisins, prunes, dates and currants are obvious choices for cakes and pastries, but shouldn’t be reserved exclusively for puddings. When they are combined with heady spices such as saffron, cinnamon and cardamom, they bring an ambrosial lusciousness to roast meats and poultry, stews and curries, and rice and grain pilafs. This imaginative and delicious way of adding fruit to savoury dishes has long been popular in North Africa and across the Middle East, and feels opulent and celebratory, making it ideal for the festive period. Perfumed honey and preserved lemon roast chicken with quince Across the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean, quinces are highly prized, but in Britain we don’t really seem to know what to make of this sweetly scented fruit that’s inedible when raw. Here, as the chicken cooks, the quince caramelises in the fat, honey and spices, and imparts its own unique perfume and flavour to the dish. Prep 45 min Cook 1 hr 10 min Rest 15 min 1 x 1½kg chicken Sea salt and pepper 100g unsalted butter 1 heaped tsp ground ginger 1 heaped tsp ground cinnamon 1 tsp allspice berries, ground 1 tsp saffron strands, pounded ½ tsp turmeric A generous grating of nutmeg 5 fat garlic cloves, peeled 1 preserved lemon 2 tbsp clear honey 1 red onion, unpeeled and cut in half 1½ lemons, the ½ lemon juiced and the whole lemon cut in half 2 bay leaves 4 quinces, peeled and cut into wedges 200ml chicken stock A few drops of good-quality rose water (I like Cortas) Season the chicken all over, including inside the cavity, with salt and pepper. Heat the oven to 200C/180C fan/390F/gas 6. In a saucepan, melt the butter over a low heat, then stir in the ginger, cinnamon, allspice, saffron, turmeric and nutmeg. Blitz the garlic and the flesh and skin of the preserved lemon until finely chopped, then add to the melted butter. Stir well and leave to infuse gently over a low heat for five minutes. Whisk in the honey, then set aside to cool. Massage the skin of the chicken, pinching and loosening it over the breast area, then push your fingers under the breast skin and pull it away from the flesh, taking care not to tear it. Anoint the chicken with the melted butter, and push the pulpy lemon and garlic mix under the loosened breast skin. Stuff the onion, lemon and bay leaves in the cavity. Lay the quince in a roasting tray, then pour over the lemon juice. Lay the chicken breast side down on top and pour the stock over the fruit. Roast for half an hour, then turn the chicken breast side up and baste with the cooking juices. Cover tightly with foil and roast for another half an hour (by roasting it upside down first, the juices from the fatty skin underneath the chicken drip down and baste the meat, meaning the breast will be moist and succulent). Remove the foil and roast for 10 more minutes to crisp up the skin. Remove, sprinkle with rose water, cover tightly with foil and rest for 10–15 minutes before carving. The rose water will add a wonderful perfume and gentle sweetness to this already fragrant dish. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Jewelled nut and cranberry rice pilaf The rice is cooked in the Persian-style to get a crust, or tahdig. Along with the textural contrast of fluffy rice, soft fruits and crunchy nuts, this makes for a sensational crowdpleaser that’s delicious as a side to the chicken or even on its own with a dollop of yoghurt. Prep 15 min Soak 30 min Cook 50 min Serves 4-6 300g basmati rice Sea salt, to taste 60g ghee (I love Superghee) 50g flaked almonds 6 cardamom pods, bruised 1 tsp cumin 1 cinnamon quill, broken up 1 red onion, peeled and finely sliced 5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely sliced into matchsticks 50g each dried cranberries and golden raisins, soaked in hot water for 20 minutes, then drained 1 large pinch saffron, soaked in 150ml hot water 50g nibbed pistachios 1 large handful finely chopped flat-leaf parsley Soak the rice in a large bowl of cold water for 30 minutes. Drain, then par-cook in a pan of boiling salted water for 10 minutes. Drain, rinse under cold running water to refresh, drain again and set aside. Heat the ghee in a wide casserole over a medium heat. Fry the almonds until golden, then remove with a slotted spoon and drain on a plate lined with kitchen paper. Add the cardamom, cumin and cinnamon to the pot, fry briefly until fragrant, then add the sliced onions and saute until caramelised. Add the ginger, fry until fragrant, then add half the rice and spread evenly in the base of the pan. Cook, without stirring, until a golden crust forms on the bottom – this will take eight to 10 minutes – then scatter over the cranberries and sultanas, and pile the remaining rice in the centre of the pan to form a mound. Do not stir. Pour in the saffron water, cover the pan with a lid and leave cook for 15 minutes. Take off the heat and set aside, still covered, to steam for about five minutes. Garnish with the nuts and parsley, and serve warm with the chicken. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match I’m tempted to suggest an orange wine to go with this exotic recipe – it tends to go particularly well with quince – but that might be a step too far for Christmas. White Rhône or Roussillon would be a less challenging choice: try Domaine Lafage Centenaire 2020 (£11.60 vinvm.co.uk), a luscious blend of grenache and roussanne or, from next month, Aldi’s Vacqueyras Blanc 2020 (£9.99, 13.5%), which is part of that supermarket’s new Winemaster’s Lot range.Britons are starting Christmas early, with sales of mince pies on track to top £100m amid a fierce supermarket bake-off. The popularity of the mince pie is rivalled only by pigs in blankets at Christmas and this year a welter of new flavours, including cookie-style and plant-based pastries, are on the menu as stores seek to appeal to younger taste buds. The restrictions on household mixing last year resulted in a drop in mince pie sales but grocery market analysts Kantar said demand had roared back to pre-Covid levels. Its data shows 5.5 million people have already bought mince pies in the supermarket which is 200,000 more than at this point of 2020. “There is a lot of pent-up “want” for a decent festive season so I think people are getting into the spirit early and looking forward to a bigger than usual celebration,” said Tesni Steele Jones, consumer insight director at Kantar. Two-thirds of the population buy mince pies at least once each Christmas so they are a vital part of a store’s festive repertoire. The battle rages between supermarket own-labels, with luxury ranges a key battleground as consumers splash out. The average price for six pies is £1.12, far cheaper than buying the ingredients to bake your own. Waitrose, which has a dozen mince pie variations in its range, thinks its No 1 Brown Butter Mince Pies are a standout after months of work by its pastry chef, Will Torrent. Sainsbury’s said it had made a “few tweaks” to its Taste the Difference mince pie recipe which resulted in a “glossier” mincemeat. But this traditional formula is fighting for shelf space alongside alternative toppings, as well as plant-based versions that promise to taste as good as the real thing. Many stores are offering other twists. In Asda, one recipe is laced with sloe gin while in Tesco it is spiced rum. Sainsbury’s has pushed the envelope with “cookie cup” pies which stray from the brief with a cookie-style pastry, speculoos-flavoured caramel filling and crumble topping. “It is always a competition between the retailers at Christmas so it is about how you keep it interesting,” said Steele Jones. “A retailer should always have a core mince pie that’s got good pastry and flavours and then other varieties people can buy into for something different; if that’s what they want.” The proliferation of flavours could be also a nod to changing tastes, said Steele Jones. At 28, she is the eldest in her team at work and the only one partial to a mince pie. Her younger colleagues did not like the consistency or flavour and in many cases were not fans of Christmas cake either. “For mince pies you have to think about who the shopper is. They are maybe someone a little bit older who has grown up with some of these flavours. Something like the cookie cup is obviously targeted at a younger shopper who maybe isn’t as keen on a traditional mince pie.”If you are stuck for ideas for Christmas gifts this year and looking for something more exciting than socks, here are some gadgets that might be just the ticket. From folding phones, headphones and VR headsets to smart speakers and eco-friendly phone cases, all of these great gadgets are excellent, built to last and won’t end up languishing in a drawer or, worse, the bin. Fairphone 4 smartphone RRP: £499 The most ethical, repairable smartphone you can buy someone has had a big upgrade for 2021 and has a more modern design, 5G and faster chips. The Fairphone 4 is built to last, with software support until 2027 and a five-year warranty. It still contains plenty of recycled and ethically sourced materials, has modular parts you can replace yourself with just one small screwdriver, and a removable battery, which is good for about two days. The camera is still a work in progress, there’s no headphone jack and it isn’t the fastest smartphone you can get but it does the job with little fuss. Fairphone will recycle an equivalent device for each unit sold, making the phone e-waste neutral, too. You are paying about £200 more than for a comparable phone from the company’s rivals but that helps pay the factory workers who make the Fairphone a real living wage. Samsung Galaxy Z Flip 3 smartphone RRP: £949 – deals from £799 Not only is the Z Flip 3 a cutting-edge piece of technology but it’s a great phone to boot. Samsung’s reinvention of the flip phone puts a 6.7in flexible screen in the centre of a classic clamshell design, giving it the best of both worlds: a big, luscious screen to rival superphones and a compact size, which means you can actually fit it in your pocket when folded up. Good cameras, top performance and good software with at least four years of updates, plus water resistance mean you are not losing anything compared with normal phones that cost just as much. Plus, there is something very satisfying about closing the phone to hang up on a call. If you need an even bigger display, Samsung’s Galaxy Z Fold 3 puts a folding tablet screen in your pocket, too. Apple iPad (9th gen) tablet RRP: £319 When it comes to a tablet for watching TV, playing games and reading the Guardian, Apple’s basic iPad is the best option for most people. The recycled aluminium body is solid, the 10.2in screen is good and the speakers are decent. The powerful chip, long battery life and 64GB of storage will be enough for apps and games. Very long software support means the tablet will last years, too. The brilliant new 12-megapixel “Centre Stage” camera automatically pans and scans to keep you in view for video calls. Apple’s App Store has all the media and tablet apps you could want, and accessories such as keyboards and cases are widely available if you want to use it more as a computer. Apple MacBook Air M1 RRP: £999 – deals from £850 Apple’s switch from Intel processors to M1 chips of its own design has transformed the MacBook Air from a low-power thin and light machine into the best consumer laptop you can buy. The M1 chip is superfast and powerful but enables gamechanging battery life in excess of 16 hours of work – multiple days away from the charger are now possible. It has no fan, so runs totally silently, the screen is great, the keyboard and trackpad are first class, the sleek body is made out of recycled aluminium and it contains recycled tin and plastic, too. The webcam isn’t the best and it only has two USB-C/Thunderbolt ports but you have to spend a significant amount more to beat the M1 MacBook Air. Ikea Symfonisk picture frame wifi speaker RRP: £179 Ikea’s partnership with the wifi-speaker maker Sonos has created some novel devices. Following on from a shelf and a lamp that double as speakers, comes the Symfonisk picture frame, which hides a speaker behind art on your wall – and it sounds surprisingly good. It can be hung or leant against the wall, streams music over wifi from almost any music service available and can even be linked up wirelessly as a pair with another or as part of a seamless multiroom audio system. It still needs a power cable running down your wall but you get a choice of white or black frames and the art print can be swapped out easily for a choice of others – though not yet your own print. Sonos Roam speaker RRP: £179 Most Bluetooth speakers are fine on the road but are immediately relegated to a drawer when you get home. Not so the Sonos Roam, which works so well you’ll want to use it in the house, too. It has wifi for directly streaming music at home, supporting practically every music service under the sun and Alexa or Google Assistant voice control. It has Bluetooth, too, for hooking up your phone on the road. It is water-resistant, durable, light and compact but packs a big, quality sound. It lasts 10 hours on battery, charged via USB-C or wireless charging in the base. It can even be part of a multiroom audio setup with other Sonos speakers. Sonos promises to support the Roam for at least five years after it stops being sold but has a history of doing so for much longer and you can get the battery replaced if it wears out. Sony WH-1000XM4 headphones RRP: £259 – deals from £249 Sony’s top wireless headphones have an unwieldy name but are absolutely fantastic. They are superlight and comfortable even for extended listening sessions, have 30+ hours of battery life, are available in a choice of colours and fold up neatly for travel. They have extremely effective noise-cancelling that works equally on flights or a commute. They also sound brilliant, producing the kind of sparkling audio that will have you discovering new details in well-worn tracks. They have a great set of touch controls for playback and volume, plus they can connect to two devices simultaneously via Bluetooth but have a cable, too. They are even repairable and you can replace the battery if it wears out, which is rare in the world of headphones. Audio-Technica ATH-M50x headphones RRP: £130 – deals from £105 If you want to give a set of wired headphones that sound great and will go the distance, you can’t go far wrong with these. Super comfortable with spacious ear cups and a well-padded headband, they sound brilliant with neutral, balanced audio that has made them extremely popular with music producers. Crank up the music and enjoy. Their closed-back design stops everyone else from being able to hear what you are listening to but they can only block a small amount of outside noise. They fold up fairly compactly and feel as if they can take a beating. The cable is removable and the headphones are generally repairable, so if something does break you don’t have to bin them. Audio-Technica also makes a version with Bluetooth for a little more money. Samsung Galaxy Buds 2 headphones RRP: £139 – deals from £99 Samsung’s latest true wireless earbuds are its best yet. They don’t skimp on features, with a solid Bluetooth 5.2 connection, good active noise-cancelling for blocking out the commute and great sound. They have good touch controls for playback, last for up to five hours of music and charge fully three times in the compact case. The app for updates is only available on Android and they are only splashproof. But they are more repairable than most true wireless earbuds, so it is possible to replace the battery and fix them if something does go wrong. Apple Watch Series 7 RRP: £369 The best smartwatch you can get for an iPhone. Its big screen, comfortable fit, 50m water resistance and slick performance are unrivalled. It doesn’t hurt that it has some of the most comprehensive health and fitness tracking features available, including the ability to take an ECG. It is made of recycled aluminium and has a reasonable selection of third-party apps, too, including Spotify with offline music downloads. If you don’t want the ECG or an always-on screen the Watch SE is cheaper at £249. Samsung’s Galaxy Watch 4 is the best smartwatch for Android and is about 80% as good as the Apple Watch, with most of the same health-tracking features and a more traditional round watch shape for £219. Oculus (Meta) Quest 2 VR headset RRP: £299 The Oculus Quest 2 from Meta (AKA Facebook) is a breakthrough in virtual reality headsets that jettisoned the need for cables and a powerful PC to create a simple, immersive set of goggles you can just strap on to enter a completely different world. The headset is powerful enough to make the experience smooth and convincing. It is pretty light and comfortable. The battery lasts about three hours, and there’s an ever growing library of games and experiences, including from big-name brands such as Star Wars, Beat Saber and Resident Evil. The recipient will need a Facebook account and enough space to walk and swing their arms around but there’s nothing quite like it for escapism. Google Nest Hub 2 RRP: £90 – deals from £54 Google’s second-generation Nest Hub puts the company’s voice assistant in a good-looking 7in smart display made from 54% recycled plastic. With no camera to worry about, it makes a good alarm clock. It can wake you with a sunrise effect and sound, and you can silence alarms by waving your hand at it. It also features radar-based sleep tracking with no need to wear a gadget. The screen can be a brilliant digital photo frame for all your favourite snaps. Google Assistant is useful, and the speaker’s pretty good, able to play radio including BBC, Spotify and others, or stream music via Bluetooth from your phone, making it just as good in the lounge or kitchen. Amazon Echo Dot RRP: £49.99 – deals from £29 As a small smart speaker to play music and the radio, set timers and answer questions, the cute ball-shaped Echo Dot is great. Simply ask Alexa for BBC or commercial radio and you’re away. The speaker is better than competitors’ and loud enough for small rooms. You can turn two into a stereo pair. It supports most common music services over wifi, or you can connect your phone via Bluetooth or the 3.5mm analogue jack on the back. It comes with or without a hidden LED display for the time or alarms, and contains recycled fabric, plastic and aluminium. Logitech MX Keys Mini keyboard RRP: £99 – deals from £87 Working from home can be a bit of a drag, so adding a little bit of luxury to the computer your loved one is stuck in front of for hours on end can make it a little more bearable for them. Logitech’s latest rechargeable Bluetooth keyboard is a compact version of its brilliant MX Keys. With some of the best laptop-style typing you can get, it makes every key-press responsive and satisfying, while not taking up too much room on a desk. It is made from up to 30% recycled plastic, works with multiple platforms and can pair to up to three devices at once, quickly switching between them at the press of a key, has an automatic backlight and plenty of customisation options, too. Microsoft Ocean Plastic Mouse RRP: £25 The Ocean Plastic Mouse is a special edition of Microsoft’s Bluetooth Mouse, which is made with 20% recycled plastic cleared from the ocean and given a cool speckled look. It will last up to 12 months on an AA battery (use a rechargeable) and you can mail an old mouse to Microsoft for recycling. Targus EcoSmart laptop bag range RRP: £49.99 When it comes to bags to truck gear around there are plenty of options but few have quite such a storied history as Targus – the inventor of the first personal computer carrying case in 1982. The latest EcoSmart range of Targus laptop bags includes backpacks, cases and sleeves, which are made from up to 26 recycled plastic bottles each. Pela phone cases RRP: £28 and up Pela makes good-looking cases that add grip and drop protection to your phone – and don’t have to end up as landfill once you’re done with them. The cases look and feel like fancy regular plastic cases but are made from a starch-based polymer mixed with flax straw, which makes them more environmentally friendly to produce and compostable at the end of their life. Cases are available for a large range of phones, with various clear and arty designs to choose from.Brentford’s injury woes are easing slightly and Yoane Wissa, a hero off the bench in his most recent two appearances, against Liverpool and West Ham, should be fit to return after six weeks out. The Bees have not won in the league since Wissa scored with the last kick at the London Stadium and have not claimed three points at home since the opening weekend. Thomas Frank has called for bravery and a display of his side’s buccaneering best should trouble Everton. Like their hosts, the Blues have taken only a point from their last five games; Rafa Benítez’s side need to improve on tedious blanks against Spurs and Manchester City. Nick Ames Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Brentford Community Stadium Last season n/a Referee Darren England This season G4 Y22 R1 5.75 cards/game Odds H 13-10 A 5-2 D 40-17 BRENTFORD Subs from Cox, Sheppard, Goode, Sørensen, Forss, Thompson, Ghoddos, Valencia, Onyeka, Fosu, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Zamburek, Racic, Wissa, Jørgensen Doubtful Jørgensen (match fitness) Injured Ajer (hamstring, Jan), Raya (knee, Apr), Dasilva (hip, unknown), Jeanvier (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R1 Form WLLLLD Leading scorer Toney 3 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Kenny, Branthwaite, Doucouré, Gbamin, Iwobi, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch Doubtful Gray (hip), Doucouré (foot), Allan (match fitness) Injured Mina (hamstring, 6 Dec), Calvert-Lewin (thigh, 12 Dec), Gomes (calf, unknown), Davies (knee, unknown) Suspended Holgate (second of three), Richarlison (one match) Discipline Y21 R1 Form DLLLDL Leading scorers Calvert-Lewin, Gray, Townsend 3At the start of the second world war, authors asked themselves if they were going to write about their unprecedented times, or if they should be doing something more useful – joining the fire service, becoming an air raid warden. The phoney war, with its uncertainty and dread, proved hard to write about, but the blitz brought new experiences and a new language that demanded to be recorded or imaginatively transformed. Elizabeth Bowen began to write short stories, somewhere between hallucination and documentary, that she described as “the only diary I have kept”. Set in windowless houses populated by feather boa-wearing ghosts, these are stories that take place in evenings “parched, freshening and a little acrid with ruins”. When lockdown hit last March, some writers offered their services as delivery drivers or volunteered at Covid test centres. Others attempted to make progress with preexisting projects, blanking out the new world careering into being in front of them. But nothing written in the past 18 months can be entirely free of Covid, with its stark blend of stasis and fear. And now, as we see the work made by writers who confronted it head on, questions emerge. Do we really want to read about the pandemic while it is still unfolding? Do we risk losing sight of the long view in getting too caught up with the contemporary? First came Ali Smith’s Summer, the final instalment in a quartet produced at speed expressly in order to incorporate current events. Smith was responding to the pandemic in real time, so her novel provides an opportunity to measure its impact on one of our most inventive and intellectually fierce writers. In Smith’s vision, the pandemic only increases the fragmentation that characterises her almost alarmingly profuse narratives. Summer includes speculations from Einstein alongside sections about the incarceration of “enemy aliens” on the Isle of Man in the second world war and ruminations on the pandemic recognisable from everyday life. As detainee immigrants are released, lest they collectively die in prison, Smith asks if it will be an opportunity for a new kind of world. The elderly Iris reflects that the comparisons to the war made by the media are inappropriate, because “the pandemic is making walls and borders and passports as meaningless as nature knows they are”. Smith folded the beginning of the pandemic into wider concerns; this autumn sees the publication of a first wave of books written wholly in response to Covid-19. Burntcoat, which Sarah Hall began on the first day of the first spring lockdown, is about two lovers facing frightening new forms of intimacy in a plague-ravaged world. Sarah Moss’s The Fell, written during the bleak hopelessness of the winter lockdown, features a self-isolating woman maddened by confinement. And Life Without Children, a collection of stories written by Roddy Doyle from one Dublin lockdown to the next, explores with curious glee the new bearings of our world and its linguistic quirks (in Dublin shops, people ask for “one and a half social distances of plywood”). The fearfulness of lockdown has also made it rich territory for crime writers. As an established writer of intense psychological thrillers, Catherine Ryan Howard knew that crime thrives in situations where secrecy, fear and suspicion are already rife. Her novel 56 Days begins with two lovers moving in together under the pressure of lockdown, and asks whether the perfect murder is precisely what lockdown allows. In Graham Greene’s wartime novel The Ministry of Fear, he has a character ask why any one murder matters amid so much death. A murder plot can seem driven by generic requirements, but Ryan Howard’s book focuses attention on the place of individual death and fragility in our lives. As Smith’s character Iris observes, wartime comparisons have been frequent over the past two years. For many, Covid brought a strange new blitz spirit. In the hospitals, there has been something like a wartime atmosphere of disaster, but for so many of us, lockdown was a period of waiting. The challenge for writers is to create narrative out of people staying at home. The reward is that this was a time rich with revelations. Bowen described the mood of her wartime stories as “lucid abnormality”. She thought we were revealed to each other with a new starkness, becoming “heady and disembodied”. I put the question of revelation to Hall, who, with a kind of terrible appropriateness, talks to me from her Covid sickbed. She thinks the virus has acted as a “clarifying force”. This is partly a case of exposing the cracks in society (government corruption, state services, inequality). But in Burntcoat there is exhilaration in the way the isolation of lockdown strips the lovers to their core, leaving them as vulnerable bodies, exposed to each other. Illness propels the discoveries here; sex becomes more intimate as the lovers get closer to death. It’s telling that in Burntcoat, Hall made the virus more deadly and the lockdown more extreme than ours. Her response to the plotlessness of lockdown is a kind of febrile, extreme imaginative act – an enactment of our fears, filtered through the perceptions of a sculptor, Edith. Edith’s creativity (she makes vast public sculptures) is as extreme as the virus, which becomes itself a devilish fellow creative being: “It was – it is – perfect. Perfectly composed, star-like.” When I tell Hall that I admired this take on the virus, she reports her conversation with a virologist about the other viruses lurking around us, “ready to jump”. “Those viruses are there, getting ready to go … Covid isn’t going to be the one that really takes us down.” The novelist can warn against possible futures. The revelations in Moss and Doyle’s books, which explore lockdown rather than illness, are more subtle. It has been said that everyone became more themselves during lockdown, and it has often seemed to me that, without the enforced normality of social interaction, people have become more extreme in their obsessions or anxieties. Moss and Doyle portray characters going gently mad under the pressure of social withdrawal. When I put this to the writers, Moss disagrees; she thinks we become most ourselves in company rather than isolation. For Doyle, however, affably chatty in his Dublin attic study, there was a kind of stripping to the core of Irish middle-aged men in particular that enabled them to lose some of the facade they’d acquired at their usually brutal schools. Most of the protagonists in Doyle’s stories are late middle-aged men. There are men who use the lockdown to walk away from their lives, or to fall in love with the wives they haven’t noticed for years. Doyle has responded to the challenges of lockdown by making narrative splinter into the fragmented form of the short story collection. Moss’s approach can be seen as the most difficult. If, as Smith suggests, Covid has shown how fragmented our world is, the danger of lockdown can be that there is too much coherence, rather than too little. Moss focuses in on the home of two people – Kate, a cash-strapped single mother, and her teenage son Matt – who are 10 days into self-isolating. Isolation itself becomes subject matter. Recently, we’ve seen the will towards isolation and a related exhaustion with narrative and storytelling in books by Sally Rooney and Rachel Cusk. Rooney’s latest novel, Beautiful World, Where Are You, is set mainly before lockdown, but describes a writer, Alice, retreating to a remote seaside house, torn between protecting herself from exposure to others and being drawn compulsively back to the world. The book ends with a parenthetic glance at lockdown and Alice’s sense that for her “the difference between lockdown and normal life is (depressingly?) minimal”. Rooney’s brusque deftness makes the single word contained in the brackets here loom large. Alice at this point is plagued by chronic ill health and has writer’s block; the narration dwindles to brisk epistolary summaries, and there’s a sense of Rooney using lockdown to find a flatter form of storytelling. Alice grapples with the heavily plotted novels she’s written previously and no longer finds them truthful; Rooney (whose neatly plotted Normal People was adapted into one of the TV hits of lockdown) seems to have been energised by similar doubts. Cusk’s Outline trilogy, which portrayed a woman increasingly isolating herself within her world, was an experiment in finding a form for the novel that didn’t rely on overall narrative structure. In some ways she’s the obvious writer to take on lockdown, and it’s there in the background of her latest novel, Second Place, where the narrator observes that her life has changed less than the lives of many others (“we had already simplified our existence”). Yet this novel is propelled by the narrative gusto Cusk previously eschewed. Moss refuses the pleasures of isolation, perhaps because she herself seems to have feared the confinement of lockdown from the start. “Some people were more frightened of confinement than contagion,” she says, speaking from Copenhagen. Her novel is an elegy for all we have lost in lockdown, though she’s also hopeful about our capacity to survive it. She tells me that the book began with a question: who will catch us when we fall? The danger is that lockdown erodes community. Driven online, where binary thinking is the norm, we may cease to recognise each other’s humanity. It is telling that both Moss and Doyle abandoned novels they were halfway through when the pandemic began, because they couldn’t think their way into an alternative form of the present. Reading these lockdown novels and stories, I’ve asked myself how many more can be published without the scenarios getting too repetitive, and what it would mean not to bring the pandemic into fiction. Are readers prepared to suspend disbelief and imagine an alternative version of the past few years? Or will writers avoid the literary challenges of the pandemic by turning to history or to the future? Some writers were already thinking about the past; Tessa Hadley’s forthcoming novel is set in the 1960s, while Jonathan Franzen has embarked on a trilogy of books set in the 1970s. Lauren Groff has said that she wrote Matrix, her tale of 12th-century nuns, to escape Trump’s America; she may have been relieved when the pandemic hit that she was saved from that as well. But there is something very reminiscent of lockdown about her community of sisters, and narrative excitement here comes precisely from the attempt to keep the world at bay: the nuns create an alternative world by constructing a vast and unwieldy labyrinth. One way to avoid writing about lockdown too narrowly is to imagine more extreme scenarios, as Hall has. Pandemics are the natural territory of science fiction, and of the climate change novel. Sci-fi writers have been thinking about what a pandemic might entail for years. Covid-19 has revealed how fully our lives are connected to the lives of other species, and Laura Jean McKay conducts a bravura investigation of the relations between humans and animals in her Arthur C Clarke award-winning novel, The Animals in That Country. The book imagines a world hit by “zooflu”, which leaves humans and animals able to understand each other’s language. Oana Aristide’s Under the Blue revealingly brings together an imagined pandemic with advances in AI – there’s a new artificial mind being developed to predict threats to human life and help us deal with crises of this kind. These books were both poised to come out when Covid hit, then delayed by lockdown. Books such as these have turned out to be prophetic because the resources of literary fiction – its artfulness, inventiveness and structural play – are themselves prophetic, dramatising the forces at work in our world with more vitality than textbooks or documentaries can. The pandemic, in its actual and its more luridly imagined forms, will continue to find its way into fiction, even as the actuality of Covid becomes something more everyday (a new normal in which few retain a sense of smell and daily life is structured around lateral flow tests). Hanya Yanagihara’s forthcoming novel To Paradise has a strand extending to 2093, imagining a totalitarian world riven by plagues that can be seen as a dark extension of our times. Sequoia Nagamatsu’s How High We Go in the Dark spans hundreds of years as humanity attempts to rebuild itself in the aftermath of a plague. And Gary Shteyngart’s Our Country Friends, set closer to home in the 2020 lockdown, is a portrayal of a group of friends waiting out the pandemic, Boccaccio-style, in a rural retreat. These three novels, all out in January, show how different sorts of high-concept literary device are being enabled, and also made necessary, by the pressures of our current times. There will be more pandemic novels to come, novels asking what happened to us as a society in lockdown, novels exploring what Covid has revealed about whether our societies and the stories we tell about them hold together or not; lucid abnormality flashed through Covid’s searchlights. • Lara Feigel is the author of The Group (John Murray).Jodi Picoult on writing Wish You Were Here I was very conscious of the fact that by the end of 2020, we had already forgotten what happened months earlier, we had forgotten the moments when we’d been told don’t wear a mask, when we washed our broccoli with soap and water. All of the things that that seemed so shocking and scary in March were so far away by November, December. And that was when I started to play around with the story. I was thinking about how we as writers are going to tell the story of Covid, because it’s up to us to make sense of the nonsensical. People turn to artists for that all the time. I couldn’t wrap my head around this, I just kept trying and trying and trying. And finally, it was when I heard about this guy stranded in Machu Picchu that I was like, “Oh, wait a second. I know how I could do this.” I wasn’t writing it thinking of publication, I was writing it thinking of sorting out everything I’d learned so far. I was in a very strict lockdown, because I have asthma, and I didn’t leave my house for 15 months except to go on hikes outside in the woods. That was a really scary time, because I knew if I got it, I was going to be on a ventilator, my lungs wouldn’t be able to handle it. I started to write, and it came very, very quickly. The research that I did was at my fingertips – even the people I interviewed who survived ventilation, it was one social media ask and I had more than 100 people within an hour saying “please tell my story, because I can’t believe people don’t think this is real”. There’s this urge for people who have gotten through Covid, to make other people see what’s right in front of their faces, that they’re not seeing. It was the same with the doctors I spoke with. I thought it’d be really difficult to find doctors who had the time to speak to me, but they were all so intent on making sure their side of the story got told. So it was this real call to arms for me. I don’t think of it as a novel about Covid, I think of it as a novel about surviving, which is a little different. Yes, you’ll see the medical profession and you’ll see deaths in it. But to me, this is a novel about how we came through to the other side. • Jodi Picoult’s Wish You Were Here is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Karin Slaughter on writing False Witness When I was in college I read Pale Horse, Pale Rider by Katherine Anne Porter – it was the first time I’d read about the 1918 flu pandemic in a way that humanised it. And so I thought, I want to write something that captures what we’re going through right now. Fiction tells the best history. You can read all the history books you want, but you won’t know the taste and the feel and the fog and London at that time from history books the way you will from fiction. I wanted to capture things like, in Atlanta, all our distilleries stopped making alcohol and started making hand sanitiser, and so everybody smelled like tequila or rum. At times I thought, why did you do this? Because everything kept changing, and I’m writing the book as these things are happening – I’m writing the chapter that has to go in the courtroom, and I don’t know if it’s going to be on Zoom, and how am I going to get tension from a Zoom? Then when the vaccines came out, I was like, I’ve got to go back and incorporate the vaccines. I had to just find a cut-off point. Most crime fiction talks about a lot of social issues, and this is a book about childhood trauma affecting you into adulthood. My character Leigh puts her child in a private school so that she isn’t virtually schooling and losing a complete year of her academics – well, most children didn’t have that. That chasm between fortunate and unfortunate people, it just widened during the pandemic, and for women it was particularly hard. These kids today – in 20 years, who knows what kind of trauma they’re going to manifest and how they’re going to experience that? We know scientifically that children who had traumatic childhoods are more likely to abuse drugs, to have diabetes, to have heart disease, they have lower life expectancy. So what is this one year-plus going to mean for children in the future? And not just children who are disadvantaged, but for children who were really lucky to get that extra year of education that most of their peers will not have? That’s the kind of stuff that I like to write about. And I think a pandemic just put a brighter light on it. • The paperback edition of Karin Slaughter’s False Witness will be published by HarperCollins on 9 December. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Manchester United are close to making Ralf Rangnick their new interim manager, but Michael Carrick will still be in the dugout when they visit Stamford Bridge. Carrick triumphed against Villarreal in his opening game and his next task is to find a way to outwit Thomas Tuchel, which is easier said than done. Chelsea are top of the league and, although they will be without Ben Chilwell and N’Golo Kanté, Tuchel’s team are in tremendous form at the moment. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Stamford Bridge Last season Chelsea 0 Manchester United 0 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G10 Y37 R2 3.9 cards/game Odds H 8-13 A 5-1 D 3-1 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Sarr, Azpilicueta, Saúl, Ziyech, Pulisic, Vale, Barkley, Lukaku, Werner Doubtful Havertz (hamstring), Lukaku (ankle) Injured Kanté (knee, 1 Dec), Chilwell (knee (unknown), Kovacic (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y13 R1 Form WWWWDW Leading scorer James 4 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Matic, Mata, Hannibal, Van de Beek, Dalot, Mengi, Lingard, Elenga, Martial, Jones, Shaw, Greenwood, Cavani Doubtful Fred (ankle), Shaw (head), Greenwood (Covid-19), Cavani (match fitness) Injured Varane (hamstring, 18 Dec), Pogba (thigh, Feb) Suspended Maguire (one match) Discipline Y26 R2 Form DLLWLL Leading scorers Fernandes, Ronaldo 4They say the table does not lie but it can sometimes distort the truth. Few would argue Tottenham resemble a team sitting seventh, especially following their latest Europa Conference League embarrassment to Slovenian minnows Mura on Thursday. On the flip side Burnley can feel slightly aggrieved to be in the relegation zone considering their only defeat in the last seven games was at Manchester City. Burnley’s problem has been a tendency to draw too many games – six – and another stalemate could be on the cards against a Tottenham side yet to find their feet under Antonio Conte, especially with James Tarkowski and Ashley Westwood suspended. Stephen Hollis Sunday 2pm Venue Turf Moor Last season Burnley 0 Tottenham 1 Referee Peter Bankes This season G5 Y29 R0 5.8 cards/game Odds H 11-4 A 11-10 D 13-5 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Barnes, Lennon, Long, Rodriguez, Vydra Doubtful None Injured Stephens (ankle, unknown) Suspended Tarkowski, Westwood (both one match) Discipline Y28 R0 Form DLDWDD Leading scorer Cornet 5 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Austin, Doherty, Sánchez, Roden, Winks, Ndombele, Lo Celso, Alli, Bergwijn, Sessegnon, Clarke, Gil, Scarlett Doubtful Bergwijn (illness) Injured Romero (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y23 R1 Form WWLLDW Leading scorer Son 4David Moyes may fancy his chances of plotting a result to remember at the Etihad Stadium considering doubts over Phil Foden and Jack Grealish and the number Crystal Palace did on Manchester City here two home games ago, winning 2-0. But Pep Guardiola’s side defeated Paris Saint-Germain in midweek and generally have the look of a champion side reaching their very best. Which is very good. Jamie Jackson Sunday 2pm Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 2 West Ham 1 Referee Michael Oliver This season G10 Y32 R1 3.3 cards/game Odds H 1-3 A 19-2 D 5-1 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Jesus, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Zinchenko, Delap, Stones, McAtee, Palmer, Foden, Grealish Doubtful Foden, Grealish (both match fitness) Injured Torres (foot, Jan), De Bruyne (Covid-19, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y19 R1 Form DWWLWW Leading scorer Silva 4 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Fredericks, Diop, Masuaku, Coufal, Kral, Noble, Lanzini, Vlasic, Ashby, Chesters, Yarmolenko, Baptiste, Perkins Doubtful None Injured Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y15 R1 Form LWWWWL Leading scorer Antonio 6Claudio Ranieri is sure of a warm welcome as he returns to a King Power dugout for the first time since February 2017. But his aim will be to upset the home crowd by plotting a win for Watford, who will arrive flushed with confidence following last Saturday’s trouncing of Manchester United. Leicester, by contrast, have been rather fragile recently and were booed off after last week’s defeat by Chelsea, but Thursday’s encouraging win in the Europa League may have restored some belief. That defence still looks jittery, however, and Brendan Rodgers will be hoping Jonny Evans is fit enough to start. Paul Doyle Sunday 2pm Venue King Power Stadium Last season n/a Referee Graham Scott This season G5 Y19 R0 3.8 cards/game Odds H 4-6 A 23-5 D 16-5 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Thomas, Dewsbury-Hall, Choudhury, Daka, Vestergaard, Pérez, Iheanacho, Amartey, Albrighton Doubtful Evans (thigh) Injured Pereira (hamstring, 12 Dec), Tielemans (calf, 16 Dec), Fofana (ankle, Jan), Justin (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R1 Form DWWLDL Leading scorer Vardy 7 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Fletcher, Gosling, Bachmann, Tufan, Hernández, Ngakia, Kucka, Rose, Pedro, Sierralta Doubtful Sierralta (hamstring), Sarr (knee) Injured Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Kabasele (hamstring, unknown), Sema (knee, unknown), Baah (ankle, unknown), Nkoulou (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y27 R1 Form LLWLLW Leading scorer Sarr 5It wasn’t until the morning after the terror attack at Fishmongers’ Hall, London, in 2019, that Preti Taneja realised she knew the perpetrator. Her partner read out his name from a news report over breakfast: Usman Khan. The 28-year-old had taken the creative writing course she led in HMP Whitemoor, a high-security category A prison, two years earlier. The report said he had been shot dead by police, after stabbing five people, two fatally. Khan had been an enthusiastic student, keen to show off his literary knowledge as well as his writing. When he was released in December 2018, he was encouraged to continue working with the prison education programme Learning Together, which brings students into prisons to learn alongside people who are incarcerated. “It was considered a protective factor,” writes Taneja in Aftermath, a new book that attempts to make sense of her personal proximity to the atrocity. “The only thing he had apart from the gym.” Taneja had been teaching with Learning Together since 2017, attracted by the chance to mix her background in human rights advocacy with her dual career as an academic and fiction writer. Creative writing, she says in the book, “was considered a sign of hope” for Khan, who had been convicted of terrorism offences. He was encouraged to keep writing when he was banned from training as an HGV driver in the outside world. He had been working on a play about a knife attack, his inquest heard, but MI5, “considered it simply rehabilitative”. He was a model student, the poster boy for the programme. On 29 November 2019, a fortnight before the last general election, Khan was at Fishmongers’ Hall for an event to celebrate five years of Learning Together. He sat quietly through the morning with his coat on. During the lunch break he went to the toilets and put on a fake bomb vest he had made from Xbox cables, empty plastic bottles and a slimming belt, then taped two kitchen knives to his wrists. MI5 knew he was going to London that day, his inquest later heard. As Taneja puts it: “They said they wanted to test his mindset.” Taneja wasn’t at the event. She had been invited, but stayed at home in Cambridge. She was a research fellow at the university and was preparing for a literary festival. She feels both relieved and guilty to have missed the horror, and has been left wondering how to make sense of her peripheral connection to the atrocity. She tells me she has now come to call it “disenfranchised grief ... for those who had known the perpetrator, it was something unspeakable”. She is now, she notes in Aftermath, writing “in the wreck”. We meet at Newcastle University just before the second anniversary of the attack. Taneja is nervous, dressed in black with an A4 pad on her lap. Even now, discussing the attacks is hard. She doesn’t want to talk about what Khan was like; she is very conscious of the privacy of the victims’ families. She weighs her words carefully, unafraid to leave long gaps while she finds the right ones. She does the same in her prose, leaving white space in the middle of sentences, requiring the reader to fill in the blanks, to ponder the unsaid, the unsayable. Taneja grew up in Hertfordshire but moved to the north-east in March 2020 to become a professor of world literature and creative writing; she wrote Aftermath in the isolation of successive lockdowns. She found the “huge pandemic silencing” of Covid helpful to form her thoughts. “Into that silence, there was an opportunity to think very carefully about some of these huge feelings of grief and culpability, of historic mourning, of political rage and social injustice that I suppose were raised from the seabed almost by this event.” She didn’t just know Khan, but also one of his victims: 25-year-old Jack Merritt, Learning Together’s programme coordinator. “Kind, funny, compassionate, driven, a mentor to many, an excellent trainer of trainers”, is how she describes him in the book. Khan also murdered 23-year-old Saskia Jones, a volunteer at the event, who worked in a rape crisis centre and hoped one day to be a detective specialising in victim support. He injured several others before being tackled by some of the course participants – one, famously, with a narwhal tusk grabbed from the hall’s wall – and was then shot by police 20 times on London Bridge. Aftermath is Taneja’s second book. Her first, We That Are Young, a retelling of King Lear in contemporary India, won the Desmond Elliott prize in 2018. Exploring the links between empire and what she sees as the “fascism” in the modern Indian state, it was praised in the Guardian as “that rarest of beasts, a page-turner that’s also unabashedly political”. It took her “a very long time” to find a publisher, a fact she partly attributes to her refusal to write “a beautiful immigrant Bildungsroman”, the sort of debut she thinks many minority writers are pushed into producing. “It wasn’t the kind of book I suppose one would expect from a debut writer from my background,” she says. Galley Beggar, the independent press, gave her a £1,000 advance. “People are shocked when they hear what I got, but it was the best grand I’ve ever earned.” Aftermath blends journalism, memoir, poetry and literary criticism in an attempt to process an event she will never truly understand. It is split into three parts – radical doubt, radicalising thought, and radical hope – and mixes first-, second- and third-person narrative to tell an often painful story. It is a confronting, sometimes angry read about racism in society and the criminal justice system, taking in everything from the Kashmir conflict to the Prevent counter-terrorism strategy (which, she writes, “makes civil society into border police”), “joint enterprise” murders and being a person of colour “passing” in majority white Britain. It should shame many readers, particularly those in the worlds of journalism, education, publishing, prisons and police. For a long time, Taneja couldn’t talk about what happened. First, she writes, her Cambridge college advised her to stay silent, less to protect her than itself – “call it fear of tarnishing a world-leading reputation, offending donors, the Daily Mail”. She was given media training by the university, where she was presented with a list of possible questions journalists might ask. Several revolved around the possibility that they might suggest her first book, which she had given to students in prison, could possibly have radicalised Khan. “There was a serious suggestion that it could be interpreted that way by elements of the media,” Taneja says. She went along with it at the time. “Shock of that magnitude almost makes you cling to things you think you know, even harder. So if you think that someone is there to keep you safe, you’ll go with that.” She taught Khan for only 20 hours over one term but wonders what could have been done to stop him. “I think I had a perspective on what was going on, that if anyone had asked … I would have been able to say, at the time: how can you release this person? How can you think that they’re going to be fine? Going from category A, right into the world? Who is taking charge of this process? It was a technicality that he was released on.” She feels the inquest process “revealed how unsafe we as course leaders and students actually were while … we did this work inside; and in fact it revealed we were all unsafe on the outside, too, all the way up to MI5 – which is what the coroner’s report finally concluded. Prevent, police, the Home Office: nothing kept this from happening … And no one at any level wanted to take final responsibility for what happened.” She says that “the realisations and responses of the inquest process deeply added to my grief and shock”. No one has ever really taken responsibility for Khan’s early release. He was let out automatically on licence after serving half of his 16-year term without going in front of the parole board, despite intelligence held by the Prison Service warning that Khan was going to “go back to his old ways”. He had been convicted aged just 19 of being part of a terror cell that was plotting an attack on the London Stock Exchange and planning a jihadi training camp. As Taneja details in Aftermath, he was not a model prisoner, though she had no idea of this when she was his teacher. In 2013, he was found in prison stockpiling chemicals for a bomb. A loose razor blade was discovered taped to the underside of his locker in 2017, as well as the address of a prison governor. He took part in the government’s Healthy Identity Intervention deradicalisation scheme, while influencing inmates to kill and harm others. There were suspicions he was playing the system and showing “false compliance”. Taneja didn’t know this when she welcomed him into her classroom. Did she see the real Khan, or was the face he presented to her and others an elaborate fiction? Though never excusing his bloodshed, she sees him as a victim of a racist society that has never atoned for the sins of colonialism; a society in which young Black adults are, she writes, “twice as likely to receive a caution, 8.4 times more likely to receive a conviction, 1.5 times more likely to be sent to prison, and given prison sentences that are 80% longer than those given to white young adults who commit similar offences”. How was he allowed to disappear from school in Stoke-on-Trent at 14 without anyone asking questions, she writes. How did he go to prison and come out more high risk than when he went in? The Britain he was released into was “more bitter, more scared, more split, more racist since his incarceration”, she writes. Though the attack provides the narrative structure for Aftermath, it is just as much a furious reflection on her 44 years as a British-born woman of Indian origin. It reappraises a childhood growing up in a white community with “angel-haired friends”, being cast as “poor girl” in successive nativities. It recalls a work experience stint on a national newspaper shortly after 9/11 where, the only Asian in the newsroom, she was dispatched to Brick Lane, in the East End of London, to coax Bangladeshi men into appraising the attacks. She did it and felt “sick with my own duplicity”. In Aftermath’s afterword, Taneja writes a long list of what she thinks the book is about: personal identity, risk, safety, generational trauma, racial grief and more. But ultimately, she says when we meet, it’s a book about trust. How to step out of the house each morning and trust in a society you can’t control. “The fluid, shining faith not in a God or in the edicts of any organised religion or institution but in the necessary fiction we rest our contingent lives on, which in English we call trust,” she writes. Even before the attack, Taneja says she had never felt safe. “I don’t think as a woman of colour I’d be alone in saying that. There was always a sense of vigilance around me, like in my peripheral vision, an acknowledgment of my own physical size, my body, what it can do.” No one with a connection to the Fishmongers’ Hall attack, whether they were staffing the cloakroom that day, or worked in the jobcentre and tried to help Khan find employment, will be the same again, Taneja says. “All these people will always have this question in their minds about who they can trust.” She adds: “For me, the trust was broken to the extent that I lost my faith in language, the things I read, the places I would go for comfort – the poets who usually provide such comfort in times like this. This event felt so extreme and so difficult and complex and unusual, that I couldn’t find anywhere in literature that knew anything about how to manage and process it. So, for me, it’s about the difficulties of that moment, but also about how, as a writer, to make any kind of future out of it. And I’m determined to do that, and make it a better one than the one that caused it.” This isn’t about “prison expansion or more surveillance – though the question of the most damaged violent people is one I’ve had to reckon with – it’s how do we work towards making a safer world without those things, which aren’t working to keep us safe anyway”. She is extremely nervous about how the book will be received, and the potential for it to be misinterpreted. Why write it? “Sometimes stories choose us,” she says. “And, there was no other way through this time than to try to work out in my own mind how I sat inside the story, and where I could say something about what I saw and what I know about this event, and the structural harms and systemic failures that contributed to it.” She wrote a few pages of notes in the immediate aftermath to record the way she was feeling. A month later, in January 2020, she received an email from an editor in the US at a small publisher, Transit Books, who was starting an essay series called Undelivered Lectures: would she consider contributing? There was no rush to publish. She wanted the bereaved relatives to have their say first, and for the inquests to be held. The journalistic aspects of Aftermath, which tell the story of attacks she did not witness, are all taken from the inquest transcripts. Any proceeds will be given to charity. “There’s no money being made here,” she says. “This book is a lament. It is a labour of love.” It feels a very contemporary book, drawing links between media coverage of the death of a schoolgirl who drowned in a river after another child encouraged her into the water, and so-called Isis brides. She writes that there is “a deep, mythologically driven Islamophobia, embraced through class harms: digital platforms, voter ID cards and immigration rules that will spare no one, from 12-year-old Shukri Abdi standing on a river bank, to Shamima Begum, groomed into Isis then consigned to statelessness, and the men who buy into an alternative promise of power, the violent ideology, extreme drug, who will use this as their rationale”. She berates the British education system for failing school pupils in colonial history, teaching instead “that Black and brown youth have no history but are lucky to be born in England. That a Muslim boy or a girl is a body of terror. That a Black man must be waiting to attack: must be subject on the street. That a brown girl mute is the best she can be. That a Black girl drowning is a tragic accident.” She calls out the media for giving white, privileged terrorists an easier ride. She reminds her readers of Harry Vaughan, a teenage satanist who was arrested in 2019 after posting offensive material online under numerous aliases, boasting about school shootings, sharing explosives manuals and neo-Nazi propaganda. Journalists tended to describe him not simply as a terrorist, but “as neo-Nazi terrorist, far-right terrorist as if the terrorist is not normally those things”. This, she reminds us, happened “in a country where the fastest-growing terrorist threat is from the far right”. Reports of Vaughan’s crimes – 14 terror offences plus possession of indecent images of children – are always mentioned alongside his straight As, his autism and a reference to his father’s job, a clerk in the House of Lords. The judge gave him a two-year suspended sentence. There are moments of macabre humour, particularly in the postcolonial glossary she provides for readers. Sample entry: “Funny tinge – As in, it is not just about being black or a funny tinge ... you know, different ... B, err, from the BME community.” It is a reference to former Labour MP Angela Smith, who used this phrase on live TV when talking about the intersection between class and race. The book now finished, she is focused on solutions to the problems she set out. She wants to use her writing to push for a better society than the one that let Khan drop out of school at 14. She wants all schoolchildren to read books by British people of colour, rather than just having one Toni Morrison text on the curriculum. “It is wonderful to have access to literature and poetics and a knowledge base about America. But it isn’t the same. It’s like the difference between hip-hop and grime. We need our own stories. We need our own ways of talking about what happened to our ancestors and why we’re here. All of us, my white students, my brown students, Black students,” she says. “There are amazing British voices coming up. And they’re so necessary – but what is needed is that the widest systems of power open the gates to hear them, really listen to them.” Taneja hasn’t been back inside a prison since 28 November 2019, the day before the Fishmongers’ Hall attack. She hasn’t ruled out a return, incensed at how prisoners were treated during Covid, with even children confined to their cells for 23 hours of a day. When it comes to that fateful day, two years ago, she will never stop wondering if anybody could have done more. “How can you not? It’s just part of grieving and the reality of being mortal.” ‘I remember it as ice, splintering’: an exclusive extract from Aftermath In the days of the immediate aftermath, I could not sleep. All I wanted was to go back to the day before. If nothing else, to tell Jack do not go to London tomorrow. And further back – who knows how far? Thursday, 28 November, 2019: A full, busy day. You and Jack are working together inside the prison. Jack is hosting a workshop on the life and teachings of Malcolm X, led by visiting UCLA professor Bryonn Bain. Your writing students join in with a larger group. You remember it as a day of laughter, shared stories: electric with effort. There is a reunion of sorts. For you with men you haven’t seen for a year, two years: you are glad to meet again. Their children have grown older, they say. In the late afternoon, your small group of writers from university and prison leaves the larger space for their final seminar of 2019. You end the day on a bittersweet note: finalising the drafts of pieces they have been working on through the semester. You leave full of plans for the next meeting, which will take place in January 2020, after the winter break. It is hard to leave. Yes, when we share stories with those who must stay, prison is hard to leave. Friday, 29 November, 2019: You do not go to the gathering at Fishmongers’ Hall, though you have been invited. You stay at home and prepare notes to chair an admired writer at a literary festival event, taking place in two days’ time. In this life, your other, public, literary life, fictions of self are heavily curated. In some ways this splitting is an act of protection for those who spend more time alone creating others’ speech. But perhaps it asks something specific also of writers with immigrant histories, who – though skilled in navigating and code switching in mainstream life – might have so much further to travel, when focus on our work puts us in the public gaze. Perhaps it can feel like a performance of the oldest pattern repeating, as a trigger, as it is called Saturday, 30 November: The bright day. You are at home. Objective correlative: Hot coffee and fresh pastries. Breakfast with a friend; your partner in the other room, winter sun coming in through the skylight, the door is open, the coloured glass reflects and refracts, and you see him scrolling, reading something on his phone. He says, Learning Together. He says the perpetrator’s name A sensation – like floating – while feeling the hardness of the chair you are sitting on digging into your back. Your phone is next to you: you text Please let me know you and the team are physically OK when you can. You remember stepping outside to the sharp incongruity of a world gone white for the first time that year. Trying to de-ice your car: it was parked in the looping street near your house, it would not start. It is a perfect blue-sky Cambridge day. A frozen day. When the call came, I remember it as ice, splintering. The shards held in place by the space in between as cold dark matter, as if the world has become all the absurd facts of an exploded shed by the artist Cornelia Parker, as if even now, metaphor will not be stopped. Even while I write, I am enraged by language, can only turn once again to lament Who will gather and hold these fragments? Who will, O who will? [ . . . ] When I think of that time, I think of a fingerprint, lines tracing around each other outwards from the small, intimate core. At heart the family, lovers, the friends and colleagues, spiral outwards, back inwards as you try to catch yourself in freefall There is a hierarchy to grief. It is profound and right to observe it, especially when deaths happen publicly and violently, when such people as Jack and Saskia, who were just beginning their work and lived with the brightest hope, are killed. Especially then. The beloved young belong to the ones who hold them closest. First and foremost to the intimacy of deep feeling, scent of childhood, growing up, sun holiday. Sound of their footfall, their phrases, the taste of their jokes, trick senses of smell and sight. Those who are left now must transmute their loss into objects suddenly so precious: necklaces, sunglasses, which yield to the way they laughed: light on water, a certain song. These dear fragments synecdoches of the left-behind. Then they become words, spoken, relayed, written down. A collage of a life. When they open their mourning to the world, it is by kind invitation. But if grief is a spiral so is guilt. Now for some they bond as double helix in the cells Survivor’s guilt is felt by those who were invited but did not go to the event, or were not in the same room as where the attack took place; or did not fight the attacker; or were standing near but could not help those hurt; or even those close enough to look into the attacker’s eyes, and speak to him, and say stop. Because we did not die, we can suffer that sense that we have less legitimacy to grieve it seems without end Some write and apologise for not responding to the invitation to Fishmongers’ Hall, as if they now feel they should have been there, if only to have put their own lives at risk alongside those whose were. Perhaps wanting to have been closer to the feeling that it could have – or should have – been them. Through all of the long months that come, for many that feeling sustains. There should be many words for these kinds of sorrow, these kindred feelings, for us as kin. [ . . . ] Those of us carrying the other cannot find comfort or rest. We cannot speak of the disappeared, the dead, who is horror, who has inflicted terror and horror. There is only this: the parabolic descent. Dive into the wreck of what was still a life, and what ruins of life it left. The possibility of a whole life after that An excerpt from Aftermath, published in the UK/Europe by And Other Stories in April 2022 and available to pre-order now. It is published by Transit in North America.There were only a few occasions when the famed self-portraiture artist Cindy Sherman took photos of someone else and, at just five years old, Gaby Hoffmann became one of them. In the portrait, Hoffmann remembers with a knowing snort, she was dressed as the devil. Posing for one of the world’s most famous photographers was no fluke: Sherman was Hoffmann’s stepmother (she married Hoffmann’s older sister’s father), and as a child Hoffmann would regularly run riot in her studio, throwing on costumes and playing with props. “Then when I was a teenager I lived with Cindy, and when Halloween came that’s where I would go to dress up. My kids now enjoy it. It’s a family resource!” This might sound like a less than conventional way to get your hands on a costume come 31 October, but such a life was pretty normal for Hoffmann. Growing up in Manhattan’s bohemian Chelsea Hotel – also home to Patti Smith, Nico and Jackson Pollock – she was the daughter of Andy Warhol muse and actor Viva, who was on the phone to the artist when he was shot by Valerie Solanas. Family friends included Gore Vidal. That Hoffmann started appearing in television adverts at the age of four to help pay the rent is perhaps one of the least fascinating things about her early years. As an adult, Hoffmann became a mainstay of the small screen’s most uncompromising shows, including Lena Dunham’s Girls and Joey Soloway’s Transparent. A long-deserved lead role is now on the horizon, with Hoffmann currently filming an as-yet-unnamed series about the LA Lakers basketball team for HBO. In it she will play Claire Rothman, the first ever female manager of a major sports arena, alongside John C Reilly, Adrien Brody and Sally Field, as well as newcomer Quincy Isaiah as Magic Johnson. The role called for Hoffmann, her husband and two children to move from New York to California, just two weeks before the US went into lockdown for the first time last year. “We just decided to commit to life in a strange, small town in Los Angeles,” says Hoffmann; the family embedded themselves in the mountain community of Altadena to achieve some semblance of stability. Just before the move, Hoffmann had finished work on C’mon C’mon, the fourth feature from Beginners and 20th Century Women director Mike Mills. Rendered in elegant black and white, it stars Joaquin Phoenix as Johnny, a radio producer who looks after the young son of his sister Viv (played by Hoffmann) while she cares for her estranged, bipolar partner. The uncle and nephew relationship blossoms as the pair travel across the US, with Hoffmann’s tender scenes largely played out on the other end of a phone line. As Viv, Hoffmann is again entrenched in a fragile sibling relationship, much like her characters in Transparent and Girls. “They felt like real people with lots of edges and corners,” says Hoffmann. “When I read the script, my son was not even a year old and my daughter was four, so I was as immersed in parenthood as ever, and I thought that it was maybe the best script that I’d ever read.” C’mon C’mon was also written by Mills, whose naturalistic approach appealed to Hoffmann. “It’s such a relief to read something that is about the actual life that I am concerned with and not some far-off fantasy,” she says. “Even though the details of these people and their lives are very different than my own, the sort of brushstrokes, the feelings are very similar.” Since Hoffmann and Phoenix’s characters haven’t seen each other since their mother’s death, she asked if she could not meet Phoenix until they shot their first scene together. “I’m not a method actor at all,” she says, “but it added this charge to the moment.” Both are former child stars from a similar generation – Phoenix broke through in 1989’s Parenthood, the same year as Hoffmann’s film debut in Field of Dreams – so it seems strange that they had never run into each other before. “Well, we may have crossed paths on a darkly lit street in Manhattan,” laughs Hoffmann. “But I don’t spend a lot of time running around Hollywood parties, and I’m pretty sure Joaquin doesn’t either!” Known for his intense approach to screencraft, in C’mon C’mon Phoenix seems softer, lighter, easier. Was he as heavy-going to work with as people might think? “Oh, he’s just a big sweetie pie!” says Hoffmann. “Unfortunately, we were more like two obnoxious 16-year-olds [on set] than intense actors taking things too seriously.” Adding to the film’s realism was the lack of professional hair and makeup on set. “I absolutely loved the idea,” says Hoffmann, whose character Viv is that rare thing: someone in a movie who looks like a person you might actually meet in real life. “For a single mother who is an intellectual and academic who looks more or less like I look every day, it’s totally unnecessary. As an audience member I’m often so distracted by how perfect everybody always looks; they’ve just got out of bed and are feeding their five-year-old and look like they’re ready to hit the runway!” C’mon C’mon marks seven years since Hoffmann’s last film role, in 2014’s Manhattan Romance. “I really love my job so much. I feel like the luckiest person in the world that I get to do this for a living, but I don’t want to do it that often,” she says with a chuckle. Such enthusiasm – albeit in spurts – is a marked change from how Hoffmann felt three decades ago. As one of the early 1990s’ most visible young actors, she followed the hit Field of Dreams with blockbusters Uncle Buck and Sleepless in Seattle, before fronting her own sitcom, Someone Like Me, at just 12. But despite the ease and confidence in which she approached her work back then, it bored her. “I didn’t care about it at all,” she says. “I didn’t think about acting. I didn’t have any relationship to it. I loved being on movie sets, but the acting itself … ?” She first announced to her family that she would be retiring at seven, but soon ended up back in front of the cameras, only to step down again at 17. “I didn’t think I would ever return to it,” she explains. Instead she went to the liberal arts school Bard in upstate New York: “I was just interested in getting to college and becoming a teacher.” If the stop-start nature of Hoffmann’s CV reflects something of a love-hate relationship with acting, over the past decade she’s made peace with it. A scene-stealing one-off role in a 2012 episode of Louie led to her revelatory turn as Ali Pfefferman in Transparent, the witty, LA-set show about a family dealing with their father’s transition. Running for four seasons, in 2018 the show fired its lead Jeffrey Tambor following two allegations of sexual harassment; a final series was replaced by a one-off musical special in which Tambor’s character Maura was killed off. “That show just had a sad, unfortunate occasion to end,” admits Hoffmann. “But it was its natural ending. It wasn’t the plan, but it’s what happened and that was fine with me.” A bonus of moving to California is that Hoffmann is now within 15 minutes of Jay Duplass and Amy Landecker, who played her elder siblings in Transparent. In fact, they were all hanging out just a week ago. “We’re very much still siblings,” says Hoffmann, warmly. “We’ll be siblings for ever, the three of us.” And next year, there’s another milestone on the way; the five-year-old devil in that Cindy Sherman photo will be turning 40 in January. “I’ve always been excited to be in my 40s. Even as a kid I had an instinct about it,” she says. “It seems quite clear to me that things just get better.” C’mon C’mon is in cinemas from 3 December“Spontaneity flowing into painstaking planning” is how Angelina Golt describes her artistic process. This image was taken during the Ukrainian photographer’s first shoot in Kyiv, after she relocated from her home in Odessa, on the Black Sea coast. “The first thing I do is walk around my location, exploring and touching,” Golt says. It was a grey winter day and she wanted to find something fresh and springlike. “It’s hard not to fall in love with a greenhouse like that. I closed my eyes, absorbed the scent of the flowers and asked my surroundings to talk to me.” With no formal photography education, Golt cites movies, and their cinematographers and directors, as her teachers. Paolo Sorrentino, the Italian director of The Young Pope, and Oscar-winning Taika Waititi, a New Zealander and the director of Jojo Rabbit, are two of her favourites. She treats her models like actors, asking them to embrace their inner feelings as they move and pose for her. Sasha, the model that day, reminded Golt of “fire and water. Plus she has a great sense of humour.” Women, and the female form, often feature in her work, and she finds an “echo of herself” in each of them. Using an iPhone saves time fiddling with camera settings: “It’s just a tool, like a brush in the hands of an artist.” In post-production, Golt likes to “play the artist” once again, but for this image she simply deepened the colours: “Colour is also a powerful storytelling tool.”Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez stood on the House floor and implored her colleagues to hold Paul Gosar accountable for sharing an altered anime video showing him killing her and attacking Joe Biden. “Our work here matters. Our example matters. There is meaning in our service,” Ocasio-Cortez said in her speech last week. “And as leaders in this country, when we incite violence with depictions against our colleagues, that trickles down into violence in this country.” House Republicans heard Ocasio-Cortez’s impassioned plea and responded with a collective shrug. All but three Republican members voted against censuring Gosar and stripping him of his committee assignments, while every House Democrat supported the resolution. The Gosar incident served as the latest data point in an alarming trend in American politics. In a year that began with a deadly insurrection at the US Capitol, lawmakers have seen a sharp rise in the number of threats against them. Republicans’ muted response to Gosar’s behavior has intensified fears about the possibility of more political violence in America in the months to come. Jackie Speier, the Democratic congresswoman who spearheaded the effort to censure Gosar, warned that Republicans’ refusal to hold him accountable could have dangerous repercussions. “If you are silent about a member of Congress wanting to murder another member of Congress, even in a ‘cartoon’, you are inciting violence,” Speier told the Guardian. “And if you incite violence, it begets violence.” That cycle is already playing out in the halls of Congress. The US Capitol police reported earlier this year that the agency had seen a 107% increase in threats against members compared with 2020. The USCP chief, Tom Manger, has said he expects the total number of threats against members to surpass 9,000 this year, compared with 3,939 such threats in 2017. Some of those threats have been on vivid display in the past month. In addition to Gosar’s violent video, the 13 House Republicans who voted in support of the bipartisan infrastructure bill earlier month have received threatening messages. Representative Fred Upton of Michigan publicly shared one such message, in which a man called the Republican congressman a “fucking piece of shit traitor”. “I hope you die. I hope everybody in your fucking family dies,” the man said in the message. And those kinds of threats are not reserved solely for members of Congress. Election workers and school board members also say they are receiving more violent messages. According to an April survey commissioned by the Brennan Center for Justice, nearly one in three election officials are concerned about their safety while on the job. Stephen Spaulding, senior counsel at the government watchdog group Common Cause, described such violent tactics as “a core threat to our democracy”. “The threat of violence is really to intimidate people from doing their jobs and upholding their oath of office,” Spaulding said. “When you start having these violent episodes enter the system, it is totally counter to the way that we are supposed to engage in open and fair debate about policy issues in this country.” There are already signs that fears over personal safety are pushing lawmakers out of office. When the Republican congressman Anthony Gonzalez announced in September that he would not seek re-election, he said his vote to impeach Donald Trump for inciting the insurrection had affected the lives of his family members. Gonzalez told the New York Times that, at one point earlier this year, uniformed police officers had to escort him and his family through the Cleveland airport because of security concerns. “That’s one of those moments where you say, ‘Is this really what I want for my family when they travel, to have my wife and kids escorted through the airport?’” Gonzalez said. Even though threats are affecting their own caucus members, House Republicans rejected the opportunity to send a message by voting to censure Gosar. Instead, the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, attacked the censure resolution as a Democratic “abuse of power” and suggested he would award Gosar with “better committee assignments” whenever Republicans regain control of the chamber. “He’s got a number of radical extremists in his caucus that are very effective communicators to the right fringe, and he can’t really rein them in because reining them in means they will attack him,” Speier said. “You might as well put a brass ring in Kevin McCarthy’s nose because they’re pulling him around.” Dr Joanne Freeman, a Yale history professor and author of The Field of Blood: Violence in Congress and the Road to Civil War, warned that McCarthy’s response to Gosar’s behavior may encourage similar incidents in the future. After all, there are other historical examples of lawmakers being rewarded for violent behavior, Freeman noted. After Congressman Preston Brooks attacked Senator Charles Sumner with a cane over his anti-slavery views in 1856, he resigned from the House but was then quickly re-elected by South Carolina voters. “He’s going to be rewarded for it in some ways, and because of that, there will be others that follow in that model,” Freeman said. “It’s a moment that shows how far party is above government and above institutions of government and above institutional stability.” While acknowledging the possibility of future violence within Congress, Freeman added that the Gosar incident could also provide an opportunity for a course correction in political discourse. “We’re in a moment of extreme contingency, and indeed things might become much worse,” Freeman said. “But during that kind of moment of extreme contingency where anything can happen, those are also moments where it’s possible to make positive change.” For Speier, Gosar’s behavior served as a reminder of how far some of her colleagues have strayed from their duties to constituents. The California congresswoman, who announced her retirement last week, urged fellow members to focus on advancing policy rather than spewing violent rhetoric to raise money and rack up retweets. “I love this institution. It’s such a privilege to serve,” Speier said. “We’re given the opportunity to fashion legislation to make lives better for the American people. And that’s what we should be doing.”The Omicron Covid variant is unlikely to “reboot” the pandemic in a population that has been widely vaccinated, according to a UK expert who voiced cautious optimism that existing vaccines would prevent serious disease. Scientists have expressed alarm about the B.1.1.529 variant, first identified in Gauteng in South Africa, over its high number of mutations. Omicron has more than 30 mutations on its spike protein – more than double the number carried by the Delta variant. However, Prof Sir Andrew Pollard, the director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, , said the location of the mutations meant vaccines may still be effective. “If you look at where most of the mutations are, they are similar to regions of the spike protein that have been seen with other variants so far,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “That tells you that despite mutations existing in other variants, the vaccines have continued to prevent very severe disease as we’ve moved through Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta,” said Pollard, whose team developed the AstraZeneca vaccines. Pollard said that “from a speculative point of view” there was optimism vaccines would continue to guard against severe disease, but acknowledged this would not be confirmed for several weeks. “It is extremely unlikely that a reboot of a pandemic in a vaccinated population like we saw last year is going to happen,” he said. The Labour party meanwhile said Britain should cut the gap between the second dose of a Covid-19 vaccination and the booster jab from six to five months. “The pandemic is not over. We need to urgently bolster our defences to keep the virus at bay,” said Labour’s junior health spokesperson Alex Norris on Saturday morning. Pollard’s remarks came after the variant reached Europe on Friday, with scientists warning it would inevitably spread to Britain. The UK has restricted travel from South Africa and five other southern African countries, while Canada, the US and Australia have also announced travel bans from a number of countries in the region. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said hotel quarantine and enhanced testing would be introduced across the UK. As alarm grows over Omicron, which the World Health Organization (WHO) said showed “preliminary evidence suggest[ing] an increased risk of reinfection”, further restrictions are being discussed within the UK government. A move to “plan B” would involve the reintroduction of mandatory mask wearing and working from home, as well as Covid passports and other measures. Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, said it was his “greatest worry” that people may not follow restrictions after almost two years of the pandemic. “If we need to do something more muscular at some point, whether it’s for the current new variant or at some later stage, can we still take people with us?” However, he said he believed the public would overall be responsive “provided you are clear with people what the logic is, provided they feel that we’re being entirely straight with them as to all the data”. Prof Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science, said “the notion of behavioural fatigue” – the idea that people would not abide by restrictions – “was probably as egregious an error as the problems with PPE or the problems with test and trace”. “It led in March 2020 to a delay in imposing restrictions and that probably led to many deaths, up to tens of thousands of deaths.” He said people had been “extremely resilient” and that the “notion that people are the weak point in the pandemic response … is probably an inversion of the truth.”Not long after Patricia Turner and a handful of Black students desegregated Norview junior high school in Norfolk, Virginia, she realized a big difference between her new white school and her former Black school. That February of 1959, she didn’t have to wear a coat in class to stay warm, because Norview was heated. She hadn’t noticed the difference earlier because of the steady volley of racism directed at her, Turner said. A teacher put her papers in a separate box and returned them wearing rubber gloves. (He later wrote her an apology letter.) And her fellow students spat on her. “I had my mother, my dad, my church, my pastor, my God,” Turner said, explaining how she survived the daily assaults on her body and spirit. Turner and 16 other Black students who attended six white schools under court-ordered desegregation were called the Norfolk 17, the young foot soldiers in the campaign against Virginia’s “Massive Resistance”, a state policy to oppose school desegregation. Rather than desegregate public schools after the 1954 US supreme court decision in Brown v Board of Education, which declared segregated education unconstitutional, Virginia officials closed some of them. A crowd gathers for an NAACP rally in May 1961 at the Prince Edward county courthouse in Farmville, Virginia, marking the seventh anniversary of the supreme court’s school desegregation ruling. Photograph: Bettmann Massive Resistance was in place from 1956 to 1959. But in some places, schools weren’t desegregated until a decade after the Brown decision, longer than in any other state in the US south, making Virginia notorious, at the time, among civil rights advocates. The period is so seminal to its history that public school students are required to learn about it beginning in the fourth grade. Since long before Glenn Youngkin was elected governor of Virginia, deploying rhetoric that tapped white fears over teaching about race and racism in public schools, race and education have been an incendiary combination, especially in southern politics. Black demands for educational equality as part of the civil rights agenda historically have been met with white rejoinders of states’ rights and other, more naked justifications for segregation. In Virginia, the Defenders of State Sovereignty and Individual Liberties was chartered after the Brown decision to preserve “racial integrity”, “racial separateness” and “the precious heritage handed down to us by our forefathers”. And the slow erosion of public education post-Brown and its replacement with “choice” and private schools are rooted in the battles over white children and Black children attending the same schools. In a 1958 letter to Virginia school superintendents, Governor J Lindsay Almond Jr wrote: “I am solemnly and irrevocably committed to do everything within my power to defend and preserve public education for all of the children of the Commonwealth. Irrefutable evidence abundantly abounds that the mixing of the races in our public schools will isolate them from the support of our people, produce strife, bitterness, chaos and confusion to the utter destruction of any rational concept of a worthwhile public school system.” Black students left to fend for themselves While the Brown decision was the catalyst for Massive Resistance, the ruling joined four other cases, including a 1951 Virginia lawsuit, Davis v Prince Edward county. In April 1951, 16-year-old Barbara Johns led a walkout in protest of the substandard conditions in her Black high school compared with the white high school in Farmville in Prince Edward county. “There had already been other protests and movement activity in Farmville by community leaders. In fact, the Reverend Vernon Johns, a major civil rights leader, was Barbara’s uncle. She had learned so much about the broader civil rights movement, community resistance activity and the art of protest from her family and community,” said Colita Fairfax, a professor of social work at Norfolk State University who has served on state and federal historic commissions. Robert Hamlin Sr, a former student at Robert Russa Moton high school, with a portrait of Barbara Johns, on the stage where Johns gave her initial strike speech to students. Photograph: Christopher ‘Puma Smith/The Guardian Johns’ actions attracted the NAACP, which sued the county, sparking legal sparring over desegregation that prompted white officials to shut down the public school system in 1959. That year, Massive Resistance ended in most of Virginia, but opposition to school desegregation intensified in Prince Edward county. Robert Hamlin Sr was a senior in high school who had grown up in the shadow of the school desegregation battles. His parents, members of the Nation of Islam, encouraged his education; his first instruction was in a three-room schoolhouse in the county with a potbelly stove for heat and an outside pump for water. When he began attending Robert Russa Moton high school, where Johns had led the walkout eight years earlier, Hamlin was thrilled because it had indoor heating and water. “I thought, ‘Wow,’” he said. Later, he attended a new Moton high school, which was built in 1953 and included facilities that white students in the community took for granted such as a cafeteria and a gymnasium. Before he could graduate, county officials shuttered the schools to avoid desegregating them, using a tactic to evade the law: they refused to appropriate taxes to pay for the school year. A foundation was created to support private education for white students; later tuition grants were offered. The Black students were on their own. Left: Senator Harry Flood Byrd Sr galvanized white resistance to integration. Right: Governor J Lindsay Almond of Virginia claimed integration would cause ‘strife, bitterness and chaos’. Photographs: Alamy/Getty Images Hamlin had promised his mother, who had only completed the sixth grade, that he would graduate high school. “So, when schools closed and I’m going into the 12th grade, that was the one thing that stuck with me most, my mom’s desire for me to graduate high school,” he said. “And now, all the sudden, through no fault of our own, it appears that I wasn’t going to be able to do that.” From 1959 to 1964, Black students didn’t receive a formal education in Prince Edward county. “That story is unique among the south. There’s no other locality that closes its schools for such an extended period of time in order to avoid school desegregation,” said Brian Daugherity, an associate history professor at Virginia Commonwealth University who has written books about Virginia’s desegregation battles. The US senator Harry Flood Byrd Sr of Virginia galvanized white resistance in the state. An ardent segregationist, he was an author of the southern manifesto, a declaration of states’ rights and a defense of Jim Crow laws, written in response to the Brown decision. With Byrd’s support, the then governor, Thomas B Stanley, created a special commission in 1954, which engineered many of the plans to oppose desegregation that were approved by the Virginia general assembly. Left: Barbara Johns is quoted on the Virginia Civil Rights Memorial. Right: Granby high school in Norfolk, Virginia, was attended by Betty Jean Reed of the Norfolk 17. Photograph: Christopher ‘Puma Smith/The Guardian Lawmakers made school attendance optional and offered white parents tuition support for private schools. And to ensure that school districts toed the line, lawmakers threatened to strip them of state funding if they integrated under court pressure. The assembly also passed laws that made it harder for Black students to attend white schools, even if the schools were closer to their homes than Black schools. In Norfolk, one of three communities under a court order to desegregate at the time, Black students had to take multiple tests to be eligible to attend white schools. Fairfax said a series of local court case delays, pupil placement exams, intimidation tactics and harassment were designed to thwart desegregation efforts. ‘You’re doing this for the future’ In Norfolk, of the 151 Black students who were eligible, based on where they lived, to attend white schools, only 17 enrolled, including Patricia Turner and her brother James, Turner said. They were close enough to the white junior high school to walk there. In an archival photo, a 14-year-old Turner poses in a dress, coat and bobby socks with other members of the Norfolk 17. When she entered Norview junior high school, she had been required to pass eighth-, ninth -and 10th-grade tests, she said. “They wanted the best of the best,” Turner said, recognizing the double standard applied to Black students. Patricia Turner had to pass eighth-, ninth- and 10th-grade tests to attend Norview junior high school, she said. Photograph: Christopher ‘Puma Smith/The Guardian In the months before entering Norview, she prepared for eighth grade and “how to react if someone spits in your face”, she said. She was told to “wipe it off because it was just water”. “They told us, ‘You are not only doing this for you, you’re doing this for the future,’” she said, referring to the instructions from elders to her and other Black students assigned to white schools in early 1959. In the last months of 1958, they attended classes in the basement of a local Black church because the white schools they were assigned to were closed. The pastor, teachers and others in the community volunteered to teach them until a wealthy Black patron financed the impromptu school. While they were being educated, 10,000 white students in Norfolk were still shut out of public schools as a result of Massive Resistance. In an effort to stall desegregation, officials had closed the white schools, but left the Black schools open. A young boy looks at an hanging effigy of a Black person placed by students in front of Maury high school in Norfolk in September 1958. Photograph: Cliff Guthrie/AP “This has always puzzled me,” said Turner, a retired educator who still works with children. “That means the Black students were being educated; the white students were out of school because of 17 Blacks.” In the end, a campaign to defend the education of white children in separate schools faltered because they weren’t in school. In addition to the activism by the Black community and organizations such as the NAACP, opposition by weary and some well-meaning white parents helped bring Massive Resistance to an end. In Norfolk, a group of white parents and community and business leaders successfully sued to reopen the schools. In a letter to Governor Almond, the Norfolk Committee for Public Schools wrote: “We believe that Massive Resistance was never intended to punish the white school children of the state. It was never intended to punish the entire populace economically. Because of federal court decisions, however, it is powerless to do otherwise than punish those who least deserve it … We believe that the Supreme Court is no more likely to reverse its school desegregation decisions than it is to reverse the decision of Appomattox. Virginia must therefore face the realities of the situation, as it did in 1865, and proceed courageously along the best and most realistic lines available.” ‘Everything is cyclical’ In Farmville, Hamlin also found support in the Black church. He was able to graduate high school, not in Virginia, but in North Carolina, 125 miles from home. Left: Norview middle school, formerly junior high, attended by Patricia Turner, James Turner Jr, LaVera Forbes, Edward Jordan, and Claudia Wellington of the Norfolk 17 . Right: Maury high school was attended by Louis Cousins, another member. Photograph: Christopher ‘Puma Smith/The Guardian While white resistance crumbled in Norfolk, it escalated in Farmville with the school closures. Two Black ministers used their connections at Kittrell Community College in Henderson, North Carolina, to help Hamlin and other students graduate high school. During his senior year, he lived in a college dorm. Prince Edward public schools reopened in 1964 following the US supreme court decision in Griffin v School Board of Prince Edward county. By them, Hamlin was long gone. After graduating high school in North Carolina, he eventually enrolled in the air force. He didn’t move back to Prince Edward county until 1999; 40 years had passed since the school closures. “I was quite pleasantly surprised by how it had advanced and changed,” said Hamlin, who stayed away because there were no opportunities. After returning, he landed a position as deputy director for youth programs at a workforce development agency serving south central Virginia. Today, Farmville is called “the birthplace of America’s student-led civil rights revolution”. The original Moton high school, which ignited the commonwealth’s school desegregation battle, was named a national historic landmark in 1998 and converted into a museum in 2001. Hamlin served on the museum board for five years, including a stint as chairperson. In 2003, the Virginia assembly apologized to the students who lost five years of education. Robert Russa Moton high school was converted into a museum in 2001. Photograph: Christopher ‘Puma Smith/The Guardian Today’s opposition to teaching race in schools could deny students the lessons of Virginia’s education history. During his run, Youngkin’s appeals to parents with slogans like “parents matter” wasn’t just part of a campaign, but a movement, he said. Youngkin has pledged to end the teaching of critical race theory, a legal theory that explores how racism is embedded in US laws and policies, in Virginia schools, though it isn’t taught in kindergarten through 12th grade schools there. The crux of the issue, Youngkin has said, is that schools shouldn’t teach children “what to think as opposed to how to think”. Colfax says teaching the history of Massive Resistance will help students become critical thinkers. Massive Resistance was one of several issues many white Virginians were responding to in the 1950s. They were also reacting to “the Black community’s resistance activities in forms of protest, agitation, voting”, she said. “When narratives such as these are not taught in public schools, it means that schoolchildren aren’t learning about the beauty, strength, resilience, contributions of Black people. They are not learning to ask questions for themselves about citizenship, fairness, privilege, hate, white supremacy.’’ Reflecting on his place in state history and the current issues in Virginia education, Hamlin said: “I have learned along the way that you need to know your history, you need to know the past because it will come back again. Everything is cyclical. And so, it may show up a little differently, but it will show up again.”High Park, Hay-on-Wye, Powys This traditional stone cottage has been beautifully restored in a modern-meets-rustic style. The open-plan ground floor has wooden floors, beams and an inglenook fireplace with a woodburner. Upstairs are two bedrooms with vaulted ceilings and a bathroom with a walk-in shower. There are deep windowsills with sheepskin rugs and cushions, and lots of artworks and houseplants. Guests can defy the winter and head outside to cook in the pizza oven, sit around the firepit or soak in the hot tub. There is a horse-riding centre nearby and plenty of walking and cycling routes. From £595 a week, sleeps four, coolstays.com Lemons Cottage, Devon This lovely thatched cottage in the village of Atherington has been renovated to add mod cons but preserve period features. So there are original oak doors, panelled walls, beams and brick fireplaces, but also underfloor heating, rain showers and a contemporary kitchen. Best of all on cold winter nights is the cinema room, with sofas, a 75-inch TV and surround sound. There are separate living and dining rooms downstairs, and a master bedroom with an en suite rolltop bath and two other bedrooms. From £235 a night, sleeps six, sandandstoneescapes.com Slackbrae, Clackmannanshire Slackbrae cottage opened to guests for the first time this autumn – the property was built in the 1700s as the gatehouse to the Brucefield Estate, near Stirling and Dunfermline. It has been renovated with sustainable materials and is a low-energy house. Vaulted ceilings with skylights keep it bright even in winter, and warmth is provided by underfloor heating, a woodburner and sheepskin rugs. There is an open-plan living area, plus two bedrooms (one en suite). The wider 420-hectare estate is being regenerated, with a 10-year wildlife plan to manage the semi-ancient birch, oak and Scots pine woodland and support resident bats, owls, pine martens and red squirrels. £300 a night including breakfast hamper, sleeps six, brucefieldestate.scot Scargill Castle, County Durham Built in 1550 on the site of a medieval castle, Scargill has been restored from a crumbling ruin to a cosy retreat for two. An arched entrance leads to the dining room, with ancient oak beams and an oak table; the kitchen, which overlooks the courtyard garden; and the bathroom, with rolltop bath. Up a stone spiral staircase is the cosy sitting room with a Tudor fireplace and woodburner (the castle also has underfloor heating), and a window seat with views over Teesdale. The beamed bedroom is on the top floor. From £465 for three nights, sleeps two, yorkshirehideaways.co.uk Dracup’s Cottage, Shropshire This former railway cottage in Bridgnorth was turned into a work of art by its former owner, artist Antony Dracup, and all its features have been preserved. This spring, it opened as an unusual holiday cottage: the living room has an Alice in Wonderland theme, the breakfast room resembles a railway platform, the bedroom is the “hobbit’s lair” and the bathroom is modelled on a boiler room. There is also an art room, with Dracup’s 360-degree mural of Bridgnorth and, most spectacular, his huge hand-carved sandstone cave, with arches and pillars. The cottage is on a steep cobbled lane off the town’s main street. From £289 for two nights, sleeps two, dracupscottage.co.uk Stable Lodge, Dorset This stylish converted Victorian stable in the hamlet of Woolland opened to guests in August. There is a cottage-style kitchen, two bedrooms, one with a restored copper bath, and a shower room. Original features include stone floors, exposed brick walls and beams. As well as a private garden, guests can access the owners’ meadows, with views across the Blackmore Vale. Perks include a welcome pack of local treats and the use of two bikes. From £125 a night, sleeps four, furtherafield.com Nyth Fach, Ceredigion Inside this cute whitewashed cottage, blue doors and windows, slate floors, beams and antique oak furniture give a period feel. Nyth Fach (Little Nest in Welsh) has a big feature fireplace with a woodburner in the lounge and a second woodburner in the dining room, plus underfloor heating in the kitchen. The bedroom is a traditional crog loft – a mezzanine over half the ground floor – and the bathroom has a walk-in rain shower. The cottage is in a cluster of farm buildings, with sheep, alpacas, goats and donkeys on site, and within walking distance of the pebbly beach at Cwmtydu on the Ceredigion coast. From £607 for seven nights, sleeps two, qualitycottages.co.uk The Green, Cumbria Richard and Carly have converted this stone barn near Ravenstonedale into three lets, two sleeping four and one sleeping six, which can be booked individually or together. The Haystore and the Byre are perhaps the cosiest, with an upside-down layout: two en suite bedrooms on the ground floor, both with whirlpool baths; a double-height, open-plan living/dining area on the first floor and a balcony with steps down to a courtyard. The space is kept toasty with a ground source heat pump. Carly’s interiors are inspired by nature, with natural fabrics and eco-friendly products. Richard is a mountain leader who can take guests on guided walks over the Howgill Fells. From £562 for four nights, sleeps four, thegreencumbria.co.uk The Hemmel, Oxfordshire The Hemmel combines original features including beams, exposed stone walls and a well in the courtyard garden with a contemporary colour scheme: splashes of bright orange, red and blue. There is a woodburner in the living room, a rolltop bath in the master bedroom and a games room. The cottage is in the Vale of the White Horse, on the edge of Little Coxwell village, which has a 12th-century church and a pub serving seasonal food such as gnocchi with squash, portobello mushrooms and greens. From £511 for seven nights, sleeps four, sykescottages.co.uk Henry’s, Port Isaac, Cornwall This building on Fore Street started life as a 17th-century net loft, became a Victorian general store and is now Henry’s, a holiday home owned – and decorated – by Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen. But don’t fear a flamboyant Changing Rooms aesthetic; it is a tasteful blend of glossy black floorboards, pastel walls and white beams (OK, and the odd statement chandelier). There is a logburner in the kitchen/diner, a window seat to curl up in with a book, and sash windows with sea views – guests can watch winter storms battering the harbour wall from the comfort of the bath. From £148 a night, sleeps six, latitude50.co.ukWhen Janice Turley was 39, she was focused on her career as a teacher – perhaps a little too focused. She’d retrained after bringing up her children and was in her second year as a primary school teacher in Hulme, Manchester. Often she’d put in 70-hour weeks. One of the school governors said she needed a night off. The governor took Turley to see a steel band at a local school. It was taught by British-Trinidadian musician Arthur Culpeper, one of the pioneers of steel band music in the UK. The room was big and draughty, but the atmosphere was brilliant. “There was a chattery buzz,” says Turley. Learning to play steel pan was addictive. Culpeper was gentle and patient with newcomers. “Arthur stuck me on the bass,” Turley remembers, “I never looked back.” Thirty years on, and Turley, now 69, teaches steel pan to a group of 15 visually and hearing impaired adults down the road in Stockport. Every Tuesday at 9am, she arrives with her husband, Barrie, to set up the rehearsal space. Sometimes her friends Keith and Irene, and her sister Pat, help. Because most players are visually impaired, they cannot read sheet music. Turley has created a system of brightly coloured stickers, stuck to notes on the pans, so players with partial eyesight can follow along. The stickers are tailored to suit each player’s specific visual impairment. “I sit at the bass player’s section,” Turley says, “and shut my eyes. I think about how he can move. Can he twist far enough, to strike that note?” At 1pm, the players arrive and natter away. When Turley wants their attention, she does a drum roll. The session finishes at 2.15pm, and Turley and Barrie pack everything away. She feels exhausted. “I come home and lie on the floor,” she says. Turley has done this every Tuesday for a decade without payment. “She really loves what she does and her patience and skill at making things as easy as possible for her players is heartwarming,” says her friend, Vivien McDougall. What makes Turley’s contribution more remarkable is that she, too, is visually impaired. Her sight began to go in 2017. “I was watching Strictly one evening,” she says, “and there were two of everyone on the television.” She has cataracts and a condition called ocular myasthenia gravis. She is waiting for an operation, but right now Barrie has to take her everywhere. “It’s the blind leading the blind,” she jokes of the band. Coordinating a group of visually and hearing impaired people can be challenging. “Sometimes people keep playing because they don’t realise everyone else has stopped,” she says. “They’re enjoying themselves a bit too much!” She has to be creative to keep everyone in time. “We have one deaf lady,” she says. “I put her on the bass so she can feel the rhythm in her body.” Turley stamps to the beat a lot. Her feet always hurt next day. But is it worth it? “It’s a lovely atmosphere. It buzzes in there. No one ever wants to go home.” They play all kinds of music: big band swing, pop, calypso. They have performed at the local beer festival, and staged Christmas shows at a retail park. At shows, Turley and Barrie carry everything themselves. “The players can’t help,” she says, “because they can’t see. We have to carry five 45-gallon oil drums down the stairs. It’s very tiring.” But Turley is not complaining. She gets joy from the steel band. “You get defined by other people when you have sensory loss,” she says. “People think you can’t possibly do things. So there’s a big buzz in watching everyone pull together as a team.” I know exactly how Turley will react when I ask permission to do something nice for her. “I do things for other people,” she says. “Not the other way around.” After some probing, she mentions a teddy bear that her father bought her on the day she was born. The much-loved Mr Teddy is now in pieces in a shoebox. Her 94-year-old mother, who is in a nursing home, has been on at her to get the bear repaired. Luckily, Alice’s Bear Shop in Dorset has a bed free for Mr Teddy, who is carefully couriered from Stockport to Lyme Regis. A medical assessment finds that Mr Teddy has been “loved to pieces”, and he is admitted for treatment. Clinicians keep Turley posted with photographs before sending over a final image of Mr Teddy recuperating in a hospital bed. A few weeks later, the fully recovered bear is on his way home. Turley calls me as she takes delivery. “He is gorgeous,” she says excitedly. “Gorgeous! He’s got a little bow tie on, and there’s a hospital band around his wrist that says ‘Teddy Turley.’ Do you want to hear him? Hang on a minute.” I hear Mr Teddy announce himself with a full-bodied growl down the phone. She plans to take the teddy to her mum’s nursing home for a reunion. “She’ll cry,” says Turley. Afterwards, Mr Teddy will go on tour with Turley’s steel pan group. “I shall have to find the music for the Teddy Bears’ Picnic, won’t I?” Turley laughs. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comA little flurry of colour right now wouldn’t go amiss. A blaze of pink or yellow to catch on the way out of the door will remind you that winter is not stealing everything. To say little of how pleased the pollinators will be that there’s still something to forage. It’s surprising, then, that Korean chrysanthemums are not more well known. If dahlias float your boat, let me introduce you to your next big love. Korean or Chrysanthemum rubellum are the last of the gang to flower and they do so in quite wicked glory, starting in September and reaching to the end of this month, or even into December for certain varieties. They run the gamut from tasteful to screaming: blazing oranges and bronzes, palest salmons and shocking pinks, white and creams or bold yoke yellows, many of which are double, or semi-double flowers. They first appeared in the UK around the end of the 19th century, but their big breeding period was in the 1930s and 40s when everyone went mad for them. These later-period chrysanths have that chocolate-box appeal, all pops and colour and pom-pom flowers. They make excellent cut flowers. They are surprisingly hardy and weatherproof if given sunny, free-draining conditions. They will be happy in a big container, which makes them excellent for patios and balcony gardens. Once settled in, they will return year after year. It’s not the cold over winter that bothers them, but the wet. If you are on anything other than sand or silt, dig in grit and well-rotted homemade compost to the planting hole. But the rub is that you can’t have them right now; they are in flower and thus too complicated and costly to transport. Order them as plug plants to arrive in spring and plant out in May when their new roots are poking out and all frosts have passed. Pinch out the growing tip to get bushy growth, and water well until the plants are established (this is when you’ll start to see new growth). They are easygoing sorts; a little staking and keeping an eye out for slugs is about all that is needed. Try Wooten’s of Wenhaston, Chrysanthemums Direct and Halls of Heddon, but be sure to order quickly as they will sell out. My favourites are the sweet-smelling ones – these tend to be weather hardy too and loved by bees. Varieties such as Cousin Joan in bright red with a yellow centre, Mrs Jessie Cooper in cerise pink is particularly tough , and EH Wilson, which starts flowering in October in palest cream.Timothy Ogene’s Seesaw is a refreshing look at aspects of American culture and politics through the eyes of a Nigerian scholar visiting Boston. The writing fellowship he takes up at William Blake College – not the poet, but a 17th-century merchant “whose other ventures in human cargo are well documented” – is for emerging writers, particularly international ones. It’s a chance for Frank Jasper to travel, to network, to write a second novel and to really kickstart his career. At the moment he works nine to five in a government post office in Port Jumbo, a fictional oil city in south-eastern Nigeria modelled on Port Harcourt. Some of the best descriptive passages in the book show the rundown sections of the city, contrasted with the opulent quarters where expatriates and rich Nigerians live. Jasper’s first novel, The Day They Came for Dan, had only a 50-copy run and is described by him as “poorly edited and lacking in punctuation and filled with typos”. But luckily for Jasper, the book fell into the hands of a visiting American woman, a former Fulbright fellow; it is she who suggests the fellowship to Jasper. This is an opportunity most young writers from a developing country would die for, but Jasper doesn’t go to Boston willingly. He describes himself as a “recovering writer”, after the underwhelming performance of his first book. Once in Boston, he refuses to write or participate in obligatory fellowship activities. He spends most of his time making fun of his co‑participants, particularly those from the global south: for the “ethnic” clothes they wear, or their accents, or their mindless spouting of academic jargon in an attempt to appear impressive. Jasper could be seen as the model of an unreliable narrator. He never misses a chance to lie or to embellish a fact, be it about his family or his writing. He reviewed his own book under an assumed name, comparing it to Proust and “all the works of Amit Chaudhuri”. He behaves this way, we gradually discover, to cover a crushing sense of inferiority. His favourite target for ridicule during the fellowship is a fellow African from Uganda, Barongo Akello Kabumba, who never tires of “performing” his Africanness, to the great delight of the college faculty – including wearing Masai regalia, complete with a shepherd’s stick, to a welcome dinner. Eventually, after a series of humiliating incidents, Jasper is kicked out of the fellowship and another chapter of his stay in America begins. Ogene himself could be described as a “recovering academic” – he has a master’s from Oxford, a PhD from Cambridge and a creative writing MA from UEA – and this book is perhaps his way of satirising the academic community for its self-absorption and egotism. It is a rebellion against his own. Every page is peppered with satiric observations about academic jargon and references to obscure texts and authors, some of them real, some not. It is clever and hilarious when it works, but it can get a bit much; most of the characters feel flat and unconvincing because we never reach beyond the aspect of their personality that the author wants us to see. One such reference is to a book by “Joshua Ibitoye, the Nigerian poet and playwright who was awarded a fellowship to a university in Ohio in the 60s but was swiftly thrown out for not engaging”. Ibitoye is a stand-in for JP Clark, the late Nigerian poet and playwright, and many of the conceits in Seesaw are based on his experiences as a writing fellow in the US in the 1960s, especially his resistance to being stereotyped by his American hosts, as documented in his memoir America, Their America. Perhaps because of this, some of the material about racial stereotyping feels a bit dated. Structurally this is a classic road novel, utilising the complete motif of departure, arrival and return. And it is when Jasper hits the road, on his way to visit his father’s old friend in the midwest, that the style begins to relax. So far, there hasn’t been much engagement with political or racial realities in America – this could of course be because the narrator is living in a privileged bubble with the other fellows, or because he is an outsider, a west African to whom racism and racial discrimination are not an everyday concern. (He does undertake a flippant post-fellowship career, lecturing on how to be anti-racist.) The road trip brings surprising and unexpected encounters, but most of all it shows the author’s powers of observation and nuance in characterisation. Perhaps Jasper, with no reason to judge or cut down the ordinary people he meets, begins to see clearly, and make the reader see, the midwestern landscape, the corn fields, the sunset, the gas stations by the roadside and the vividly described characters in a startling and convincing way. • Seesaw is published by Swift (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.An intruder managed to make their way on to the set of I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! earlier this week after a security breach, ITV has said. It adds to a number of events connected to the show, as the person was removed with “immediate effect” in the days before adverse weather conditions hit north Wales. The series has been filmed at Gwrych Castle, near Abergele, for the second year in a row during the Covid-19 pandemic. The previous 19 editions were filmed in the Australian rainforest. The series was forced to abandon its live show on Friday as Storm Arwen hit the UK with wind speeds of up to 98mph. On Saturday, ITV said the contestants had been removed from the castle while work was carried out to get the production base back up and running. It is understood that the celebrities will individually return to quarantine to ensure they remain Covid secure and will come back to the castle once the whole production is safely re-established. A statement from I’m A Celebrity said: “Whilst we get the production base back up and running after suffering technical issues due to the storm, we have removed the celebrities from the castle.” Earlier on Saturday, ITV announced the technical difficulties caused by the weather conditions meant there would be no new episodes this weekend. The Sun reported that a trespasser evaded six levels of security and came within “touching distance” of the castle’s walls. A statement from the programme said: “A security breach was identified and an intruder was removed from the location with immediate effect. The safety of both our celebrities and our production crew remains our primary concern.” Richard Madeley, a contestant on the show, left on Thursday after being taken to hospital, breaking the Covid bubble in place. The daytime-TV presenter had fallen ill in the early hours of the morning after a “challenge” to earn food in which he had offal and fish guts dumped on him. A day later, the ITV series aired its first pre-recorded show because of weather conditions. Presenters Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly recorded their links early in the evening as part of “precautionary measures” put in place by the broadcaster in response to severe weather warnings. The duo posted a video filmed outside the castle with wind whipping and roaring in the background. “You’ve probably heard we’ve had to record the show a bit earlier tonight because of the winds here at Storm Arwen,” said Donnelly.Inflation is rapidly becoming a problem for the Democratic party and President Joe Biden. They need to get a grip on it before it imperils their wider agenda and sinks their chances of keeping control of Congress in the midterm elections next year. As they think about how to address it, one thing is certain: what they’ve been doing so far isn’t working. A recent poll found that two-thirds of Americans disapprove of how Biden is handling inflation, and the same number consider the issue “very important” in their evaluations of his presidency. Among those Americans concerned about the state of the economy, nearly nine in 10 ranked inflation as a reason why. Clearly something has to change. But inflation, a complicated product of economics and mass psychology, is also devilishly difficult to understand, and even more difficult to control. Presidents have few tools to tame it, and the ones they do have can backfire. The inflation of the 1970s crippled Gerald Ford’s presidency and was doing the same to Jimmy Carter until he opted for an extreme cure – installing a chair of the Federal Reserve who dramatically raised interest rates, stopping inflation but also plunging the economy into a deep recession which handed the White House to Ronald Reagan. These experiences left inflation with a reputation as a presidency-killer, with either the disease itself or the medicine taken to combat it ultimately killing the patient. Despite this, Democratic party elites have been slow to take the latest round of inflation as seriously as they should. American policymakers have not had to deal with levels of inflation as high as this for 30 years, and it shows. Many latched on to the message that inflation was “transitory”, a temporary consequence of the economy revving back into high gear as the country emerged from the coronavirus pandemic. Some liberals have even lashed out at those warning about rising prices, characterizing their concerns as an attempt to undermine support for Democrats’ plans to spend more to advance social welfare and combat climate change. Whatever the economic merits of the argument – and many economists still expect inflation to start falling soon – this response has been politically toxic. Democrats risk appearing out of touch on an issue of profound concern to many Americans. In order to change tack, they need to communicate to voters that they feel their pain and that they’re fighting to make things better. There are already signs that Democrats from the president on down are starting to get it. Biden recently gave a speech on the topic and announced the release of 50m barrels of oil from the US strategic petroleum reserve, an attempt to bring down gas prices at the pump. He also pointed the finger at oil companies for charging consumers high prices even as the wholesale price of oil has dropped over the past few weeks. But Democrats should also be doing more to point the finger at the businesses who are helping to foment the problem. The Wall Street Journal reports that companies in many different sectors are using this inflationary spike as a cover to raise prices faster than their costs, essentially betting that consumers won’t object when they already see prices rising all around them. According to the report, nearly two out of three big, publicly traded US companies have seen larger profit margins this year than in the same period in 2019. Inflation might be hurting consumers, but it’s a boom year for corporate America. Democrats ought to use all the tools of government to highlight and combat these abuses. As Biden has been finding out, public anger over inflation tends to be directed towards the incumbent president – and the only way to survive might be to redirect it at a more appropriate target. The presidential bully pulpit can be used to highlight corporate abuses and regulatory investigations, such as the one already announced by the FTC into the oil and gas sector, can hold industries to account and combat potentially illegal practices. Nor should Democrats stop there. They control both houses of Congress and should consider holding congressional hearings to name and shame particularly egregious price-gougers. Whether any of these measures will actually serve to lower prices is an open question. But the only responsible thing to do is try. Corporate price rises risk kicking off an inflationary spiral in which the initial reasons for rising prices become secondary to a general feeding frenzy, and anything that can be done to discourage it is healthy. Administration actions might also serve to dampen consumers’ expectations of future inflation, which will reduce the risk of a spiral. Because the media narrative is driven by inflation that has already happened, reassurance remains important even after prices have begun to stabilize. But even if we shouldn’t hold our breath for these actions to actually slow the rate of price increases, it’s important to show leadership on this issue for the simple reason that it’s what worried voters want and deserve. To be seen to be acting and pointing a finger at those to blame is smart politics, especially if this bout of inflation does indeed prove to be transitory and prices begin to fall next year. Meanwhile, corporate America has to decide if it really wants to undermine the Democrats and risk handing stewardship of the economy back to the party of Donald Trump. With the modern Republican party increasingly the party of incompetence and ignorance, self-restraint might be the better option. As Democrats should seek to remind the price-gougers, profiting less now will help everyone mightily down the road. Andrew Gawthorpe is a historian of the United States at Leiden University, and host of the podcast America ExplainedA baked alaska feels really extravagant and full of effort. Truth is, though, it doesn’t have to be. A baked alaska is really adaptable to what you like, and can be assembled in advance, ready to whip out at the table, blowtorch and impress. Here, I’ve made a hazelnut sponge to complement shop-bought salted caramel ice-cream, but you can, of course, change that to suit your palate. Homemade ice-cream is even more impressive, but seriously, when it’s December and we’re all rushing around, I don’t think anyone will judge you for not making your own. Baked alaska Prep 45 min, plus freezing time Cook 30 min Serves 6 For the hazelnut sponge 100g unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing 100g golden caster sugar 2 eggs A pinch of salt 60g plain flour ¼ tsp baking powder 60g roasted ground hazelnuts For the swiss meringue 120g egg white 200g caster sugar A handful of roasted hazelnuts 2 x tubs of your favourite ice-cream Line the base of a 20cm sandwich tin with baking paper and grease the sides with butter. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. In the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or in a large bowl with a whisk, cream the butter and sugar until pale and fluffy. Mix the eggs one at a time, making sure it’s well combined before adding the next. Combine the salt, flour, baking powder and ground hazelnuts in a small bowl, then add to the butter mixture and mix gently to combine. Scoop into the lined tin, level the top with the back of a spoon and bake for 25-30 minutes, or until a skewer comes out clean. Leave to cool fully. Line a 12½cm-diameter bowl with greaseproof paper (or a few layers of clingfilm), leaving enough overhang to help you lift out the frozen ice-cream later. Push your chosen ice-cream into the lined bowl, then freeze solid. Bring a large, deep pan filled halfway with water to a gentle simmer. Whisk the egg whites and sugar in a large bowl that will sit over, but not touch, the boiling water, then set the bowl over the simmering water and stir with a whisk until the sugar dissolves. (You can check by feeling the mixture between your fingers: it shouldn’t be at all grainy.) Lift the bowl off the water pan and whisk on a medium speed until cool – the meringue mix should now be voluminous. Trim the cooled sponge so it’s 17½cm in diameter with a flat top. Take the ice-cream out of the freezer and flip on to the sponge and pull off the wrapping. Spoon the meringue all over the ice-cream and sponge – it should be thick and full of peaks. Blowtorch immediately and serve garnished with the roasted hazelnuts, or freeze and blowtorch just before serving. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match Ice-cream isn’t the easiest thing to pair with wine, though the meringue will mitigate its palate-numbing iciness. I’d be inclined to go for something sweet and strong, maybe served in shots. Picking up on the hazelnuts, that could be Frangelico (£15.95 Tanners, £19.50 Ocado, 20%), or one of the tawny ports mentioned in my column this week.They used to say at Hearts that you would barely know when Aaron Hickey was in the room. The crucial anomaly was that a shy, understated off-field presence was tenacious and composed after crossing the white line. Hickey was always destined for great things. Fourteen months on from departing Tynecastle, Hickey is flourishing in Serie A with Bologna. Milan have been credited with an interest. There is definite attention from the Premier League – partly linked to the added value of Scottish players in a post-Brexit world – in a 19-year-old who has continued on a steep upward curve under Sinisa Mihajlovic. Similarity of position between Hickey, typically a left wing-back, and Bologna’s manager – who forged a successful playing career of his own in Italy – has undoubtedly been significant. “He gives me a lot of one-to-one tips,” Hickey says. “On the ball, off the ball, defensively and attacking-wise he is very good at telling me stuff.” A Hickey smile follows. “He can lose it sometimes … but he is a top manager.” The world has wanted to know about Hickey for a while. Not that he has been perfectly inclined to open up. “Listen, I don’t mind doing these things, it’s fine,” he says. “It’s just not something I would volunteer for.” Can he plead ignorance to Italian and so avoid club media duties? “I can skip most of it but they bring me a translator for press conferences.” Ouch. Hickey’s case is a fascinating one. It owes plenty to the fortitude he continues to hide so well, this time in discussion from his apartment in central Bologna. As a teenager, he left Celtic’s youth system to join Hearts on the basis he foresaw a first-team pathway. That boldness was rewarded; Hickey was outstanding in the 2019 Scottish Cup final a month shy of his 17th birthday. Celtic were impressed enough to try to buy Hickey back. There would be no return to green and white. Manchester City and Bayern Munich also failed with attempts to coax Hickey their way. At the player’s behest, it was the lesser-worn path to northern Italy in a £1.5m move. The smart money would bet on that figure multiplying umpteen times for Hickey’s next transfer. “I came to see Bologna and immediately liked the feel of it all,” Hickey says. “The training ground, the people, the city. Serie A was a big attraction, this felt like a good move. I also thought there may well be more opportunity to play here than at a lot of the other teams. I am very happy with how it has all worked out, with the choice that I made. They have all been good decisions so far. They have worked out the way I wanted. I have just looked at what provided the most opportunity.” That Hickey has remained a starter this season is even more impressive given further context. He contracted Covid-19 in Italy last December. In March he required surgery on a shoulder injury, which curtailed his 2020-21 campaign. Scottish players have such limited experience when it comes to success abroad that pessimists sensed Hickey’s Bologna period might be brief. Little did they know. “So far it has gone really well,” he adds. “Coming in to the season, I thought it might be a case of working my way back into the team after my injuries, that maybe I’d get a few games, but I’ve managed to play a lot and even add a couple of goals as well. So I’m very happy. I didn’t expect to get into the team so early and play so regularly. “You go to bed thinking you are going to be playing in the San Siro the next day. That’s a bit of a ‘wow’ moment. It has all been such a great experience.” Except, perhaps, from facing Achraf Hakimi, formerly of Internazionale, whom Hickey cites as easily his toughest opponent. How did the Scot handle the winger? “Not very well. We lost 3-1. He scored two.” The smile is back. Hickey’s versatility is yet another key attribute. His coaches at Hearts used to debate whether he was naturally left- or right-footed. He has played right-back, centre-back and centre-midfield alongside left-sided defensive roles. Pieced together, it is no wonder Hickey attracts admiring glances. “It’s a good feeling knowing there is interest from big clubs,” he says. “For now my head is in Bologna but I want to try and go to one of the big clubs in the Premier League or similar. That would be the ultimate thing for any footballer.” If Hickey is remotely homesick, he masks it well. “My pals all have jobs or are at college,” he explains. “They are living at home. One plays for Queen’s Park. It’s all very different. I don’t know whether they are jealous of me or not. They’d never let me know if they are. “Sometimes I think it would be good to stay in Glasgow all the time again but when I get back out here, it’s fine. I miss my family and friends but I enjoy it out here, living by myself.” Hickey’s only social media tool, Instagram, is “used to see what is happening with my pals”. With Liam Henderson at Empoli, Scotland has two players in the Italian top flight. Until now, only Graeme Souness, Joe Jordan and Denis Law had represented the country in Serie A. Sharp development by Hickey means there is already cause to ponder what happens next.Born in Stoke-on-Trent, AJ and Curtis Pritchard have established themselves as the hard-grafting good guys of reality TV. Spending much of their childhood and teens working as professional dancers and representing Britain in world and European championships, they are now primetime fixtures: AJ first appeared on screens in Britain’s Got Talent in 2013 and has since competed as a professional on four series of Strictly Come Dancing and as a contestant on I’m a Celebrity; Curtis’s career blossomed as a finalist on 2019’s Love Island. Next month, they star in Cinderella for Wolverhampton Grand’s panto. They live together in south London. Curtis Growing up in the countryside in Cheshire, we were always getting dirty in the garden. Before we started dancing, we were into extreme sports and we’d do everything together – build dens, rob Dad’s toolbox, saw wood. Typical lads really. As teenagers, we could have got drunk. We just didn’t. My school mates were partying while I was representing our country in Russia. There were parties in the dance world, though, plus a couple of people I fancied. I was a bit mischievous. At one major competition when I was a teenager, nobody could find me for a few hours. I was with a girl. I ended up being late for a competition round. My dad absolutely bollocked me. There’s always rivalry between us, but never jealousy. AJ is 15 months older and such a great big brother, always looking out for me. It was amazing having someone slightly older on my side at school. The odd few people would take the piss out of us for performing, but we’d always have each other’s back. I suppose that kind of mentality carried on into our 20s. Back in 2018, on Boxing Day, we were on a night out in our home town, Nantwich. We hadn’t seen each other in ages – AJ was doing Strictly and I was doing Dancing With the Stars in Ireland – so we went to this upper-class place, a nice club. We were dancing, minding our own business. Then someone pushed me as hard as they could. As I turned, a load of people went to grab AJ. I stood in front of him. There were eight lads – and I just took a beating from them. My face was smashed up. I had a flipped cartilage and had to have a knee operation. I couldn’t walk for a while. It was fight or flight, but I’d do that for anyone in my family. I’d sacrifice my life. Without hesitation. Fame hasn’t changed mine and AJ’s relationship, but at times it has been hard. When I went on Love Island, I didn’t know what to expect. According to the papers, I was the fat one. Obviously not nice. I was a bit more overweight than the lads in there as they were shredded. I got into good shape, but then I just ate cheesecake every day – five slices with every meal. It was stressful – sometimes we slept for three hours a night. But I loved it. It was an all‑inclusive, paid-for holiday – and I came home and made more money than I had in my entire life. Now I’ve got all these incredible opportunities. Me and AJ live together, but I’m going to move out, because while it’s fantastic, I’ve had enough. It’s his place, so I’ve always got to ask if I can bring anyone over. He pays all the bills. I’m 25 and I don’t want to have to ask my older brother: can I see this girl? Can I bring her back home? He’s also so clean. He has to have everything perfect. We do get on each other’s nerves. We hate each other. We drive each other mad. But we’ve always got each other. And I’m only moving around the corner. AJ Our parents ran a dance studio, Pritchards’ Dance &amp; Fitness Academy, from our house. When I was a kid, I’d go to bed upstairs, wake up in the morning and come downstairs to dance. I had a very clinical routine. Everything was scheduled so I could move forward: the same lunch at the exact same time, TV at the exact same time. All my clothes were folded and ready to go. My pencils would be sharpened before school. When you’re trying to compete for No 1 in the world, everything has to be ridiculously detailed; I apply that to my everyday life. Even when I’m making a cup of tea, it has to be perfectly filled to the top. If I know everything is clean and in the right place I know that I won’t waste any time grabbing it. Everything is 100% efficient. Mum and Dad thought this approach was a positive thing. I know it might sound weird, but it’s kept me going. It’s a fallback. I can go back to my quiet place, sit down in my room and everything is perfect. If you’ve got a clean mind, a clean body, everything is easier to get the task at hand done. Me and Curt couldn’t be more different. Whatever happens on his side of the door stays on his side of the door, so I don’t have to see it. I never wanted to rebel growing up. Maybe I’ll have a midlife crisis. I’ll probably just buy an expensive car. For me, life is about rewards. The first two years of Strictly, I refused to pay for coffee in London. I come from the north and I’m not paying for anything. I get the underground. Claim back all my expenses. Not buying a coffee for two years has meant that I had a deposit to buy a flat. I always buy my own birthday or Christmas presents. If I want to get a new bag, I’ll go to the gym for four weeks straight, and I’ll eat healthily and won’t touch sugar. Then I can buy the bag. As I’ve always been focused on dancing and my career, I never had that many friends. Curtis was always very sociable – and it’s still that way. If I want to go out, I end up bringing his friends, so it’s quite simple for me. On the night Curtis got attacked, I was just thinking: what’s best to do in the moment? It wasn’t a winnable situation. Curt’s 6ft 3in and I’m 5ft 7in – to pick him up and escape with eight people frantically kicking and punching, it wasn’t going to work. I had to get the kitchen staff to step in and call 999. Afterwards, both of us talked about it – if you don’t talk about things like that, it festers. I like to keep my emotions bottled up and away from people normally, but with this it really helped to open up. Of course you question their motives – was it jealousy? We’ll never know the answer. From being a nobody to suddenly being on TV with 12 million people watching on Strictly was quite a lot. It was the same for Curtis. When me and Mum and Dad watched him walk into the Love Island villa, he was wearing white jeans. We thought: he’d never normally do that – so he must be happy. Like me, Curtis is very honest, but when he broke up with Amy on Love Island, it was stressful; it’s a high-pressure situation, he looked sunburnt, he looked dehydrated, and the way it came out was brutally honest. People said he’s not genuine – why would you make coffee for everyone, why would you hold the door open? Well, that’s Curtis! It’s the way we’ve been brought up, to help each other and help other people. It’s much easier to be kind than not.Barry Smith spent this summer clinking as he walked. The 26-year-old painter from Devon sold nitrous oxide at four UK festivals. Before each event, he loaded his van with 20 boxes containing 480 canisters, bought online at 25p each, and hundreds of balloons. (This is considered small-time in the nitrous oxide racket.) His pricing is flexible: a balloon base rate of two for £5 (a markup of 1,000%) or five for £10. But prices can plummet to zero for mates or skyrocket for strangers once he’s running low. Standing largely in one spot, holding a nitrous dispenser, or “cracker”, that resembles a coffee flask, Barry (not his real name) handed balloon after balloon to revellers attracted by a high-pitched hissing noise. He used the cracker to dispense the gas into latex balloons, while his girlfriend handled the payments, either in cash or by using a card machine borrowed from a friend’s ice-cream company. “It’s like a family business,” he jokes. Trade is brisk. “People just swarm at you – everyone’s gagging for it.” Barry’s main objective was simply to cover the cost of a festival ticket, make some pocket money and have fun. For him, part of the attraction is chatting to wasted partygoers (he also has no problem getting high on his own supply). “I’d say we made about 600 quid profit at each festival,” he says. “It’s crazy that people spend all that money for such a short high.” As for festival security, Barry says: “You just try and be a bit sly.” His van is rarely checked at the gate. Once, he was standing in the middle of the crowd and all the whooshing and huffing attracted a steward’s attention. Barry saw security pushing through the crowd. “I just put the cracker down my trousers and acted normally,” he says. When the stewards reached him, they walked straight past. Nitrous oxide, or laughing gas, or “nos”, a relatively niche drug for decades, is now the second most popular drug among 16- to 24-year-olds behind cannabis, according to the Office for National Statistics. Its 2019/20 England and Wales Crime Survey reported that 8.7% of 16- to 24-year-olds had taken it, up from 6.1% in 2012/2013. It is very much a young person’s drug: two in three users are under 24. As people receded from public spaces during lockdown, piles of little silver canisters that once contained nitrous oxide cropped up instead. They were in parks, on roads, on beaches. “It’s a teenage drug,” says Becky, a 22-year-old from Stoke-on-Trent, who began taking it when she was 14. (She, like all the users I speak to, is not using her real name.) “There was nowhere for kids to go – they couldn’t go to the pub, they wouldn’t stay at home. You’d see them hanging out in the streets doing nos.” Politicians helped to whip up a moral panic, uniting MPs from both main parties. In July last year, Labour MP Rosie Duffield criticised young people for “indulging a quick lockdown high”, arguing that it promoted antisocial behaviour. Home secretary Priti Patel has promised to take tough action on the gas, which is likely to include criminalising possession, and in September ordered a second review into its effects (a first in 2015 did not see sufficient evidence for harm to justify criminalising possession). But will a crackdown work? Since the government first banned sales for the recreational use of nitrous oxide in 2016, large numbers of dealers have emerged – from small-scale teen sellers to mid-level festival entrepreneurs and a minority of gang-affiliated dealers. And it is young people who have staked out control of the trade. Today, nitrous oxide is more readily available than ever, says Harry Sumnall, professor in substance use at Liverpool John Moores University. If the Home Office does clamp down on it further, drug policy experts – many of them former government advisers – fear that this risks criminalising the many thousands of young people who use it. “I can’t see the enforcement approach doing anything positive,” said Steve Rolles, of the non-profit Transform Drug Policy Foundation. “It could cause a lot of harm: increasing risky behaviours [and] criminalising young people, which is far more dangerous than nitrous anyway.” *** Moral panic aside, nitrous oxide is not illegal to possess. It is a staple of commercial kitchens, mostly used to whip cream. But around 2013, it began taking off as a mainstream party drug. The gas is commonly dispensed into balloons and inhaled, and is popular with young people for its lack of smell or after-effect – users are totally sober in minutes. It induces a short, 30-second high. “You get a weird sense of detachment and giggliness,” says Josh, 26, an occasional user. Many people experience a “helicopter effect” – the feeling of a chopper thundering overhead. A minority experience visual hallucinations. In the early 2010s, young footballers including Jack Grealish and Raheem Sterling were captured allegedly taking the then “legal high”. Tabloids began labelling it “hippy crack”, attacking celebrity users and complaining of litter from its mercury bullet bulbs. When the government banned the sale of it for recreational use in 2016, under the Psychoactive Substances Act (PSA), limits were placed on buying boxes in bulk. But because it could be legally used in catering, casual purchases proved impossible to suppress. An estimated 25% of corner shops, not to mention websites such as Amazon, sell boxes, often for just 20p a canister (playful reviews on the online giant’s site include such lines as, “I whipped a lot of cream with this” and, “The cream tasted so nice, it made my head feel all fuzzy”). There are stiff penalties for selling nitrous oxide for recreational purposes. Sellers found guilty can face up to seven years in prison or an unlimited fine. Although prison terms are rare, this February a 24-year-old dealer from Newcastle, who also sold cannabis, was jailed for 27 months. There are currently no penalties for possession (except in prisons). After a small dip in usage in 2017 and 2018 following the introduction of the PSA, consumption jumped back up in 2019; the main legacy of the act was to usher nitrous off the streets and into private house parties. When Heather, 23, was studying at a northern university before the pandemic, she says every party worth attending included a “nos bar”. When she and her housemates threw their own bash, they bought 600 canisters from a dealer, set up a “till” on a table, and worked in shifts, selling balloons for £2.50 a hit. The venture paid for the party’s speakers, decorations, smoke machine and strobe lighting. “We got proper supermarket-style queues,” Heather says. Some sellers take peddling nitrous to more extreme levels – treating it like a day job. James, a 19-year-old student from London, started selling nos aged 16. A couple of his friends were already cashing in and he wanted a part of the action. His friends’ suppliers loaned him 10 boxes on credit – his first injection of venture capital. Soon, he was travelling across England by train, where he found eager customers at university parties, underground raves and festivals. He claims that one weekend he earned £20,000 by bribing a festival bouncer, smuggling in tens of thousands of canisters and working the crowds. (I put the figure to several other sellers – they say it sounds believable.) “It can be very profitable when you buy in bulk,” James says. He would stuff coins and notes into his boxer shorts, his makeshift cash register, and later stash the money in his room – a bank account was deemed too risky. James found he could easily tap into a market of students and casual users from affluent backgrounds – “The Oxford white kids who wanted coke and nos. I’m sort of like an upper-class drug dealer,” he says. He’d drop his Snapchat handle in university groups and watch his phone ping with orders. *** Nitrous oxide, N20, was discovered in 1772 by the English chemist Joseph Priestley, who called it a “remarkable species of air”. The gas was popularised by chemist Humphry Davy, as both an anaesthetic in dentistry and an intoxicant at upper-class parties of the late Georgian era. (In 1800, Davy reported himself “stamping or laughing” after inhaling, and experiencing “a highly pleasurable thrilling” through his body.) People have continued to take nitrous oxide both medically and recreationally ever since (think of Charlie Chaplin’s 1914 comedy Laughing Gas, set in a dentist’s office) before it surfaced in mainstream British culture in the 2010s. It has never presented a major public health danger. An average of four people a year died from nitrous oxide abuse in England and Wales between 2010 and 2019, “which is of course a tragedy but absolutely insignificant compared with other drug-related deaths,” says Sumnall of Liverpool John Moores. In comparison, the UK recorded 7,423 alcohol-related deaths in England and Wales in 2020, and 64,000 people in England died of smoking-related causes in 2019. Nitrous oxide deaths are commonly via asphyxiation – when users inhaled with a bag over their head or straight from a pressurised canister. Nick Hickmott, who works in early intervention and harm reduction for teenagers in Kent, says there is a lot of misinformation about nitrous oxide, largely because of tabloid media coverage. “Young people are coming to us with the idea that nitrous oxide can freeze your brain and you can die,” he says. “That kind of scaremongering, and lack of education, has perpetuated myths.” Hickmott’s role is to talk frankly with teenagers about drugs and their potential harms – not to encourage use, but to cut through to the facts. However, there are other dangers. People might fall and injure themselves, and the gas can cause a B12 deficiency, leading, in a small number of users, to the development of peripheral neuropathy (nerve damage). About 3.3% of all users experience pins and needles, a symptom of nerve damage, according to a 2019 analysis of three years of Global Drug Survey data. Then there’s the problem of overuse. At an after-party about 18 months ago, James, the young seller, was sitting around a table in a student flat. Everyone was having fun, laughing and slamming hundreds of balloons. Then he saw something vigorously shaking at the edge of his vision: it was his friend having a seizure. They called an ambulance. “It was really scary,” he says. The friend was OK, but doctors warned he had nearly had a stroke – the cause wasn’t clear. James, shaken by the experience, began to confront his own habits. “I would be having a balloon when I woke up,” he says. It affected his concentration: “I felt brain dead, getting to the point where I’d struggle to read.” He says that since he cut down, his mental clarity has bounced back. “We know really heavy use can have some health effects,” says Niamh Eastwood, executive director of drugs and harm reduction charity Release. “But that’s like coffee: if you were to drink 40 cups a day, you would not be in a very good place.” *** Nitrous oxide is here to stay. So given its widespread use and relative safety, government policy should prioritise “smart education over blunt regulation”, says Adam Winstock, a consultant psychiatrist, addiction medicine specialist and UCL professor. But this is a path the government seems to be careening away from. Before David Cameron’s government outlawed the selling of it for recreational use, Joshua, then a charity worker, headed to Parliament Square, where he joined a group of about 100 people – other students and older hippies – protesting against the proposed law with a “mass inhalation” event. People huffed balloons against the clangs of Big Ben, as police officers stood by. Joshua, now 30, thinks further criminalisation would be bad news. “If somebody wants to get a tattoo or piercing, you say, ‘That’s their body, that’s their choice.’” In his view, the same principle should hold for drugs, but he believes that too often politicians take an “infantilising attitude” to people getting high. What’s more, given the sustained popularity of nitrous oxide, it doesn’t seem to work. Drug experts now expect the government to reclassify nitrous oxide under the Misuse of Drugs Act – criminalising possession and increasing the penalties. A Home Office spokesperson points out the possible serious long-term effects of using it, such as vitamin B12 deficiency and anaemia. They add that because of its popularity with young people, “it is right that we ask independent experts to consider potential harms”. Yet given its legitimate use in catering and medicine, it is unclear how criminalisation will be enforced. “There’s a huge loophole,” Sumnall says. Some court trials have already collapsed over confusion about its exemptions. This is all part of the wider story of Britain’s war on drugs, in which UK policy has drawn intense international criticism. This month, Helen Clark, chair of the Global Commission on Drug Policy and the former New Zealand prime minister, criticised it as “costly and self-defeating”, adding: “You need the Home Office to get off its high horse of oppression and prohibition, and say: ‘Look, we’ve had this wrong, our prisons are thronged with people on drug offences, marginalised swathes of people.’” Young people who use nitrous casually are horrified that a short high could wreck their lives. “The idea that someone out with their friends might have a gram of weed on them or a few nos canisters, and then, if they’re caught, that’s them done – that’s way too harsh a punishment,” says one of the users I speak to. Chandos, a 27-year-old photography assistant in London, fears a new law will target young people of colour and the underprivileged. When he was 20, before selling recreational nitrous oxide was illegal, Chandos used to hawk it to friends for spare cash at house parties. The government’s impending plans would have jeopardised his future. “It criminalises specific types of people – I guess me, because I used to sell it, and because I’m a black male,” he says. Black people in England and Wales are already seven times more likely to be stopped and searched than white people. “So now, with potentially heightened stop and searches, it’s giving more power to fewer people with less accountability,” Chandos says. The young people I spoke to were not surprised by the Home Office’s apparent plans – on nitrous oxide, or wider drug policy. For them, it cements their complete lack of trust in the government. And they are not alone. Drug policy experts say criminalising possession would prove a huge waste of police time. Barry, the festival seller, thinks Patel’s rhetoric is all hot air. What’s to get stressed about, he asks: “It’s just a little bit of a buzz, innit,” he says. “If they started putting massive fines on it, obviously I wouldn’t do it.” Others don’t sound so easily deterred. If Amazon and corner shops are still stocking it, many will risk it, hoping to outfox the police. “If the government cracks down, I don’t really care,” says Katie, another dealer I speak to. She has sold at festivals for five years because “it’s such easy money”. In the meantime, street pedlars are doing a roaring trade. At midnight in Shoreditch, London, I came across a platoon of a dozen young boys standing 100 yards from three police officers in fluorescent jackets. They clutched balloons to their mouths, chatted to girls and sold nos. One seller, who looked no older than 21, held a 580g Gold Whip N2O canister – coveted among sellers for its quick dispensing – under his arm. “How many for £5?” I asked. “Two,” he replied, “but you have to find your own balloons.” Some names have been changed.It is a Saturday morning in November, and Afghan MP Nazifa Yousufi Bek gathers up her notes and prepares to head for the office. But instead of jumping in an armoured car bound for the mahogany-lined parliament in Kabul, her journey is by bus from a Greek hotel to a migrants’ organisation in the centre of Athens. There, taking her place on a folding chair, she inaugurates the Afghan women’s parliament in – exile. “Our people have nothing. Mothers are selling their children,” she tells a room packed with her peers. “We must raise our voices, we must put a stop to this,” says Yousufi Bek, 35, who fled Afghanistan with her husband and three young children after the Taliban swept to power in August. Some around her nod in agreement; others quietly weep. Yousufi Bek, from the northern Takhar province, is one of 28 female MPs who have found refuge in Greece, a country most had never visited before. Until recently, these women made up more than 40% of Afghanistan’s female MPs. Now they are confronted with an unrecognisable alphabet and an uncertain future. They want to combat an illegitimate regime that has stripped women of basic rights and plunged their country deeper into poverty and hunger amid an economic meltdown caused by the American withdrawal and sanctions. November sunshine pours through the windows as the room buzzes with energy. The women take turns speaking, standing up to address their peers. They express opposition – to the Taliban, to what they described as Pakistan’s outsized influence on recent events – as they would in parliamentary sessions in Kabul, by rhythmically drumming their fingers on the table. During meetings with Greece’s prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, and president, Katerina Sakellaropoulou, the MPs have pushed the country’s authorities to advocate for Afghan women with other EU member states. They have also petitioned several ambassadors, including the US envoy, to pressure their governments to consider human rights when working with the Taliban. Shagufa Noorzai came up with the idea for a parallel parliament in exile with Yousufi Bek. A teacher before becoming a legislator, while in office Noorzai focused on improving the financial status of women and set up a foundation aimed at supporting homeless children and widows in her native Helmand province. “I want women in Afghanistan to think, ‘Shagufa didn’t forget us. Shagufa wants to do something for us’,” says Noorzai, who at 24 became the youngest member of parliament when she was elected in 2018. Many of the MPs have seen fierce opposition when seeking election; Yousafi Bek’s campaign was the target of a deadly suicide bomber. In the coming weeks, the MPs will hold virtual sessions with Joe Biden’s administration, US Congress members and UN security council officials, which will be facilitated by Mina’s List, a non-profit that supports women’s political leadership and is working with the Afghan female lawmakers. On the agenda: the women’s rights crisis under Taliban rule, ensuring aid reaches the millions of starving Afghans facing a cruel winter and keeping pressure on western nations to provide safe passage for Afghan women who worked as judges, prosecutors and activists, as well as those who served in the security forces. “Our intention is to really leverage all of those networks, to amplify the women’s agenda, to amplify their platforms, to help them have opportunities,” says Tanya Henderson, Mina List’s founder and executive director. Emotions were high when the women gathered for the first time at a community centre run by Melissa Network, a grassroots network for female migrants and refugees that played a role in their evacuation. “You realise how much power lies with women,” says Nadina Christopoulou, an anthropologist and director at Melissa Network. Thousands of women have come through her doors in recent years, but this is the most high-profile group. “Women are half of society, so we are very important. You can’t hide us,” says Noorzai, in the small hotel room she shares with her mother, brother and sister just outside of Athens. Flowering pink bougainvillaea trees climb the whitewashed walls of a holiday resort that has seen better days. The MPs and their families are its only guests, filtering in and out of a food hall serving chicken gyros and chips before strolling along the beach at dusk. It has not been an easy adjustment: the basic lodgings are a far cry from the opulent houses of many Afghan politicians in Kabul and their home towns. Wiping away tears with her headscarf, long-serving MP Homa Ahmadi shows a recent photo on her phone of Taliban MPs in Kabul. Where she once sat surrounded by female peers and men in suits, there are now only men wearing turbans and sporting long beards. Ahmadi, 46, represented eastern Logar province for 15 years, winning a seat in all three of the country’s elections. No country has recognised the Taliban government, though senior officials from some, including the UK, have met the group’s leadership in recent weeks, where they advocated for women’s rights. But those delegations contained no women, sparking outcry from prominent Afghan women and causing German MEP Hannah Neumann last week to criticise such meetings as “counteracting the whole argument”. The parliament in exile wants to bring to safety the nine female MPs who remain behind in Afghanistan. They are in hiding, a traumatic predicament the women know all too well. “[Since August], the Taliban have killed schoolgirls, policewomen and women in government. The family members are too afraid to speak up,” says Fawzia Hamidi, 48, a lawmaker from northern Balkh province. Formerly a prosecutor for cases of violence against women, Hamidi describes recent murders in the region as the tip of the iceberg. Fearful of reprisal killings or torture by the Taliban, the MPs who fled first went into hiding before escaping to Greece, often in disguise or behind the anonymity of a face mask. Some flew through Iran and Georgia before arriving in Athens, in a complicated rescue effort that involved New York-based philanthropist Amed Khan. Others, such as Halima Askari from central Wardak province, crossed overland to Uzbekistan. In her second trimester of pregnancy, a doctor in Tashkent told her the baby’s oxygen levels were severely depleted due to stress. Now in her third trimester, she will give birth in Greece. Hamidi describes how she was separated from her five-year-old daughter, Hadia, as she entered Uzbekistan under the cover of darkness. “Hadia didn’t have a passport. So I was on one side of the border, and she on the other,” she says through muffled sobs. She is still waiting to be reunited with her daughter. Most of the MPs in Greece are applying for asylum in other countries, such as Canada, the US and Britain. The MPs have found unlikely protection in Greece, a country that recently extended a border wall with Turkey with radars and drones designed to deter Afghans from reaching Europe. They want to advocate on behalf of the thousands of Afghans in limbo in Greece, where they are the largest population of asylum seekers, with few job prospects and little opportunity for reintegration with society. “Greece is only the beginning. We will start small, we will start again,” Noorzai says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The first suspected cases of the Omicron Covid variant in Germany and the Czech Republic are being investigated, as Dutch authorities scramble to see if 61 passengers from South Africa who tested positive for Covid-19 have the new variant. Omicron, first identified in South Africa and known officially as B.1.1.529, has already been detected in travellers in Belgium, Hong Kong and Israel, according to reports. Australia and several other countries joined those imposing restrictions on travel from southern Africa on Saturday after the discovery of the variant – described by the World Health Organization as “of concern” – triggered a selloff on global stock markets In Germany, a minister in the state of Hesse said on Saturday the variant had probably arrived in a traveller returning from South Africa. “Last night several Omicron-typical mutations were found in a traveller returning from South Africa,” tweeted Kai Klose, the social affairs minister in Hesse, home to Frankfurt international airport. Dozens of people who arrived in the Netherlands on two flights from South Africa on Friday tested positive for Covid. Tests are under way to establish if any have the Omicron variant after arriving at Schiphol airport in Amsterdam. The planes arrived from Johannesburg and Cape Town shortly after the Dutch government banned flights from some southern African countries. The local health authority said those who tested positive would have to quarantine for seven days if they had symptoms and five days if not. Those who tested positive were being housed in a guarded isolation hotel close to the airport, reported NL Times. The 539 passengers who tested negative were allowed to return home or continue their journeys on to other countries. One of the passengers onboard was Stephanie Nolen, the New York Times global health reporter, who was on her first flight since the start of the pandemic. She tested negative but said passengers were being kept in a small space at the airport, with many not wearing face masks. She tweeted: “Probably 30% of people are wearing no mask or only over mouth. Dutch authorities not enforcing. We’re just all in this unventilated room at hour 12, breathing on each other.” Meanwhile, the Czech Republic is examining a suspected Omicron case detected in a person who spent time in Namibia. “A lab is checking a possible find of a positive specimen of the Omicron variant. We are awaiting confirmation or refutation of the case,” the spokesperson for the National Institute of Public Health, Štěpánka Čechová, said in a statement on Saturday. Since the discovery of the variant, described by senior British scientists as the “worst ever” since the pandemic began, countries around the world have been scrambling to introduce travel restrictions. Japan has announced it will tighten border controls for the southern African nations of Mozambique, Malawi and Zambia, requiring a 10-day quarantine for any entrants. The new rules will take effect from midnight local time and come a day after it tightened border controls for people arriving from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Namibia and Lesotho. Qatar Airways said on Saturday it had banned entry to travellers from South Africa, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. Travel bans from certain African countries have been introduced by the UK, US, Brazil, Turkey, Sri Lanka, Oman and Thailand, among others. Australia plans to introduce a 14-day quarantine for citizens travelling from nine of the southern African countries. “Anyone who is not a citizen of Australia or their dependents, and who has been in African countries where the Omicron variant has been detected and spread within the past 14 days will not be able to enter Australia,” the health minister, Greg Hunt, told a press briefing on Saturday. However, the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, told officials to review plans to ease travel restrictions due to rising concerns over the variant. Additional reporting by agencies.Wagner maintained that the kernel of The Ring of the Nibelung lay in the second of the cycle’s four operas, The Valkyrie, in which Wotan, flawed leader of the gods, gives an exhaustive account of the backstory. The reason English National Opera began its five-year Ring adventure here, conducted by Martyn Brabbins and directed by Richard Jones, may be more pragmatic. With human emotion at its heart, The Valkyrie can feel like a self-contained work. It lasts five hours, with two extended (and usefully lucrative) intervals. It’s an event. The cycle’s first opera, Rheingold, is roughly half that length, with no interval. There was certainly a sense of occasion at the Coliseum last week. Elite Wagnerians – singers, conductors – were out in force to hear what a new generation of British performers could offer in this overwhelming score. The cast, mostly new to their roles, has some of the best British singers: Rachel Nicholls (Brünnhilde), Matthew Rose (Wotan), Nicky Spence (Siegmund), Emma Bell (Sieglinde), Brindley Sherratt (Hunding) and Susan Bickley (Fricka), richly contrasting voices all, from the beauty of Nicholls’s steely, pinpoint accuracy to Bell’s more diffuse warmth, to Sherratt’s snarling, dark-toned heft. Their performances haven’t yet gelled, but the first outing of a new Ring always feels like work in progress, for musicians and production team alike. This will not comfort a paying audience looking for a fully achieved result and at least a degree of spectacle. The opening night was blighted. The final ring of fire, when the erring Brünnhilde is consigned to a flame-encircled rock, had to be abandoned for safety reasons. With an aerial Brünnhilde wrapped in Wotan’s all-weather red anorak, it had the makings of something interesting, especially with Nicholls’s androgynous, childlike portrayal of the Valkryie. Spence, surely born for this central role of Siegmund, had a cold, but still sang, and acted, with lyricism, magnetism and tenderness. He alone had impeccable diction. Elsewhere, John Deathridge’s new translation, literary rather than colloquial, was often lost. Bickley, looking a million dollars as the stern goddess of marriage, Fricka – she who puts her foot down at incest – was suffering from an even worse cold than Spence. She walked the part, with one of the collectively impressive gaggle of Valkyries, mezzo-soprano Claire Barnett-Jones, singing from a side box. Jones goes back a long way with the Ring – from half a cycle with Scottish Opera in the late 1980s to a full production for the Royal Opera House in the 1990s, arguably ahead of its time. Today his latex-clad Rhinemaidens would barely raise an eyebrow. Then, the staging was widely derided as a comic-book insult. Jones’s international reputation now established, ENO has put its faith in him. So too has the Metropolitan Opera, New York, which says it will roll out Jones’s new Ring in 2025, and will present full cycles by the end of the 2026/27 season. The Met’s last Ring, directed by Robert Lepage, was burdened with immense but ineffectual stage machinery. Here, stage crew dressed as ravens push the scenery as required. Stewart Laing’s designs, with lighting by Adam Silverman and movement by Sarah Fahie, feature a log cabin in a leafless forest, a larger, deluxe hut for Wotan, king of the lumberjacks in red and black checked shirt, echoed in his son Siegmund’s blue version. Menacing vapours, swirling round a world heading for destruction, fall as sooty rain. The ENO orchestra played with customary expertise, but the opening act, including the turbulent prelude, lacked bite and power. Pacing was problematic throughout, meandering in the long first act, and rushing in Wotan’s Farewell, leaving Rose, a singer capable of immense verbal clarity and insight, having to swallow the text and with it some of the emotional resonance of this huge set piece. No production can provide adequate stage action to fill the long, overarching exchanges in this opera (and in much of Wagner). You can’t blame an empty stage and a dreary grey curtain; something wasn’t happening in the pit to hold attention. It may yet, when the rattle and tension of a first night give way to greater confidence. I’m not ready, as some already have, to write it off yet. There’s plenty of Jones’s customary perception. Let’s see what happens next. The production runs until 10 December, with the penultimate performance conducted by the distinguished Wagnerian Anthony Negus. From a 92-piece orchestra, with harps and percussion spilling into the side boxes, to a string quartet is as big a musical step as you can take. The Sacconi Quartet marked their 20th anniversary with an enticing programme of Mozart, Mendelssohn and Jonathan Dove at Wigmore Hall. Named after the Italian luthier Simone Sacconi (1895-1973), and with the two violinists and violist playing 20th-century instruments made by him (only the cello dates from earlier), this is a group committed to aural equality in performance, whatever may or may not happen offstage. This was especially evident in the beguiling new work written for them by Dove, On the Streets and in the Sky (2020). Many works have been composed during lockdown. This will surely survive as a sonorous record of the time: for the anxiety and dislocation of its first movement, the soaring, twittering birdsong of the second, and the serene, meditative melancholy of the last. Dove, among the most communicative of composers, isn’t always given full recognition. To cheers and applause he was called back four times to take a bow – sign enough of the work’s success. Star ratings (out of five) The Valkyrie ★★★ Sacconi Quartet ★★★★ The Valkyrie is at the Coliseum, London, until 10 DecemberSuper howler A new documentary, Malfunction: The Dressing Down of Janet Jackson, has revisited the infamous “wardrobe malfunction” at the 2004 Super Bowl half-time show, when Justin Timberlake exposed one of Janet Jackson’s breasts – and nipple adornment – for about a half a second, causing America to lose its collective mind in a manner that was unfathomable then and remains unfathomable now. Whoops now The documentary is the latest in the New York Times Presents series which has revisited the travails of Britney Spears and the awful treatment she received from, well, everyone. It’s part of a recent wave of work reframing events of recent pop culture history: in the midst of this, Timberlake, who dated Spears in the 2000s, this year hastily apologised to her and Jackson for his roles in the sorry tales. See you at the crossroads In her imperial phase, Spears starred in 2002’s Crossroads, a coming-of-age road movie (nothing to do with Jonathan Franzen’s latest opus, or the soap opera, or Blazin’ Squad), which was unloved by critics then but a box office success – look out for some critical reappraisal. The film was written by Shonda Rhimes (Grey’s Anatomy, Scandal, Bridgerton, everything …) and directed by Tamra Davis. Tamra’s camera In a decades-long career, Davis has also had a long connection to hip-hop through her early music videos in the 80s – she was also married to Beastie Boys’ Mike D (they separated in 2016). Her 1993 film CB4 (see streaming options here), written by and starring Chris Rock, has been called the “Spinal Tap of rap”, parodying NWA and the gangster rap game. Together again After his NWA years, Ice Cube had a notable role in Boyz N the Hood, John Singleton’s groundbreaking debut film about gang culture in South Central LA – he became the first black film-maker and the youngest person (24!) to be nominated for best director at the Oscars (Jonathan Demme won for Silence of the Lambs). Now, keep your head up: his next film in 1993 was Poetic Justice – a romantic drama starring Tupac and … Janet Jackson. Pairing notes Listen Revisit Jackson’s back catalogue with her 1986 album Control – choreography, wardrobe, makeup, BANGERS. Eat Over on Instagram @janetjackson has declared the high-end Greek restaurant Estiatorio Milos as one of her “favourite places in London to eat”.When the UN’s landmark climate report was released in 2018, calling for urgent and unprecedented changes, Microsoft executives were told to “commit it to memory”, said Elizabeth Willmott, who leads the company’s carbon program. “And so we did.” The report warned the world must reach net-zero emissions by 2050 in order to avert catastrophic climate change. To achieve this, not only must the emissions released by countries and companies be dramatically curtailed, but billions of tons of carbon dioxide must be sucked out of the atmosphere. These findings directly informed Microsoft’s climate policy, said Willmott. In January 2020, the company announced that it would be carbon negative by 2030 and by 2050 it would have removed from the atmosphere all the carbon it has emitted since it was founded in 1975. By making this pledge, the company joined a small group of businesses, including Ikea and the software company Intuit, committed to going further than net-zero. Microsoft is often ranked as a leading business on climate action. Its policies – from making it easier for people to repair their devices to launching software to help companies measure and manage carbon emissions – have been praised for going beyond the company’s own operations to the footprint of its suppliers and customers. “Being a large, well-known brand, and putting a stake in the ground, talking publicly for years about the importance of climate change, is really critical,” said Simon Fischweicher, head of corporations and supply chains for the environmental non-profit CDP North America. However, Microsoft has also been criticized for actions that appear to contradict its bold rhetoric on climate, including membership of trade associations that lobby against climate legislation, contracts with oil and gas firms and donations to politicians who obstruct climate policy. These connections make it “complicit” in efforts to push against climate action, said Bill Weihl, a former sustainability executive at Google and Facebook and the founder of the advocacy group ClimateVoice. Scaling up goals Microsoft has been operating as a carbon-neutral company for nearly a decade, a feat it has achieved through buying carbon offsets as well as securing renewable power directly from clean energy companies and installing onsite renewable energy, such as solar panels at its offices. Since 2012, Microsoft has also implemented an internal carbon fee, currently set at $15 a metric ton, making business units pay for emissions related to their operations and electricity, as well as from business air travel. “The money gets collected and spent,” said Willmott, whose carbon management team uses the money to fund initiatives such as buying clean energy and carbon offsets. “I have to pinch myself regularly because that was something we dreamed about and didn’t think was actually going to happen.” It’s a “powerful mechanism”, says Fischweicher, to push a company to think more deeply about the impact of its activities: “To pay a fee, you start to think about: ‘What can I do to reduce that so I have more money in my budget?’” But the company has recognized that much more is required to tackle the climate crisis and the plan to go carbon negative was a big step up in ambitions. Microsoft has laid out milestones for reaching the target. By 2025, it aims to reduce the emissions from its direct operations to “near zero” through gains in energy efficiency and using 100% renewable energy. By 2030, it has committed to reducing by at least 50% its direct emissions and those from its supply chain. The company’s supply chain – more than 58,000 suppliers provide everything from office furniture to the metals and plastics used in its products – makes up the bulk of its emissions. Last year, the company implemented a carbon reporting requirement for suppliers and it extended the internal carbon fee to cover supply chain emissions. But in order to remove more emissions than it produces, the company will rely heavily on carbon removal projects. These include nature-based initiatives such as funding reforestation projects, but the company is also pinning its hopes on technology. Microsoft is investing $1bn to support emerging technology that can reduce, capture and remove carbon from the air. As part of this, the company has invested in and purchased carbon removal from Climeworks, which operates the world’s largest direct air capture plant, in Iceland, removing CO2 from the air and trapping it in rock underground. In 2020, Microsoft removed 1.3m metric tons of carbon through a range of initiatives from nature based programs to carbon capture technology. However, these projects face obstacles. Relying on forests and soil to trap endless amounts of carbon is increasingly difficult in the face of worsening wildfires, pests and changes in land use. And carbon removal technology is not anywhere near the scale needed. There are 19 direct air capture (DAC) plants in operation globally, capturing just over 100,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide each year. The International Energy Agency has estimated that reaching net zero by 2050 would require the world to scale up DAC to capture more than 85m tons each year by 2030 and around 980m tons a year by 2050. It’s a challenge that Microsoft is grappling with. The number and type of projects currently available is “far short of what we need”, said Willmott. By 2030, the company estimates, it will need to remove 5m to 6m tons of carbon. This means the technology will need to be considerably scaled up to meet Microsoft’s demands alone, she said, “and that’s to say nothing of the fact that there’s a real spike in corporate demand”. It’s not just the amount of viable carbon capture projects that’s lacking, Willmot said; there’s also a quality issue. The industry doesn’t fully distinguish between avoided emissions and those that are actually removed from the atmosphere, she said. More robust quality standards would go a long way to making sure “it’s not quite a wild, wild west that it is today”, Willmot said. “[Microsoft is] opening up new conversations about historical emissions without having all the answers,” said Aoife Brophy, departmental research lecturer in innovation and enterprise at the University of Oxford’s Saïd Business School. “Leaders on climate need to acknowledge the complexity of the problem and be transparent about the fact that there are not always clear solutions.” Microsoft’s focus on historical emissions could also help spur a deeper conversation, she said, about “responsibility for the past, and may lead to much better ways to think about issues like climate justice that have not yet been adequately addressed by companies”. A wider influence The modern corporate sustainability movement requires companies to also consider their impacts on customers, peers and society more broadly. This shift in perspective, said Fischweicher, “is a really critical turning-point moment … because what you’re also talking about is shifting your business model overall”. To Microsoft’s critics, this means the company should reconsider its work with oil companies. The same week that Microsoft made its carbon-negative announcement, it sponsored an oil conference in Saudi Arabia. A 2020 Greenpeace report digging into tech companies’ work with the oil and gas industry – such as providing software to support fossil fuel extraction – found that its contract with ExxonMobil “could lead to emissions greater than 20% of Microsoft’s annual carbon footprint”. The company also spent about $200,000 during the 2020 US election cycle supporting politicians with a history of climate denial. And this October, Microsoft – along with other corporations – was criticized by the watchdog group Accountable.US for its membership of trade organizations with a history of fighting climate crisis legislation, including the Business Roundtable and the US Chamber of Commerce. Most recently, these groups have lobbied against climate legislation included under Joe Biden’s reconciliation bill. “I feel really strongly that we need to be able to work with everyone to make this transition to a low-carbon economy in the future,” said Willmott, responding to these criticisms. “I really think it’s important not to villainize any particular sector, or villainize any particular entities, but rather really work hard from within to shape the journey.” Weihl, whose organization ClimateVoice is calling on Microsoft and others to devote one-fifth of their lobbying dollars to climate policy in 2021, remains skeptical. “Companies are putting their narrow self-interest ahead of actually addressing the climate crisis at scale,” he said. “Silence and unwillingness to publicly distance themselves [from these groups] is not neutrality, it’s complicity.” Whether it’s Microsoft’s customers and affiliations or the type of work it does, experts agree the company’s size and political heft as well as its position within trade groups give it immense power – and it’s all about how the company chooses to use it. “Tech companies shape how we engage with the world, and the information we see on a daily basis,” said Brophy. “We need to think of impact beyond measuring emissions and consider ways in which technology can be used to create change across different systems.” Microsoft’s climate commitments are laudable, she said, but ultimately success will require collective action. “The biggest challenge is that Microsoft’s goals cannot be achieved by Microsoft alone,” said Brophy. “But that’s exactly what we need to see companies across industries doing more of: coming out and being bold, recognizing that they need to be systems leaders.”Howardena Pindell’s art can seem as if it were made by two separate people. There are the huge canvases where stencilled dots or tiny, hole-punched discs of paper amass like drifts of leaves, which she began making while working as MoMA’s first African American curator in 1970s New York. And then there’s the work that has challenged social injustice with a gut-punch directness since the 80s. It is clear, though, speaking with the 78-year-old ahead of her first UK solo exhibition in a public gallery, that her swirling abstract constellations are not entirely devoid of politics. As a young curator, she’d seen artists with museum day jobs give up their creative lives. Not her. She found time for painting because “the racism [at MoMA at the time] meant I was left out of certain activities. I loved being an artist and I had the stamina to work at night.” In 1979, this institutional racism grew too much and Pindell’s activism made its way into her art. Following years of exclusion from work parties and enduring some of her white colleagues’ uninterest in Black women’s experiences, she quit MoMA. Then, when the gallery staged a show with the N-word in its title, Pindell and her friends protested – only to be accused of censorship. The year ended with a major car crash that left her with head injuries and memory problems. Her response was to seize the day and make her voice heard. Free, White and 21, Pindell’s forceful first video, challenges the dismissive attitudes she met from white feminists. In it, she calmly recounts personal experiences, such as being tied to a bed by a kindergarten teacher or being propositioned by an old white man at a wedding, to a doubting blond interlocutor who said: “You really must be paranoid. Those things never happened to me.” Since then, she has made uncompromising political work, tackling everything from the Vietnam war to the Aids crisis. Pindell traces her initial awakening to a childhood ordeal. “I was at a friend’s house and in Life magazine I saw a lynched African man lying over a log, burning from the inside out. White men were standing around him looking thrilled. My friend’s mother was cooking meat, and the smell and sight made me unable to eat meat for a year.” When she suggested a work using the photograph to AIR Gallery, the women’s artists cooperative she co-founded in the 70s, it turned it down. Last year, following George Floyd’s murder, Pindell returned to the image for her second video, Rope/Fire/Water. It’s a masterfully minimalist evocation of brutality with her voiceover providing a bleak history of racist attacks. While finally making the work was “healing”, she is only hesitantly optimistic about increased exposure for Black artists – “mostly men” and not at “big ‘gold collar’ galleries” – in the wake of Black Lives Matter. Rope/Fire/Water concludes with Martin Luther King’s words of warning: “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” Pindell’s eyes remain trained on that big picture. Wrongs and rights – five works by Howardena Pindell Rope/Fire/Water, 2019 “A gruesome lynching photo in Life magazine that I saw as a child was the reason why I created [the video work] Rope/Fire/Water. It covers lynching, slavery and the civil rights movement. I also make reference to the Middle Passage, where slave ship captains would throw enslaved people overboard for insurance or would dangle them head first over the side of the ship. The sharks would eat them from the head up.” Separate But Equal Genocide: Aids, 1991-1992 “These flags are about 6ft tall. The red script represents blood. My cousin had Aids. He could pass for Black or white, and found the healthcare changed depending on what race he was perceived as. The majority of the names are children who died of Aids in hospitals in New York City and the Bronx. It’s something you don’t hear about. The others are people I knew.” Plankton Lace #1, 2020 “Plankton floats on top of the ocean and it’s vital to the planet. But when it blooms, it becomes toxic [it’s thought to worsen with global heating]. The way the circles move within the painting, they’re suggesting ocean currents. It must be really hard to swim through all those different currents.” Free, White and 21, 1980 This was my first video. I was reacting originally to both the racism in the New York white feminist art movement and in general. I made it after a car accident where I could have died. I decided to express my opinion in my work when I realised how short life can be. The bandages refer to my head injuries. Untitled, 1974–75 “Circles are an iconic form: the sun, the moon, the Earth, the planets. After I started using them in my work, I remembered a time drinking root beer with my dad as a child. It was during segregation, when it was court-mandated that utensils had to be designated whether someone of colour could use them; they painted huge red dots under the mugs.” Howardena Pindell: A New Language is at Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, to 2 May.Is this a latecomer weaving through the front row of the stalls? No, it’s warehouse poet Tom Wingfield, narrator of Tennessee Williams’s first hit and most autobiographical play. Nahuel Pérez Biscayart – with brush-up hair, scruffy moustache, wry smile and sunken eyes – doesn’t half look like the playwright as he performs an illusion with a scarf and rope, assisted by the audience. For their own latest magic trick, director Ivo van Hove and designer Jan Versweyveld shrewdly plunge Williams’s 1944 memory play – set a decade earlier, in a St Louis tenement – into a subterranean domain. The family’s Victrola, typewriter and kitchen appliances are present but the floor is earthen, the burrowed walls covered with sketches of the long-gone Mr Wingfield that resemble cave paintings. As Amanda, the skittish matriarch whom Tom berates for her “hawklike attention”, Isabelle Huppert suggests a woman both striving to rule this underground roost and protect her children. She spoon-feeds them from a bowl and fusses across the stage with the lightness of a bird; her daughter Laura (Justine Bachelet) crawls on all fours and sleeps not on the fold-out sofa imagined by Williams but hidden beneath a brown blanket in a corner nest. Rarely has this fragile family resembled so closely the collection of glass animals treasured by Laura, whose dress (designed by An D’Huys) similarly catches the light. Their home is as much a refuge from the outside world as a place of confinement. The walls, coloured to match Huppert’s hair, emphasise her paleness. Amanda is living out her claim, on learning Laura has been skipping college classes, that she felt like hiding in a hole in the ground. Huppert races breathlessly through Amanda’s lines, wired on the promise of gentleman caller Jim (Cyril Gueï). She adds notes of gibberish, with loosey-goosey gestures matching the frilly frivolity of her dress. All of this accentuates the silence that hits like heartburn as she learns about Jim’s betrothed, Betty, and her guttural cries of despair at the play’s end which bring an overdue flood of pity. Biscayart’s Tom is not a bookish daydreamer but snake-hipped and louche, drunkenly dancing to an R&amp;B slow jam with Laura and bringing home the bliss of nocturnal wanderings halfheartedly disguised as midnight movie trips. Van Hove also underlines his attraction to Jim when Tom writhes in delight at his workmate’s “Shakespeare” nickname for him. As Amanda flirts with Jim, who moves on to kiss Laura simply because he knows he can, there is an echo of the household seduced by a stranger in Pasolini’s Theorem – previously adapted by Van Hove – though Jim is not manifestly manipulative and his catlike toying with Laura could be more explicit. Gueï swells in pride, recalling his high-school power over women, just as Huppert writhes on the kitchen sink with memories of jonquils and gentleman callers. Bachelet’s Laura, never wholly meek, shares a playful relationship with Tom and imitates a penguin’s waddle as she boasts – more than confesses – to Amanda of trips to the zoo while skipping classes. Van Hove’s interval-free, French-language production was created for the Odéon in Paris and delayed because of the pandemic. It is characteristically punctuated with bursts of eclectic music with varying impact, including Debussy (perhaps inspired by that “silver slipper of a moon”) sounding unusually alarming. If the portraits of the father are a bit distracting, they stress how memories are subjective and how the Wingfields are haunted by the past and left behind while Jim strides into a tech-powered future. Van Hove recognises the individual searches for strength within this fragile family but shows, too, how memories – like this underground lair – can confine as well as comfort. La Ménagerie de Verre is at the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam until 28 November and livestreamed with English subtitles on 27 NovemberPlans to restart night tube services on London Underground will be disrupted by strike action on Saturday. Members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers (RMT) union will walk out at 8.30pm on the Victoria and Central lines, over a continuing dispute over the drivers’ rota for night services. It is the second disruption in two days after drivers took part in a 24-hour strike that affected the Northern, Central, Jubilee, Piccadilly and Victoria lines. The weekend overnight service, introduced in 2016, was stopped last year during the pandemic and has not yet resumed. A dispute persists between trade unions and Transport for London (TfL), with accusations the transport authority “ripped up” an agreement made in 2016. It said drivers could choose whether to work on night services, whereas the transport authority has said drivers should work four nights a year. The RMT general secretary, Mick Lynch, said: “The widespread impact on services is solely down to management failure to recognise and address the anger of their staff at the imposition of damaging and unacceptable working practices. “This action was wholly avoidable if [London Underground] bosses hadn’t attempted to bulldoze through arrangements that abolished the night tube driver grade, lumping everyone into a central pool where they can be shunted about at will in a drive to cut costs. “Our members have spoken and it’s time for London Underground to start listening. The mayor and his officials need to recognise our determination to defend progressive and family-friendly working practices. We remain available for talks.” On Friday the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, criticised unions for striking “at the worst possible time”. The Unite general secretary, Sharon Graham, said his stance was “precisely why workers are turning away from Labour when a Labour mayor attacks workers”. Andy Lord, London Underground’s managing director, said customers should check before they travel. He added: “I am very sorry for the inconvenience that this strike action is causing. We understand that our customers will be frustrated by the RMT’s strike action, which is timed to cause maximum disruption to London. “This action is the last thing London needs as it recovers from the pandemic, which is why we have done everything we can to get this action called off.” Planned strike action 8.30pm 27 November –4.29am 28 November Central and Victoria. 8.30pm 3 December – 4.29am 4 December Central and Victoria. 8.30pm 4 December – 4.29am 5 December Central and Victoria. 8.30pm 10 December – 4.29am 11 December Central and Victoria. 8.30pm 11 December – 4.29am 12 December Central and Victoria. 8.30pm 17 December – 4.29am 18 December Central and Victoria. 4.30am 18 December – 4.29am 19 December Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly and Victoria.Too often in dance music, melody is treated as something you’re forced to endure while waiting for the beat to kick back in. A little sugar with your medicine. Samantha Poulter knows better. Her stellar Logic1000 productions romp gleefully across genres, but always pack an arresting tune. House music is her heart, but a teenage love for Destiny’s Child and Missy Elliott bulges out of wonderfully idiosyncratic songs such as Na and Perfume. Poulter posted tracks online as DJ Logic for a few years, until another DJ Logic served a cease-and-desist order. Relaunched in 2019 as Logic1000, the raw emotion and floor-shivering bass of her debut 12-inch, DJ Logic Please Forgive Me, propelled Poulter to another level. Her music is equally powerful in or out of clubs, with songs such as What You Like seeking sympathy between Bicep and Mazzy Star. Poulter moved to Berlin last year but grew up in Sydney, playing drums in her sister’s spaghetti western rock band, working in retail, childcare and mental health. In 2022 she’ll be back in the DJ booth, after time out with the pandemic and a new baby. She also plans to work on her debut album, although she has no idea what it’ll sound like yet. “My music’s all very spontaneous,” she says. “I’m not a logical thinker!” Logic1000’s EP In the Sweetness of You is out now on Therapy.Despite the cold, it had been a decent day. Late March is sometimes like that in London. More winter than spring, the grass often still frozen half solid underfoot. It’s rarely a time that speaks too loudly of renewal. This year wasn’t any different, as far as I can remember. The occasion that afternoon was a friend’s 30th birthday party, if that’s what you’d call a few faintly desultory beers in a barren Peckham Rye Park. Back at home, my partner and I had settled down to watch a florid period drama. About half an hour in, that’s when it happened: the moment my life changed. My phone lit up with an unfamiliar name on Facebook Messenger. “Hello Francisco, this might be a shock. It’s your father’s family in Spain. Twenty years may have passed, but we have always remembered you.” The story begins a few years before my birth in July 1992. My Londoner mother, Stephanie, had met my Spanish father, Christobal, in La Linea, his troubled home city, which sits at the southern tip of Andalusia, just across the border from Gibraltar. They’d fallen in love with youth’s ease and inevitability. London seemed like the best place for their new beginnings, so they returned. Mum, to her job as an admin assistant with Lambeth Council, and Christobal, to a fresh start in an unfamiliar city. Though life was never easy, exactly, there were plenty of happy times. I arrived and our new family secured a small council flat in Lewisham. But things had changed by the mid-90s. Christobal’s work as a painter and decorator dried up and his drinking became more pronounced. Eventually, he returned to Spain, while Mum and I moved up the road to a small basement flat in Forest Hill. By 1999, things had taken a darker turn. Mum was ill and it was terminal. Breast cancer, barely into her 40s. By September that year, she was dead, a few months on from my seventh birthday. The last time I saw Christobal was several months later in 2000, back in La Linea, on a trip accompanied by my maternal aunt. He wasn’t well either. In my memory, the drinking had hollowed him out, though grief had doubtlessly played its part, too. I don’t remember much about that trip, outside a few vivid flourishes of blue sky and Spanish heat. It was a harsh time in all of our lives. I was subsequently brought up by my grandmother and one of my maternal aunts, in London and Scotland. Life gradually began anew, and there were plenty of happy times to come. But until that Facebook message arrived 21 years later, that was the last I’d heard of Christobal, or my Spanish family. Life branched out in different directions and the silence gradually deadened to estrangement, even if I never did entirely stop wondering what became of my father. In 2019, I started work on a book documenting the UK’s missing-persons crisis. When I began writing professionally in my early 20s, it wasn’t wrapped up with detailed career plans. I did it because I couldn’t really imagine doing anything else. I’d always been drawn to the stories at the margins and the shadow world of the disappeared: 175,000 people are reported missing in the UK every year, a number that encompasses everything from long-term “mispers” to the legion of vulnerable people who flit in and out of sight, suffering poor mental health, a lack of social support, or simply having been taken and harmed. It also led me to a better understanding of Christobal. How, in the decades since our last meeting, he too had become missing from my life. By March 2021, I was tentatively happy with what I’d achieved on the book. There were still a couple of months until its publication in May and everything appeared to be on track. After all the weeks and months crisscrossing the country, conducting dozens of interviews with the missing and the left behind, as well as the agencies tasked with searching, there came a time when the mass of personal stories had cohered into a recognisable wider narrative. There were the questions that I’d tried to answer as carefully as possible, like what this constant churn of disappearances might tell us about the health of our society. The number of people slipping through the gaps seemed to speak to an ever more emaciated social safety net. And what of the people, perhaps like my father, who didn’t want to be found? Intention matters. In June 2019, I’d visited the National Crime Agency offices in Vauxhall to speak with Joe Apps, head of the Missing Persons Unit. He’d explained how “many people who go missing don’t think they’re missing at all, because they haven’t got that concept in their head”. In September 2020, I’d finally arrived in La Linea on the last leg of book reporting. Though I’d tried to justify it as a research trip, that was never really the whole of it. There was something else, something more elemental at play. Like what it would feel like to trace my steps around the city my father had hailed from, or appraise the water’s particular shade of blue as it spread out across the horizon. It was there that I’d made a conscious choice not to try to seek out my lost family. In truth, I wouldn’t have known how, then. So much time had passed in silence, it didn’t seem fair. There was no way of saying what my presence might have stirred up for them, or even if they’d want to know me at all. Back then, I thought if my life was ever to conclusively move forward, the ambiguity around Christobal would simply have to remain part of it. None of this was going through my mind that night those first messages from that same lost family arrived. There was no room for reflection, just sheer, dumb shock. The first had arrived from my cousin, the second from an aunt I remembered from that visit two decades prior. In the following days, they started to arrive in a torrent, via WhatsApp and email. Aunts, uncles, cousins and even grandparents. So many names and faces from the distant past, suddenly made real again. The irony was obvious and unavoidable. Just as I’d finished years chronicling the world of the missing, the focus had flipped. During all of the time spent considering how and why people slip into disappearance, I’d rarely given serious thought to the idea that I might be missing myself. But that’s exactly what I had been, from my Spanish family’s perspective. They had been searching for, and thinking of me, just as much as I’d done the same for Christobal. I had been lost to them, but now I was found. There was no rancour, no bitterness: just a sense of undiluted joy. Pictures passed back and forth. Some depicted Mum and Dad in London and Spain, flushed with youthful happiness. More recent images were enthusiastically received on both sides. Had anyone, they asked, ever told me how much I look like my father? The same smile and facial features, down to the thickness of our eyebrows. Mainly, they said for me to take my time, that the past was the past and they wanted to talk, whenever I was ready. That there could be many new memories to make. They’d found me via Facebook after many years of searching, unaware that I’d kept my entire Spanish surname. They hadn’t thought until recently to look for a Garcia-Ferrera on social media, assuming I’d taken my mother’s maiden name – Ward – to go with Garcia, as is the custom in Spain. And, finally, there I’d been, staring back at them from a half-dormant Facebook profile. All of this time and they’d been looking for a person who didn’t technically exist. It’s an odd feeling, to suddenly become a ghost in your own origin story. After a sleepless night, I replied. The central question didn’t remain unanswered for long. Christobal had died just a few years after my last visit in 2000. At 32, he was only three years older than I am now. By then, he’d lost most of whatever clarity he’d once possessed. It had been hard for him and the wider family. But he had never forgotten the memories of his London life, or his son. Every night, they told me, he’d sleep with a picture of Mum and me tucked under his pillow. They had waited so long to give me an honest biography of my father’s life. La Linea in the 1980s wasn’t a great time or place to be young. Unemployment was high and prospects limited. Drugs were rife and he had fallen in with a bad crowd in his youth. He’d been in his early 20s when he’d met Mum, little more than a kid, in truth. She was a few years older and proved an immediately steadying influence. Yes, he’d had his demons. And there were times when he had been weak. But he had also been so very young. They wanted me to remember so much of the good he carried in him. Kindness had always come naturally. And he was smart. You had to be, to have learned English and Portuguese. I replied with the truth. That I’d never felt anything like bitterness towards him and wasn’t going to start now. Life had always been too pressing for that. There had been pity, certainly. I’d sometimes wonder whether that was worse than resentment. After all, who would ever want to pity their father? Closure is an ideal never too far away in any discussion of the missing. It was a word I’d learned to distrust over many months of reporting. What did it mean, applied to the endless complexity of an individual life or disappearance? One woman I’d spoken with in the north-east had been a missing person in the mid-2010s, after her mental health had deteriorated. The two days of her self-imposed absence had reverberated through her life in the years since. After her return, people had looked at and treated her differently, though she had since built up a new life, refusing to let the “episode” define her. For her, the act of returning hadn’t offered any kind of neat conclusion. Things are rarely that simple. In the early days of writing the book, I’d sit down with my old friend Jamie Reid in an Edinburgh pub. We’d first met years before in Dundee, when I’d been studying for my undergraduate degree in the city. In the spring of 2014, his mother, Susan, was reported missing. After four months of agonising silence, her body was discovered a few miles from their family home. His life in the years since has been a study in resilience. He’d moved to Edinburgh, earned a degree, started a thriving career and remains one of the most contagiously social people I’ve ever met. But moving forward doesn’t mean the past isn’t always there. “People in my home town are obviously happy to see me and are happy for what I’ve achieved, but it can be exhausting sometimes, too,” Jamie had explained to me then. “It’s the reminder of a previous life, when everything was different.” Life is rarely symmetrical and neither is loss. Grief can take many different forms, but there is certainty in death, if nothing else – or at least, that’s what I used to think about the ghosts of my own past. The person was here and now they aren’t, and never will be again. There isn’t a more emphatic form of closure. No ambiguity, no tiny thread of hope that things might turn out differently given enough good fortune. It’s the kind of cold, hard clarity that means you can start to “move on”, as the months bleed into years and the hurt hopefully diminishes into something less vivid. Perhaps that isn’t quite true. I’m not sure the old conclusions work now, when it comes to Christobal. It might sound strange, or even callous, but the news of his passing came as a relief. It explained so much, like why he’d never tried to make contact. In truth, I might not have known what to say to him after all this time. It’s not a problem with the rest of my new family. Since that March night, we’ve stayed in steady contact, exchanging regular messages about the minutiae of our weeks, or whatever else we want to speak on. There’s no rush now to dissect all the things that went before. One thing I’ve grown to understand is this isn’t, and was never, just about me or my impressions of an absent father. At first it was a shock to discover that while Christobal might have been missing from me, I was equally missing from his – our – family in Spain. Perspective is crucial and absence can often cut two ways. I’d no idea I was being searched for, as well as doing the searching myself. So much of life is timing. The happy or disastrous accidents of fate we have little to no control over. That this new chapter has opened up in front of me, at the very moment I’d finally given up on closure, often catches me as unreal. Six months on, there are still times when my good fortune almost feels obscene. I’d told myself that some things just weren’t meant to happen. That’s what I thought my work with the missing had shown me in the end: that reunions were the stuff of fairytale not real life, with all of its messy compromises and false starts. September was warm this year, as it often is in London. Even as the trees shed their leaves, there was something in the air that just seemed to speak to fresh beginnings. Maybe it had something to do with a purchase I made at the start of the month. It isn’t all that expensive to fly to Spain at the moment and I’m looking forward to visiting La Linea again. Only this time, I’ll have a whole new family to guide me. If You Were There: Missing People and the Marks They Leave Behind by Francisco Garcia is published by HarperCollins at £14.99. Buy it for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.comWith less than a month to go until Christmas, many retailers are not only having to deal with the impact of the pandemic and a global supply chain crisis but are also experiencing the full impact of Brexit on festive demands for the first time. Here we talk to the people behind four key components of the festive period to see whether we will notice the impact in our houses and at our tables this year. CHRISTMAS TREES An estimated six to eight million Christmas trees are sold every year in the UK – each of which has to be felled, pulled out of the field, packed and handed over to the customer. Usually growers rely on the help of a seasonal workforce to get the job done, many of whom come from outside the UK. But this year, as a result of Brexit, growers have had to find local labourers to step in who may not be as skilled and as a result took longer to do the work. It is feared that this, along with Brexit-related transport issues, could lead to tree shortages. Christopher Hood, the director and founder of Swindon-based Needlefresh, the UK’s largest supplier of trees to blue-chip retail businesses such as Waitrose and Tesco, said that in more than 30 years of working in the business, this season has been one of his hardest and the first time that he has really felt the Brexit effect. “This is the first year we’ve had real challenges with labour and with transport. We felt it much more this year than last year.” He usually hires 80 to 90 people each year, many of whom usually come from eastern Europe. But this year he had to find and train local labourers. Another factor causing issues is transport, caused by a shortage of HGV drivers and the fact that most British trees are grown in Scotland. Hood, whose company uses 700 lorries a year to move trees around the country, said: “We’re having to work a lot harder to get the results and we’re having to ask customers to be much more flexible as to when they take delivery of the trees.” While he believes he will satisfy all of his tree orders, he has heard that some growers are getting “extremely behind”. He said it is too early to say whether there will be shortages, but that it will become apparent in the next two weeks. “It won’t be a matter of availability of product, it will be the ability to get that product to market.” The British Christmas Tree Growers Association reported a rise in early inquiries from retailers but urged shoppers not to panic. ALCOHOL Amid Brexit border control issues, shortages of HGV drivers and other staff, combined with pandemic business closures and global shipping disruption, industry leaders have warned of a “cocktail of chaos” that they say could lead to Christmas alcohol shortages. In a letter to transport secretary Grant Shapps last week a group of 48 wine and spirits companies said rising costs and supply chain chaos have caused delays in wine and spirit deliveries which could lead to empty drinks aisles in supermarkets. Miles Beale, the chief executive of the Wine and Spirit Trade Association, which coordinated the letter, said the confluence of factors has led to “problems in the supply chain leaving our wine and spirit members faced with major issues getting deliveries to supermarkets, off-licences, pubs and restaurants.” He called on the government to take “action as a matter of urgency to save British business from facing huge losses”. Pierre Mansour, director of wine at Stevenage-based the Wine Society, said despite having planned for Brexit since the middle of last year, it has made moving stock from vineyards in Europe to the UK “the most logistically and operationally challenging Christmas we’ve had to date”. In the last 12 weeks of 2019, not including bar, pub and restaurant sales, over 403 million bottles of wine and spirits were sold in the UK, according to Nielsen data, with a total value of £3.4bn. Will there be enough to go around this year? With shipping times doubled, Mansour advised people to order early, especially if they want a specific brand. Already he said demand is higher than this time last year, which was a record-breaking year for the cooperative wine merchant, with many customers ordering magnums for, Covid-permitting, big family gatherings. TOYS AND GIFTS After months of talk of fears of empty shelves in toy shops as a result of the global shipping crisis, industry leaders say there will be toys on the shelves after all, but that if you’re looking for something specific, it’s best to buy it sooner rather than later. Brexit has led to labour shortages in warehouses and especially for HGV drivers, leading to shortages throughout the supply chain. Roland Earl, director general of the British Toy &amp; Hobby Association, said: “There will be toys in the shops but there might not be as many choices as there might be in a normal year.” For those seeking a specific gift, he advised people to buy it when they see it rather than wait because once it sells out “restocking is difficult”. This festive season has been, he said, a “bit of a nightmare” for the industry with “multiple things all happening at the same time”. FOOD While fears around turkey availability appear to have calmed for now, after the government introduced a temporary visa scheme for seasonal poultry workers, the supply of other Christmas staples such as pigs in blankets is still less than certain. Earlier this month the National Pig Association said thousands of pigs had been culled on British farms, and thousands of more were likely to follow, because of a shortage of skilled labour in the UK following Brexit and warned of a “catastrophic collapse” in the price of pork. The government has introduced an emergency visa scheme for 800 butchers to come from outside the UK in the run-up to Christmas but they are reportedly not expected to start work until January. Sophie Hope, a pig farmer at Alexander and Angell Farms in Gloucestershire, said a shortage of skilled workers in processing plants who usually come from the EU has led to a backlog of pigs. That in turn has led to some farmers having to cull pigs on site which means they cannot be sold. Others end up with pigs that are too big and lose half their value. Hope believes there will be shortages of British pork at Christmas. “There’s not a shortage of pigs on the ground, but they’re not being able to be slaughtered and processed,” she said. She fears shops may instead import pork to fill gaps on shelves, which she said, “obviously doesn’t help us British farmers at all”. Meanwhile, shoppers appear to be getting their orders for Christmas food in early. Marks &amp; Spencer said it closed its Christmas food-order service early this year because all the slots were taken more quickly than normal – despite having more slots: “There’s not been a supply issue but certainly shoppers did shop early.” A government spokesperson said the food supply chain is “highly resilient” and has “coped well in responding to unprecedented challenges.”The feeling of longing for a lost love can be powerful, and George Orwell makes full use of it in his work. In Nineteen Eighty-Four, his great dystopian novel, the hero Winston Smith’s memories of walks taken with Julia, the woman he can never have, give the story its humanity. Now a stash of largely unseen private correspondence, handed over to an academic archive on Friday by the author’s son, reveal just how large a role romantic nostalgia played in Orwell’s own life. The contents are also proof that the writer was an unlikely but enthusiastic ice-skater. The 50 recently discovered letters were sent to two former girlfriends and show that Orwell, whose real name was Eric Blair, kept up a close and sentimental connection with both women, despite his two marriages, until the end of his life in 1950. The fact that these former lovers, Eleanor Jaques and Brenda Salkeld, had previously turned down his proposals of marriage seems only to have increased the hold they had on his imagination. “I knew he liked his ladies very much, and it is so distant now that I do not mind,” Orwell’s adopted son, Richard Blair, told the Observer, adding that he believes the letters indicate his father was “sweeter on Brenda than on Eleanor”. “He wanted a bit of an open marriage with my mother Eileen, but she put her foot down.” Blair has now handed over the letters to the Orwell Archive at University College London, having bought them from the families of the two women shortly after their rediscovery. He had earlier promised to make them available for study. “This is gold dust for a biographer,” said DJ Taylor, the writer and Orwell expert, this weekend. “The letters give a new understanding of the longevity and the intensity of these relationships. He clearly couldn’t get them out of his mind.” Taylor is currently writing his second study of Orwell’s life, in the light of fresh information. It is due out in 2023, and he has also drawn on the uncovered letters, to which the biographer had been given early access. “They reveal his elegiac side,” said Taylor. “Orwell writes so much about country walks in his novels, and he was always trying to arrange walks in Suffolk with these women. “He had met them in Southwold when he was staying with his parents in the early 1930s. Brenda was the sports mistress at a nearby school and Eleanor’s father was the dentist. She went on to marry his best friend in the village, Dennis Collings. It was a small world, and the letters often ask ‘Can I visit? Don’t let anybody know.’ ” Taylor points out that Orwell wrote almost identical letters to Salkeld and Jaques when he moved to London: “He wrote about what it was like working in a bookshop while he wrote Keep the Aspidistra Flying. “We now know that he was in touch with both women for much longer than we thought, and I have a strong suspicion his letters to Eleanor reminiscing about their country walks inspired similar passages describing Winston’s affair with Julia in Nineteen Eighty-Four.” The bulk of the letters have not been seen before, and 18 of those sent to Jaques first came to light a decade ago in a shed, inside an envelope in a handbag. The letters to Salkeld surfaced in 2018, after her niece spoke at a public event attended by Blair and Taylor. “It is the kind of thing you always hope might happen at an event,” said Taylor. In one previously disclosed letter to Salkeld, written four years into Orwell’s marriage to Eileen O’Shaughnessy, Orwell wrote: “It’s a pity … we never made love properly. We could have been so happy. If things are really collapsing I shall try and see you. Or perhaps you wouldn’t want to?” Orwell also wrote to Salkeld from his bed in University College Hospital, London, sending his last letter four months before his death, as he was about to marry his second wife, Sonia Brownell. “I am not divulging much more about the content yet,” said Blair. “But it does not mean to say he was not in love with Eileen, just that he cast his eye about and liked to talk to intelligent women; women who had something to say. “People think everything has been uncovered, but we knew there was more out there. When these letters came to light, the families were all conscious they should not be auctioned off and disappear into the ether. That is why I stepped in. Both the women’s relatives are quite content with what I have done.” Blair hopes the archive will be digitised so that scholars will have access not just to detail of the overlapping romances but also to evidence of his father’s other interests during the 1930s. The letters include stick drawings of Orwell ice-skating, fishing and working in Billingsgate Market. Taylor adds that the correspondence fills in gaps in Orwell’s highly “compartmentalised life” in the 1930s. “Not least that one of his great hobbies was ice-skating. As soon as winter came around, he would get his skates up from Southwold and head for Streatham ice rink.” The letters were presented to the UCL archive ahead of the annual Orwell Memorial Lecture, delivered on Friday by the novelist Ian McEwan.My childhood was like Wuthering Heights. I grew up on a smallholding in the middle of the North York Moors. It’s one of my favourite books. My mum used to play the Kate Bush song in the car on the drive to school and we’d all sing along. Fame doesn’t change you, but it gives you confidence to be who you really are. When I was on Coronation Street, at 16, I was very uncomfortable with recognition. By the time I did Downton Abbey, I was older, wiser, prepared for it. Now I just do things my way and try to stay true to myself. “Chuck a brick and run after it.” That’s what my dad always tells me. He has numerous weird and wonderful northern sayings. It means you’ve only got one life, so try things and have a go. “Don’t thrash yourself with nettles” is another one. It means don’t be too hard on yourself. Divorce made me glad I’d kept my privacy. I’ve always had a line. I’ve never done paid interviews, had photos taken in my home, on holiday or at big life events. I was so grateful I’d maintained that boundary. I’m in awe of musicians. I met Amy Winehouse and was starstruck. I walked past Jarvis Cocker at an awards show, but was too excited to say hi. In my teens, I listened to Pulp’s Different Class album on repeat. I embarrassed myself in front of the Duchess of Cambridge. She visited the Downton set and walked in while me and Michelle Dockery were filming a scene in Lady Mary’s bedroom. She said: “It feels very strange to be in your bedroom”. I replied: “Yeah, not many people get to come in Lady Mary’s bedroom.” I didn’t mean it as a double entendre, but I swear I saw the faintest flicker of a smile. Downton was a gamechanger for me. I’d been working professionally for 12 years when I got the role of Anna and it hugely elevated my career. It was wonderful, but we finished at the right time. Now it’s lovely to pop back and do the movies. The answer to violence against women is education. Educating our society. Educating younger people. The murders of Sarah Everard and Sabina Nessa were shocking, and scary but they’ve opened up conversations. My male friends have started seriously thinking about how women can feel vulnerable and making the streets safer. Red wine and dark chocolate are my vices. When I go out, I like a negroni or a dirty martini, though I can’t drink many of them. Two cocktails and I’m done. It’s my voice that people recognise. I get noticed in all sorts of places but only when I talk. Someone recognised me in a doctor’s surgery in Prague. A little boy in Australia said, “You’re Wendy from Bob the Builder!” Mick Jagger is a big Downton fan. I heard he cut short a Rolling Stones rehearsal so they could go and watch it. I’d love that to be true. I’m empowered by getting older. I turned 40 last year. I know my mind andfeel the most comfortable in my own skin I ever have. Times are changing in this industry. Age is something to be embraced. The older you get, the better an actor you are. My friends call me Jo-Fro. Like the Yorkshire J-Lo. That’s what I’m going for. Angela Black is available for streaming on ITV Hub. Downton Abbey: A New Era arrives in cinemas in March 2022Not many people have to worry that their children will be forcibly removed or locked away from society. Yet this is something I do worry about. My autistic son, who also has a learning disability, experiences the world differently. I am often in awe of his perspective, and he has inspired my more than 40 years of professional and voluntary effort advocating for better understanding, care and support. When people like my son go into crisis there is a high chance they won’t be supported at home – not because they can’t be helped to live full, valuable and meaningful lives in their communities, but because our “system” doesn’t allow for it. Instead, they may be removed and taken, sometimes miles away, to an unfamiliar inpatient setting designed to treat mental illness, even though many are not mentally ill and do not need to be in hospital. There are currently more than 2,000 people with learning disabilities and autistic children and adults in such settings in England and Wales. These often noisy and sensory-driven environments exacerbate the more troubling features of autism, instead of providing the routine, structure and predictability that autistic people need. It is little wonder that autistic people struggle to regulate themselves and fail to thrive in these places. Many get stuck, with the average length of stay for current inpatients being five and a half years, albeit skewed upwards by some long forensic detentions (those subject to legal or court proceedings). This week we have seen shocking accounts of one man’s 20-year detention in such a setting, traumatised by a system that has failed him. Tony Hickmott’s brave, and now elderly, parents persuaded the judge in a court of protection hearing that his article 8 right to respect for family life had been breached – and that it was in the public interest for him to be named. They talked on national news about their 100-mile journey every week to see him. His father described having to break his journey on the way home to manage his own tearful distress. His mother said they don’t smile any more. The promise of his release by next spring offers some hope for Tony, who has spent nearly half of his life in hospital, but there have been promises before and it’s years too late. Ryan, whose similar story featured in national news last year, recently moved back home to live near his parents. Neither Tony nor Ryan have forensic histories, but they are victims of inadequate planning and a lack of safe and adequate care and support in the community. Ryan’s mother wrote to me this week : “Ryan is doing really well in his new home, and the staff can’t believe how chatty he is, as in hospital he didn’t converse much. When he goes for a drive, my son looks forward to coming back home, and my husband heard him mutter, ‘Home sweet home.’ Each day when he wakes, he goes to the living room window, looks out and smiles, knowing that at last he’s free.” The sad truth is families are not routinely involved in the way that is the norm for patients with physical health conditions. Instead, distressed families are seen as somehow part of the problem. The families of Tony and Ryan describe being ignored and marginalised. It’s two years since Matt Hancock, the then secretary of state for health, appointed me to advise and oversee a DHSC-managed programme of independently chaired case reviews for 77 people detained in long-term segregation. The cases examined comprised people with learning disabilities and autistic people. I work with an oversight panel of experts, including experts by experience. For legal reasons we do not know the identity of the people being reviewed. The reviews were intended to uncover the blocks in the way of getting people discharged more accurately. The reviews started just before the pandemic began and many had to take place virtually. Despite making urgent and achievable recommendations, there has been insufficient action to get people discharged even in cases where alleged rights violations have been reported. The numbers of people in long-term segregation have increased rather than gone down. The independent reviews are continuing, and some people have been offered a senior “intervenor” as part of a pilot to speed up commissioners’ responses. Other recommendations include that when someone is admitted a clinical contract must be agreed in advance, and those responsible for that admission should be accountable for checking the clinical pathway is effective, timely and brought to a satisfactory conclusion. Autistic people and people with learning disabilities who do have a mental illness need a specialist environment with people who understand their sensory and communication needs and also have proven expertise in their health condition. It doesn’t take much imagination to compare expectations for people with mental illness with those for people needing cancer treatment or a hip replacement. Both need to be assessed and treated by a competent clinical team. I began this work by holding a good practice workshop to gather success stories to inspire commissioners, clinicians and families about just how much could be achieved for someone whose needs have previously not been recognised and met. One of the outcomes was a freely available booklet called Helping People Thrive. Shockingly, many of those responsible for implementing aspirational government policies and for making decisions about people’s care seem to have very low aspirations themselves. There is some good practice but too often the hopes and needs of autistic people and people with learning disabilities are misunderstood or considered marginal, and once out of sight in a psychiatric hospital they are literally out of mind. A radical system change may be the only thing that will make the lasting difference needed to see all autistic people and people with learning disabilities fairly treated, with an urgent programme of high-quality service development in every locality. We all have a right to an ordinary life, and for disabled people there is a right to extra support to live an ordinary life. We mustn’t stand by and allow them to be offered less than the rest of society. Lady Sheila Hollins is emeritus professor of psychiatry of learning disability at St George’s University, London and a crossbench member of the House of Lords. She is also the founder and chair of Beyond Words, the visual literacy charity • This article’s headline was amended on 27 November 2021 to follow style guidelines on language related to autism.People say I always write about such neurotic people. Well, tell me a Shakespeare play that isn’t about neurotic people. That’s what drama is. No problems, no drama. All works of narrative must have a point to do with the consequences of one’s action. If it turns out well it’s comedy; if badly, tragedy.” July 1987 I like that twilight zone between what we call musicals and what we call opera. Song is the key word. I believe in songwriting.” July 1987 I love treating words as if they were just counters on a table, to be moved around … I also like hiding rhymes, tucking them in the middle of lines where no one spots them. I don’t see it as subversive. What have you got to lose?” September 1995 Every time I see A Little Night Music, I trudge in like a schoolboy to class. Then I’m always surprised by how much I like it. It never fails.” March 2003 I’ve never thought for one minute: ‘Oh, this line, oh, this dissonance is going to turn this audience off. I’d better change it.’ Not once. That’s a fool’s game. To try to prejudge while you’re writing is a waste of time.” December 2010 I’m a great audience. I cry very easily. I suspend disbelief in two seconds.” December 2010 I’ve always sipped something when writing lyrics, because it’s the words that are difficult. Writing music is hard, too, but you can always just sit at a piano and move your fingers around the keys – even if you’re not writing, you feel like you are. Lyric-writing is all sweat.” November 2012 I try not to read my reviews, but there’s always some friend who’ll come along and, under the guise of trying to comfort you, let you know that you’ve been speared.” November 2012 Writing a scene is one thing; writing a song is another. Writing a song, you are restricted; you have certain rhythms and meters and rhymes. You can’t just go [he makes a retching sound] – whereas, you can write a scene that should be two pages long and is eight pages, and just vomit on the page and then you cut back and edit and go to your collaborator. But that’s not the same thing.” July 2016 I don’t think the theatre is about converting people to new ideas. I think it’s about confirming ideas you have by dramatising them and making them human.” July 2016 I learned from Oscar Hammerstein, my mentor, that the whole point is to underwrite not overwrite because music is so rich an art itself. Poetry makes, generally, very poor lyrics unless you’re dealing with a certain kind of show. It’s too allusive, that’s not what you want.” September 2017 West Side Story opened out of town. By the time we got to New York the audience had heard the show was a “work of art” and sat as if at church. The first half hour was just deadly. They forgot they were at a musical until the girls came on and did some fancy dancing and shook their skirts for America. The reviews were great but the danger is always: don’t get complacent.” September 2017Should this fixture be repeated next season, Newcastle may need some cajolement into making the journey. They have lost 11 straight games at the Emirates and on the basis of past performances and current form most elements of their latest reverse could confidently be predicted at the outset. Arsenal were not especially convincing but ultimately proved too strong, scoring twice in the third quarter of the game, and once Bukayo Saka had put them ahead any doubts about the outcome were banished. Arsenal continue to tick off the lesser assignments and maintain designs on the top four, but the scale of Eddie Howe’s task is starkly laid out. His debut in a Newcastle technical area was not an unqualified disaster and, in fairness, he oversaw a competent first-half display that could have even brought the lead. But Arsenal returned from the break in a palpably different gear and deserved the win their shift in tempo ensured, even if their opponents contrived a sense of injustice. Shortly before Gabriel Martinelli made sure of the points, having only just come on, Callum Wilson had gone to ground under the attentions of Nuno Tavares. The pair had been shoulder to shoulder inside the box, Wilson failing to get a shot away, and the enduring impression was that Tavares had simply been too strong. “The key moment has to be Callum going through one-on-one with a chance to equalise and a penalty’s not given,” Howe said, although he admitted he had only seen the incident in real time. “I can’t understand why Callum would go down there if it’s not a foul.” After rewatching he might accept he was over-egging things, as he also was in calling Newcastle’s performances in the first and final thirds of the match “very good”. That is understandable: Howe has not come to bury his new charges and knows confidence, which he said is low in a winless side, must be bolstered before a home match against Norwich on Tuesday that now assumes seismic proportions. For the first 56 minutes Howe had paced and pointed energetically on the touchline, perhaps keen to make up for lost time after missing the draw with Brentford due to Covid. Newcastle had been compact enough but were punctured by the excellent Saka. The goal was marvellously constructed, Saka receiving possession in a tight position on the left flank before finding Emile Smith Rowe and, while his teammate dealt with the ball, darting infield. Smith Rowe passed to Tavares and the left-back, who was among the players Mikel Arteta felt “needed another chance” after a ropey performance at Liverpool, located the onrushing Saka with a deft right foot pass. The angle was tight, but perfect for a low-raking drive into the far corner; Saka produced exactly that and Arsenal had their breakthrough. Saka hobbled off eight minutes later, Arteta saying he “felt something muscular” and may require a diagnostic scan. He was replaced by Martinelli and within 93 seconds the points were secure. This time it was Takehiro Tomiyasu assisting intelligently with a chipped pass from the right: Martinelli watched it drop over his shoulder and then helped it past Martin Dubravka on the volley, scoring for the first time since May. “A big moment and I am especially happy for him,” Arteta said. “The technique is so top, when the ball is flying over your head. To keep the ball down and have that quality to finish, it is impressive.” Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang could watch and take note. The Arsenal captain had contrived an extraordinary miss before half-time, sidefooting against the post from point-blank range after Dubravka had saved Smith Rowe’s header. It had looked harder not to score. His aberration met with bafflement and while it may be a discussion for another day it did little to dispel the nagging sense that Arsenal must expedite a succession plan for the centre-forward role. Saka and Martin Ødegaard, the former set up by the impressive Albert Sambi Lokonga, also came close but Arteta accepted Arsenal had lacked “urgency and some composure” in the opening period. Newcastle had fired a warning shot on the half-hour when Jonjo Shelvey, taking aim from 25 yards, forced Aaron Ramsdale to tip on to the bar. It was a more credible turning point than Howe’s penalty complaint. “You achieve some remarkable things in football if you all believe and stay united,” Howe said. Staying up would, at this rate, fit that definition and Newcastle will need that togetherness given few away from Tyneside will shed a tear over their struggles. Relegation would, at least, avert more of the same old fare in north London.Sarina Wiegman limbered up for her first trip to Wearside by watching the Netflix documentary series Sunderland ‘Til I die. It is, in part, a cautionary tale about pride coming before a fall but, on this evidence, there seems little danger of England suffering a collapse in any way comparable to Sunderland’s painful tumble from the Premier League to League One. Under the tutelage of the former Netherlands coach, the Lionesses have won their first five qualifiers for the 2023 World Cup in Australia and New Zealand, scoring 33 goals and conceding none along the way to move five points clear at the top of Group D. Austria, ranked 21st in the world to England’s eighth, represented their toughest test to date, with Ellen White’s 45th goal for her country separating two sides who will meet again at Old Trafford in July as the curtain rises on the European Championships. If they are to prosper in that tournament England will need to be rather less ponderous in possession than they were on Saturday but, in mitigation, the game was affected by a horrendously cold and capricious wind whipping in from the North Sea, variously supplemented by icy rain, hail, sleet and snow. Storm Arwen restricted the attendance to 9,159, but everyone who braved the elements and trekked to the Stadium of Light on a day when much local public transport was suspended deserves a medal. They were treated to a stellar performance from Fran Kirby on an afternoon when too many teammates frustrated. “We had some hard moments,” Wiegman said. “We value the clean sheet. “Although we dominated possession, it was a tough game against a tough opponent, dangerous on the counterattack.” Kirby has expressed disappointment about not being able to replicate her Chelsea form in an England shirt, but you would not have noticed that deficiency here. Although operating in a deeper role than she habitually occupies for her club, it did not take long for the brightest star in Wiegman’s firmament to once again prove that she is capable of shaping a game and dictating play from almost anywhere. No prizes for guessing that virtually all of England’s better moments arrived after Kirby’s vision and technique from the right of midfield permitted her to pick a defence-splitting pass or cross. Whenever Kirby was joining the dots, the immensely gifted Lauren Hemp raised her game, showing off wonderfully quick feet while disorientating Austria’s otherwise stubborn defence courtesy of some incisive link-up play. Even so, bar saving one left foot shot from Kirby, Manuela Zinsberger was underworked until the 39th minute when Hemp and Kirby combined to unpick that durable visiting defensive lock. All that remained was for a stretching White to arrive in the right place at the right time and extend a foot to steer a half-volley beyond the Arsenal goalkeeper. “Ellen’s so alert in the box,” said Wiegman. “She’s really consistent, really special and a real team player.” White’s goal left a striker presented with her 100th cap before kick off one short of Kelly Smith’s all-time England scoring record. Had she reacted a millisecond faster as an inviting cross from Hemp came her way before half-time she could have equalled that milestone; instead, Zinsberger was able to divert the danger. As good as Kirby was, England moved the ball too slowly and their continued failure to pass at speed almost cost them dear in a largely underwhelming second half, which raised certain concerns about the strength and dynamism of the central midfield. Accordingly, after spending the opening 45 minutes endeavouring to keep warm, Mary Earps was finally called to arms, saving smartly from Barbara Dunst and Maria Plattner as they threatened to equalise. “The two saves from Mary Earps were such important moments,” Wiegman said. For a while after that a Lionesses XI captained for the first time by Millie Bright experienced an attack of the sort of defensive wobbles not seen since the latter days of Phil Neville’s tenure, appearing incapable of clearing their lines. Nonetheless, they were unlucky not to double their advantage when Carina Wenninger brought down Beth Mead. A penalty beckoned but the referee, Kateryna Monzul, was not buying it. Mead had reason to feel aggrieved but, overall, she failed to fully impose herself and, like Ella Toone, may face a fight to preserve a starting place. Rachel Daly continues to deputise for the injured Lucy Bronze at right-back and her shot forced a decent save from Zinsberger as England otherwise dropped worryingly deep and their manager shivered on the sidelines. Wiegman must hope it will be warmer in Doncaster on Tuesday when Latvia visit and White gets another crack at breaking Smith’s record.And that will be all. Congratulations to the Lionesses on grinding out a win against Austria, and congratulations also to Ellen White on her 100th cap, suitably marked with the winning goal. Barry Glendenning has the Saturday clockwatch here: Louise Taylor’s report from a chilly Sunderland has landed: Sarina Wiegman has a chat: “We created chances, we scored only one, but we had some hard moments in the game too ... the two saves from Mary [Earps] were such important moments ... that allowed us to keep playing and go for the second goal. We didn’t get it but still, we have a clean sheet, and that is fine.” On Ellen White: “She’s such a professional, she’s such a team player, as you saw today ... she’s done that over and over for the national team, it’s very special.” Ellen White, the matchwinner, speaks to ITV: “It’s a dream really ... it’s come full circle which is really strange. To have made my debut against Austria, to now get my 100th cap against Austria, but for me, I just wanted the team to win. It was a really hard game but I’m so proud of the team, the way we stuck in there, a clean sheet, and obviously the three points, so yeah I’m really happy. “They really came out of the blocks ... we just needed to be patient ... there were spells when we didn’t play our best football but we just stayed in the game.” On the conditions: “Snow ... I couldn’t feel my face ... that’s the joy of playing up north. “Fran Kirby is a dream to play alongside ... she’s a phenomenal player and we’re very proud that she’s English. “I don’t like talking about it [Kelly Smith’s England scoring record] but I’m delighted to get on the scoresheet, so it’s an absolute dream for me, I’m really pleased.” England go five points clear at the top of the group. Fittingly, Ellen White scored the winner on the occasion of her 100th cap. Fran Kirby of Chelsea was exceptional in attack for England, and Bayern Munich’s centre-back Carina Wenninger was the pick of the Austria players. It’s another win, and a deserved one, but Wiegman will ideally want her team to start being more clinical. Take nothing away from Austria, however, they held their shape impressively and some of their last-ditch defending was top class. England face Latvia on Tuesday. It was a test, and England passed. 90 min: Austria move forward in attack – Dunst has three teammates up with her – she chooses to shoot (I think) and the ball flies out harmlessly. She looks suitably disgusted after wasting a chance that could have snatched a point. 88 min: White is suddenly clear in acres of space and bearing down on goal. Wenninger, who has been exceptional at the back, nicks the ball off her toe. 85 min: England come forward again – Day hits a sweet shot from an angle which is flying into the bottom corner. Zinsberger dives down well, again, to beat it out. Kirby then gets her foot on the ball yet again in the penalty area and has time to try and pick a pass to a teammate on the edge of the box but it is intercepted. 83 min: Hemp causes another nuisance for England on the left and bends an accurate cross towards White. Wenninger is well placed to clear. 80 min: England build another solid attack, the ball drops to White around the penalty spot, and she hits a low shot which deflects out for a corner. Austria manage to clear the danger from the set-piece. 78 min: For the first time during this campaign, there is some jeopardy for England here, as they approach the final 10 minutes of this qualifier. A draw would not be a satisfactory outcome given all the chances they have created. But Austria are battling away well and if they grabbed a point, it would be a reward for some very determined defending. With Austria threatening again, Billa is penalised for a foul on Greenwood. 75 min: Hemp comes alive on the left, and lofts over a cross which Zinsberger punches clear with White in close attendance. But the flag is up. 73 min: Billa tries to run on to a through pass for Austria in another warning for England. Seconds later, and Bright has another good ball to tidy up at the back. Wiegman would no doubt be much happier with a two-goal cushion here. 71 min: Parris, who has just entered the fray, races on to a fine long ball out of defence from the captain, Bright. But she can’t quite get on the end of it. 70 min: A touch of class from White, with her back to goal, laying off a sumptuous first-time volleyed pass, looking to play in Kirby who is lurking to her left. Now Nikita Parris comes on, Mead off. 65 min: Kirby makes a lovely run through the middle with the Austria defence stretched. She slides a ball out to Mead, who has a shot which is blocked, and then has another go. Kirby looks frustrated in the middle, wanting a return pass. Seconds later there is more lovely footwork from Kirby who ghosts away from three defenders and wins a corner. Bright heads the set-piece wide. England are back on top after a shaky opening to the half. 62 min: Stokes makes a strong run down the left, the referee playing advantage when she is fouled from behind. Wienerroither is booked for tugging Stokes’s shirt from behind, and then Ella Toone comes off for England, replaced by Georgia Stanway. The weather, meanwhile, is abysmal, with what looks like snow or hail hammering down. 57 min: England relieve the pressure by winning a free-kick in an advanced area, and then two corners in quick succession, the first of which so nearly leads to the second goal with a header flying wide. Mead is then brought down in the penalty area by Wenninger, and there are strong appeals for the penalty but the ref isn’t interested. Rain has started to pelt down which isn’t going to be fun for the players. Wienerroither comes on for Austria, in the place of Naschenweng. 52 min: WHAT a save by Earps! Austria construct a three-on-two, and Zadrazil is then freed one-on-one with the keeper, and hits a right-footed shot which is destined for the top corner. Earps throws herself to her right and beats the shot out for a corner. She gets up, and urges her teammates on: “Come on!” 50 min: Dunst hits a powerful effort from an angle, from outside the area, and nearly catches out Earps at her near post! That was flying into the net but Earps just manages to keep it out. Austria have started the second half pretty well, and that’s a warning for England. It was an excellent effort, and nearly cancelled out the lead that the Lionesses earned in the first half. Here we go. Can England stretch their lead, make this game safe and go five points clear at the top of the group? Can White equal Kelly Smith’s record? Topical half-time reading after that stellar first-half showing from Fran Kirby: A good half from England. The visitors have shown little in attack but have defended excellently. England stuck to their task, kept creating chances and trying to stretch the Austria defence, and were rewarded seven minutes before half-time with Ellen White’s well-taken goal set up by Kirby, who has been the pick of England’s players, full of direct running and always looking to link with teammates or have a shot herself. 45 min: Kirby now cracks a low, powerful shot from the edge of the box which takes a nick off a defender ... Zinsberger dives low to her right to pull off a fantastic save! 43 min: Hemp causes damage down the left wing again, crosses low, but Zinsberger gathers after White fails to connect. It’s there! Hemp crosses from the left and Kirby has a shot which is blocked by Kirchberger’s header. The ball comes straight back to Kirby, though, and she pokes it back across goal. White is perfectly positioned to belt the ball into the net from point-blank range. England deserve that goal – and it’s one White will remember, this being her 100th cap. She is now just one goal behind Kelly Smith’s all-time record! England had to show a bit of patience but they’ve worn down the Austria defence really well. 35 min: Demi Stokes nearly gets caught in possession by Dunst, in the England penalty area, but is fouled. England move forward, Mead finds space on the right yet again, and drills a good cross for White. Austria defend it well though, yet again. Austria’s defenders will be looking forward to a cup of tea at half-time, and if they can go in at 0-0 having soaked up a considerable amount of pressure, they’ll consider it a job well done for the first half. 33 min: Dunst slides into a meaty challenge on the edge of Austria’s box which the referee lets go. Bright, the captain, finds herself with the ball in space and cracks a powerful shot from 25 yards which screams wide – Zinsberger looked worried for a second, though. 31 min: England are on the front foot with consistency now. Mead bends a good cross to the far post, from the right wing, but again no one can get on the end of it. Positive stuff from England but no end product – yet. 28 min: England stream down to the other end. Kirby plays a perceptive little pass with the outside of her right boot, looking for White who is making an angled run in behind. But Austria’s defenders, who have been by far the busier of the two sides’ rearguards, manage to deal with it. 25 min: The England supporters’ band strikes up. Zadrazil gets a painful-looking kick from Toone, and wins a free-kick which Austria will launch into the penalty area. Dunst takes it, and Daly climbs to head clear. 22 min: Mead gets free again, thanks to service from Kirby. She squares to White at the far post – Wenninger dives in brilliantly to clear – and White had strayed offside anyway. 20 min: Austria win a free-kick in a handy spot on their right wing but England deal with it. Kirby, who has been superb so far, then sprints down the England right and knocks a nice ball inside to Mead. Mead’s touch is heavy though, and the move breaks down. The chances should come for England, they are building a bit of momentum now, but creating truly clear-cut opportunities is, as expected, a lot tougher than it has been in the qualifying campaign up until this point. 15 min: From the resulting corner, Bright has a powerful shot blocked. The ball bounces up towards the goal mouth, where Mead tries to head it in, while Wienroither (standing on the goal line) tries to kick it. Mead goes down, and it was certainly a high foot by the Austrian, but thankfully Mead seems OK and there is no sanction from the referee either. 14 min: Daly is booked for a cynical foul. England soon attack down the right, with Kirby flashing an excellent cross right across the six-yard box. There are three England players close by but no one can get on the end of it. The best chance of the match. England come again, and Kirby curls an even better ball to the far post. Wienroither does very well to clear. 10 min: Verena Hanshaw gives away a free-kick for handball in a good position for England. Alex Greenwood hits a good shot goalwards but Zinsberger is right behind it and catches cleanly. 9 min: Zadrazil is in the thick of the action for Austria, first making a good run to the near post trying to get on the end of a low cross from the left, then trying to play a good ball on to that same flank for a teammate. 6 min: Walsh hits a nice early ball to Mead, who is initially in space in a central area near the Austria penalty area, but eventually she is crowded out. Hemp then bursts down the left, before Mead wins a corner on the other side. Encouraging signs for England. 4 min: England, for the first time, get a bit of front-foot possession and advance towards the Austrian penalty area. There are two banks of defenders to deal with, who are set up in rigid fashion, and the early signs are that chances are going to be tricky to come by for Wiegman’s team. 2 min: Austria take the corner short, which seems a bizarre option, and cough up a throw to England. A waste of a nice early opportunity for the visitors. We are under way at a cold and windy Stadium of Light. Austria attack immediately, down their right wing, showing their ability to compete strongly with this accomplished England team. They win a corner. The teams are lined up on the pitch. Ellen White is presented with her 100th cap. And it’s time for the anthems ... Millie Bright speaks to ITV: “It’s been pretty busy [since being named captain], but to a certain extent I’ve put it to one side. Two massive games ahead, we want to keep building ... that’s my main focus ... to make sure the standards are high and that we keep progressing and developing. “It’s massive ... we want to be tested ... we want to keep a clean sheet ... it’s a big day ... It’s an incredible day for Ellen White [her 100th cap], an incredible achievement, the whole team is so proud of her and hopefully we can go out there and put on a good show.” World Cup qualifying news from last night: Wales coasted to a 5-0 win over Greece in their Women’s World Cup qualifier in a wet and windy Llanelli. Skipper Sophie Ingle fired Wales into a seventh-minute lead with an assured side-footed finish from Jess Fishlock’s clever cutback. Kayleigh Green doubled the lead after 17 minutes when beating goalkeeper Anthi Papakonstantinou to an underhit back pass on the sodden surface. Ceri Holland made it three before the break as her 20-yard shot slipped through the fingers of Papakonstantinou, and the Liverpool forward claimed her second after the restart with a superb strike from the edge of the area. Natasha Harding headed home the fifth from Rhiannon Roberts’ pinpoint cross after 64 minutes. Unbeaten Wales face their biggest test in qualification so far when they play Group I leaders France, ranked fifth in the world, in Brittany on Tuesday. (PA) Suzanne Wrack takes a look at some key talking points before the Lionesses’ final two matches of the year: It’s a 4-3-3 for England with Rachel Daly and Demi Stokes coming into the side. England: Earps; Daly, Stokes, Walsh, Greenwood; Bright (capt.), Mead, Kirby; White Toone, Hemp. Substitutes: Charles, MacIver, Stanway, Carter, Wubben-Moy, Parris, Nobbs, England, Scott, Hampton, Russo, Zelem. Arsenal’s Manuela Zinberger is the most notable name on the team sheet for Austria, if you are a fan of the WSL: Austria: Zinsberger, Naschenweng, Plattner, Wenninger (C), Dunst, Zadrazil, Wienroither, Kirchberger, Billa, Puntigam, Hanshaw. Substitutes: El Sherif, Pal, Horvat, Fuchs, Schiechtl, Triendl, Georgieva, Hobinger, Eder, Wienerroither, Schasching, Enzinger. Sarina Wiegman, the England manager, speaks to ITV about Ellen White’s 100th cap: “To play 100 says everything about her, and her consistency to play at the highest level ... it’s going to be a really great experience for her, and for us too.” On Millie Bright taking the captaincy: “We have some leaders in our group ... she had done well the first two int periods ... I had some good conversations with her, and she can lead the team, that’s why I made the decision.” And on the blustery, cold conditions in Sunderland this afternoon: “In the Netherlands we have these conditions too ... we have to deal with it, I expected a little worse actually ... hopefully it doesn’t affect the game very much.” Millie Bright has said she is “humbled and honoured” to have been asked to captain England for the World Cup qualifiers against Austria and Latvia. England have cruised through World Cup qualifying thus far, winning 8-0 against North Macedonia, 10-0 against Luxembourg, 4-0 against Northern Ireland and 10-0 against Latvia. Today’s home encounter against Austria in Sunderland doesn’t look so straightforward: the visitors have won three out of four, along with a draw against Northern Ireland, scoring 21 goals and conceding three. This is a proper test, then, against a side who would go top of Group D with a victory. But England won’t be lacking motivation, particularly Ellen White, the clinical finisher who plays her 100th match for her country at the Stadium of Light today. As well as becoming a cap centurion, White is now just two goals behind Kelly Smith’s all-time England scoring record of 46, although a goal-fest today seems unlikely given the calibre of the opponent. It’s also a highly significant day for the Chelsea defender Millie Bright, who has been given the captain’s armband today and for Tuesday’s meeting with Latvia in Doncaster, where she began her professional career. That match in three days’ time, England’s final assignment of the year, is sure to be an emotional affair for Bright – but first she and the Lionesses will be focused on this afternoon, the toughest match England will have face in some time. Pre-match reading, team news and more coming up.Nick Ames braved the wind and the rain at the Emirates, and here’s his report. Off you click! Thanks for reading this MBM. Mikel Arteta’s turn. “In the first half we played how we wanted but without being a real threat. The first half was too slow and we did not occupy certain spaces. In the second we changed a few things and started in a different way, our rhythm was much better. Saka’s goal was great, it’s what you need against a low block.” Eddie Howe speaks to BT Sport. “It was good for the first 30 to 35 minutes. We were solid but creaked a little before half-time, and probably the same after half-time until the goal. Then obviously you’ve got the penalty incident and the second goal. Ramsdale made a couple of great saves. So we were close and it could have been different. To me it looked like a penalty but I’d need to see it again. It wasn’t, and we needed to defend the second goal better. But you saw a committed team and ended the game strongly. We never dropped our heads. It’s a big task ahead of us, but I saw positive signs.” Arsenal remain in fifth, but consolidate their position ... ... while Newcastle remain in serious bother. A comfortable bounce-back victory for Arsenal in the end. Newcastle remain the only winless club in the top four divisions, and are rooted to the bottom of the Premier League. 90 min +4: Saint-Maximin spins in the centre circle and dribbles with balletic grace down the middle. But his attempt to free Wilson with a slide-rule pass is intercepted. Lovely run, though. 90 min +3: ... so having said that, Murphy makes his way down the right and rolls a cross into the box for Wilson, who can’t connect. Ramsdale gathers. 90 min +2: Newcastle ping it around the back, damage limitation seemingly the aim now. 90 min +1: Actually, there might be more than four added minutes, because Martinelli took a whack on the jaw while being eased off the ball by Lascelles, and is down grimacing quite a lot. 90 min: On BT, co-commentator Steve McManaman gives the man of the match award to Saka. Can’t complain with that decision. There will be four added minutes. 89 min: Tomiyasu sends a long pass down the right for Martinelli, who breaks into the box but hesitates and is forcefully - but legally - barged off the ball by Lascelles. Goal kick. 88 min: Hayden comes on for Shelvey. 87 min: Lacazette threatens to break clear in the Newcastle box down the right. But he can’t control. He tries to dribble past Dubravka but the keeper wins that battle easily. Newcastle go up the other end, Saint-Maximin driving a shot goalwards from a tight angle on the left. Ramsdale parries, the ball dropping to Almiron, who should cream a first-time shot goalwards, with the keeper prone, but decides to shift his feet. He doesn’t have the time for such luxury and the chance is lost. 85 min: Elneny comes on for Partey. 84 min: Smith Rowe executes a perfect slide tackle on Almiron. The crowd enjoyed that one. 82 min: Willock nips in from the left and curls towards the top corner. Ramsdale claims easily. The Arsenal keeper has had very little to do in this second half. 81 min: Martinelli romps down the middle and slips Lacazette into the box down the left. Lacazette slaps a shot into the side netting from a tight angle. 80 min: Tavares barrels down the left and curls a luscious ball to the feet of Martinelli, on the edge of the D. Martinelli can’t control. A better touch, and he’d have been one on one with Dubravka and it’d surely have been 3-0. 79 min: Shelvey steps forward and has a skelp from the best part of 30 yards. Nope. It’s blocked easily by White. 78 min: Saint-Maximin drives down the right, but with Arsenal light at the back, chooses to turn tail. That just about sums up Newcastle’s day. 76 min: Aubameyang is booked for a striker’s challenge on Almiron. It’s his last act of the afternoon; he’s replaced by Lacazette. 75 min: The corner is no good. 74 min: Schar strides down the middle and tries his luck from distance. His low shot takes a huge deflection off Gabriel and sails out for a corner on the right. 72 min: Murphy makes good down the right and sends a low cross straight through the Arsenal box and out for a goal kick. Nobody in black and white took a gamble. 71 min: Aubameyang is found down the inside-left channel and tries to dink over Dubravka. The keeper stands firm. 69 min: Shelvey creams a shot from distance towards the top left. Easy for Ramsdale. Newcastle are far from happy, by the way. They’re sure they should have had a penalty just before Arsenal’s second, Tavares having shoulder-charged Wilson ... from behind? From the side? It was a close thing, either way, and you can be sure that differing opinions will be available soon on the internet. 67 min: Newcastle respond by making a double change: Murphy and Almiron come on for Ritchie and Joelinton. What an introduction to the game for Martinelli! Tomiyasu, found by White out on the right, loops a cross into the middle. Martinelli meets the ball, dropping over his shoulder, on the right-hand corner of the six-yard box. He opens his body and steers a volley across Dubravka and in. That’s a glorious finish. 65 min: Nothing comes of the corner. Then a long ball down the middle nearly exposes Arsenal. Wilson gets ahead of Gabriel and Tavares, but never looks under control, and falls over inside the box. He wants a penalty, but he’s not getting one. 64 min: Saka, who has been magnificent, limps off, to be replaced by Martinelli. Loud cheers for both players. 63 min: Partey bursts into a pocket of space down the left. His shot is deflected over the bar. Before the corner can be taken, Lascelles is booked for a late clip on Aubameyang, while Saka goes down again. He won’t be able to continue. 61 min: Tomiyasu crosses from the right. Aubameyang, level with the far post, flicks the ball over Krafth’s head, but Dubravka claims it before the striker can shoot goalwards. 60 min: Saka is good to continue, for now at least. 59 min: That goal came at the end of a 16-pass move, incidentally. Patience rewarded. 58 min: Saka deserved that. He’s been fantastic since the restart, buzzing and probing down both flanks. But he looks to have tweaked something. He’s down holding his hip, and frowning at the bench. This is a lovely team goal. Some triangles drawn down the left. Smith Rowe suddenly slides infield for Tavares. He rolls a cute first-time pass down the inside-left channel to release Saka, who sends a clinical shot across Dubravka and into the bottom right! 55 min: Saka probes down the right again. This time his cross isn’t quite so good, sailing over the head of Smith Rowe and into the arms of Dubravka. 53 min: Dubravka takes his sweet time over the goal kick. It’s not the first time he’s faffed about, and he’s seriously testing the referee’s resolve. The official might be taking action sooner rather than later. 52 min: Smith Rowe is barged off the ball by Krafth out on the left. From the free kick, the ever-dangerous Saka scampers down the left and whistles an inviting ball across the face of the six-yard box. Tomiyasu lunges in, hoping to poke home at the far stick, but can’t connect. What a cross that was. 50 min: Saka cuts in from the right, jinking his way between Willock and Ritchie with supreme grace. His low drive from a tight angle isn’t so impressive and easily gathered by Dubravka. 48 min: Krafth is booked for an absurd barge on Tavares as the pair chase a ball down the Arsenal left. The resulting free kick leads to a non-event of a corner. 47 min: Ritchie swings a fierce cross in from the left. Wilson sniffs around but Tomiyasu does well to clear, just in time. Newcastle get the second half underway. Neither side has made a half-time change. Half-time entertainment. These two clubs have contested the FA Cup final on three occasions: 1998, 1952 and the Over The Line final of 1932, a tale entertainingly told here by two partisan old boys who each have their story down pat and aren’t budging an inch. Both teams have hit the woodwork: a fine shot from Shelvey pushed onto the bar; an absurd Aubameyang shank onto the post from a couple of yards. 45 min +4: Shelvey looks to meet a ball dropping on the edge of the Arsenal box. He shapes to belt another one goalwards, only for Saint-Maximin to get in his road. 45 min +3: Tavares takes yet another ambitious potshot at goal. Over the bar it flies. He’s testing the crowd’s patience now. 45 min +1: There will be four added minutes, and in the first, Tomiyasu crosses low from the right, Smith Rowe meeting the ball first time and pearling it goalwards. Schar blocks. Tavares blazes the rebound over. Arsenal are finally baring their teeth. 45 min: Saka is slide-tackled in the box by Lascelles. Perfectly timed. It had to be. 44 min: Ritchie is booked for a cynical block on Saka, who was about to scoot down the right. He’ll miss Newcastle’s next match as a result. 43 min: Dubravka needs a bit of attention, and the stoppage allows Aubameyang to stand around ostentatiously shaking his head in a mixture of disbelief and embarrassment. 41 min: ... and then they nearly score! They really should have scored. Saka dribbles down the left, eases past Lascelles, and stands one up for Smith Rowe, who powers a header towards goal from close range. Dubravka makes a stunning reaction save, but can only parry towards Aubameyang, who prepares to tap home from a couple of yards ... only to sidefoot onto the right-hand post! Newcastle clear. What an astonishing miss! 40 min: Arsenal dink it around to little effect pt.II. 38 min: After a lengthy stoppage, Krafth is up and about again. 36 min: Saka curls in. Dubravka punches clear. Krafth takes a whack from his keeper, who was taking no prisoners. He’s down and looks groggy. On comes the trainer. 35 min: Saka dribbles down the right and is clipped by Saint-Maximin. A free kick just to the side of the box, and more set-piece danger for Newcastle to deal with. 34 min: A replay of the Newcastle corner on 31 minutes. Odegaard had his hands on Schar, who went to ground. VAR checked for a penalty and decided against it, though you’ve seen them given. 33 min: Arsenal pass it around the middle, to little effect. A few mumbles in the stands. 31 min: The resulting corner is only half cleared, and Shelvey has another dig, albeit one that’s much easier for Ramsdale to deal with. Arsenal go up the other end, where Tomiyasu drags a low drive wide right. Some action, all of a sudden! 30 min: Wilson slips Fraser into space down the right. Fraser’s pull back breaks to Shelvey, who takes a touch, opens his body, and curls powerfully towards the top right from the edge of the D. Ramsdale, at full stretch, tips onto the crossbar and out for a corner. What a shot, and the spectacular is becoming routine for the new Arsenal keeper. 29 min: Tavares has a belt from the best part of 30 yards. Shank. Goal kick. 27 min: Fraser takes the corner. Schar flicks on at the near post but the ball flies harmlessly over the bar. Arsenal have dominated, but Wilson and Saint-Maximin have threatened to spark into life. 26 min: Saint-Maximin turns on the jets and shimmies down the inside-left channel. He reaches the byline and pulls back. The ball clanks off the sliding Tomiyasu’s arm and out for a corner. Newcastle want a penalty but they’re not getting one. 24 min: Dubravka takes an age over a goal kick, much to the mild displeasure of the home fans. It’s underwhelming fare. 22 min: Newcastle clear their lines, then the game stops as Joelinton has taken an accidental whack in the chest from his own man Schar. The doc comes on and has a look. He’s good to continue. 20 min: Partey shapes to take the free kick. He stutters then stops. Odegaard takes it instead, whipping over the wall and towards the top left. It’s heading into the corner, but Dubravka saves at full stretch. That’s a very decent effort and a stop to match. 19 min: Tavares bursts down the left. His cross is blocked. Arsenal come again through Odegaard, who is clumsily brought down by Willock, just to the left of the D. Free kick in a dangerous position. 18 min: White sends another long ball down the inside-right channel. Saka scampers after it, but Dubravka is quickly off his line to claim on the edge of his area. 16 min: Lokonga, in a deep position on the left, clips a smart diagonal ball towards Saka, who stretches for it, ten yards out, and pokes it marginally wide right. That was a glorious pass, and it would have been a picture-pretty goal had Saka converted. 14 min: White, quarterbacking from deep, tries to release Tomiyasu down the right. Too long. Goal kick. Arsenal haven’t achieved much in the final third yet. 12 min: A long ball down the left releases Wilson, who has his shot blocked. The flag goes up late for offside, though it looked very close. Eddie Howe will be happy enough with this start, despite Arsenal hogging the ball. 11 min: Tavares makes his way down the left and shoots from an optimistic position. The ball’s deflected out for a corner. Smith Rowe takes, and Dubravka claims easily. 10 min: Arsenal are dominating possession. They’ve had 82 percent of it so far. 9 min: Gabriel and Wilson battle for a long ball down the Newcastle right. They grapple. Wilson wins out, Gabriel falling to the floor. Wilson strides into the box and blazes a shot at Ramsdale, who parries. The whistle goes for a foul on Gabriel, a very generous decision given the Arsenal defender was doing most of the wrestling. 7 min: Joelinton whips the ball off Partey’s toe. The Brazilian looks up for this today, doubtless eager to impress the new manager. 5 min: Odegaard turns out of a tight spot and slips a cute ball down the middle, hoping to release Aubameyang. But Schar is over quickly to blooter clear. 4 min: Saka tries to make good down the inside-right channel and thinks he’s won a corner off Schar. But the whistle goes for use of a hand. A brisk if not particularly dramatic start to this game. 3 min: It’s super-cold at the Emirates, though the rain is clearing up. “Seeing how Tavarez deals with Saint-Maximin barrelling through will be instructive, if not always pretty,” suggests Charles Antaki. “Generous of Arteta to select him after his performance last week, so long as we don’t decode ‘if he’d tried, play him again’ as meaning ‘Tierney’s not quite fit enough, sadly’.” 1 min: Joelinton barges his way down the left and seriously troubles White, nearly breaking into the box along the byline. White eventually wins the battle, but only just. Goal kick, but that’s a statement of intent from the goal-shy Newcastle striker. Arsenal kick off, but only after the knee is taken. The gesture is met with warm applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Arsenal are in this season’s strange Ajax homage - white sleeves only, surely? - while Newcastle wear traditional black and white, albeit with that once-seen-can’t-be-unseen accidental “4” motif. Adidas and Castore, must do better, see me. Anyway, it’s a rainy day in north London, and we’ll be off in a minute. Eddie Howe, fresh out of Covid quarantine, talks to BT Sport. “It’s been a long absence for me and I’m delighted to be back. Last week [watching the Brentford match remotely] was a very surreal experience! I was delighted with the performance, we didn’t quite get the result we wanted but hopefully we’ll go one better today. I’ve seen encouraging signs since I’ve arrived at the club. We approach every game differently so the players coming in give us an edge. We have points to prove and believe we can get out of the position we’re in.” Mikel Arteta speaks to BT. “We have to show from the first minute that we are still hurting. That is as it should be. We have to change the team more because we have a busy schedule coming up. We expect a tough game.” As for keeping Tavares, who had a torrid time against Liverpool, in the team? “When a player is trying and doesn’t hide, play him again.” Love is love, one and all. The Premier League does its bit for Stonewall’s Rainbow Laces campaign this week, as clubs link arms to show their support for all LGBT+ people both in the world of football and beyond. Rainbow armbands, pin badges, ball plinths, substitute boards, LED perimeter boards, and of course laces, ahoy! More details of a celebration of solidarity, inclusion and love can be found here. Just one change for Arsenal from the 4-0 thumping by Liverpool. Martin Odegaard comes in for the benched Alexandre Lacazette. No starting spot for Kieran Tierney as he returns from injury, so Nuno Tavares, who had an absolute shocker at Anfield, retains his place. Newcastle United make three changes to the side that drew 3-3 with Brentford last week. Martin Dubravka replaces Karl Darlow in goal, while Emil Krafth and Ryan Fraser replace Ciaran Clark and Jacob Murphy, who both drop to the bench. Arsenal: Ramsdale, Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tavares, Saka, Partey, Sambi Lokonga, Smith-Rowe, Odegaard, Aubameyang. Subs: Leno, Tierney, Lacazette, Maitland-Niles, Holding, Pepe, Elneny, Nketiah, Martinelli. Newcastle: Dubravka, Krafth, Schar, Lascelles, Fraser, Willock, Shelvey, Ritchie, Joelinton, Wilson, Saint-Maximin. Subs: Clark, Lewis, Hayden, Hendrick, Manquillo, Murphy, Almiron, Darlow, Longstaff. Referee: Stuart Attwell (Warwickshire). Here, in reverse order, are the results of the last ten competitive matches between Arsenal and Newcastle United at the Emirates: 3-0, 2-0, 4-0, 2-0, 1-0, 1-0, 4-1, 3-0, 7-3 (!) and 2-1. That’s ten wins in a row for Arsenal, with an aggregate score of 29-5. Ah me lads. While Arsenal are reeling from last weekend’s trousers-down walloping at Anfield, they’d previously gone ten unbeaten in all competitions, trending generally in the right direction, sitting comfortably and encouragingly in fifth. Newcastle on the other hand have yet to win in the league this season, are rock bottom, and Eddie Howe lost all five Premier League matches here while at Bournemouth. All of which suggests there’ll be lots of Arsenal-supporting lads and lassies with smiling faces gannin’ along the Holloway Road later this afternoon. But hey, streaks are there to be broken, and it’ll be quite the start to Howe’s time in the Newcastle dugout if his new team can get any sort of statement result here today. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!The abject silence of sporting contests held behind closed doors during Austria’s return to lockdown is not the ideal atmosphere for any Davis Cup tie, but in their first appearance at the 2021 Davis Cup Finals, Great Britain made their own atmosphere and coolly handled their business. As their singles superiority on paper translated to reality, they secured an essential 2-1 win over France in Innsbruck to clinch their first victory of Group F. In the opening rubber between the two second-ranked players, Dan Evans overcame some tough resistance from Adrian Mannarino, the world No 71, to win 7-5, 6-4. Cameron Norrie, the British No 1, followed shortly after, securing the win by saving two set points in a breathless, extended tiebreak before edging past Arthur Rinderknech 6-2, 7-6 (8). In the doubles, Joe Salisbury and Neal Skupski lost 6-1, 6-4 to Nicolas Mahut and Rinderknech. While France have historically boasted one of the deepest Davis Cup teams, reaching back-to-back Davis Cup finals in the previous format as recently as in 2017 and 2018, they arrived in Austria with a depleted group headed by Rinderknech, the fast-improving world No 58 and French No 4. Although Mannarino has endured a tough season, he was a nuisance to Evans early on with his spotless hand-eye coordination and sweet, compact backhand. However, Evans struck his more potent forehand well and his backhand slice robbed Mannarino of the pace he loves to feed off. Despite ample pressure, Evans sealed the opening set at his second attempt and then took an essential break at 4-4 in the second set before closing out the win. “It’s not easy to come out playing first,” Evans said. “I’ve thought about the match all week and it’s difficult to come out and get your game on the court and try to stay calm. I was very nervous beforehand. It was great to play for my country, come out and get a point on the board. There’s only a few better No 1s in the world right now than the guy [Norrie] coming out here so I wanted to set it up for him out there.” After spending most of his career far out of the spotlight, this tournament marks an interesting step for Norrie as he adjusts to his new status within the sport. Norrie was not selected for the 2019 Davis Cup Finals squad despite being a top 100 player and he has not competed in the event since 2018. Now, as underlined by Evans, he is ranked No 12 and the leading singles player of the team. His first assignment was the tall, powerful Rinderknech who has risen 120 places this year. Norrie swiftly established himself in his typical manner, making ample returns, eking out errors from his opponent with his consistency and depth while exposing Rinderknech’s movement by dictating with his forehand when the opportunity presented. But the Frenchman grew into the match and as he began to hold with authority, he reached the tiebreak and established a 4-1 lead. After fighting back from that, Norrie spectacularly recovered from bleak positions to save both of Rinderknech’s set points. At 6-7 he was completely vulnerable at the net, but he anticipated Rinderknech’s cross-court passing shot correctly and punched his forehand volley into the open court. On Rinderknech’s serve at 7-8, he pulled off a sweet, angled backhand passing shot winner from deep behind the baseline. Soon afterwards he landed his first Davis Cup win in three years. Norrie talked about the high morale within the team that translated to the noise they generated for each other on the court in lieu of any spectators: “We’ve been playing a little bit of cornhole, some darts,” said Norrie. “We’ve been watching the other matches together, going to dinner. Some good chat. It’s just nice to be part of the team, especially since we go play all year long, we’re with our own smaller teams. It’s nice to come together at the end of the year and share this moment.” Great Britain will face the Czech Republic on Sunday morning. With three nations in each group, Britain would win their Group C and confirm their place in the quarter-final with another win.The Madrigal clan are a little unusual. The burly Luisa (voiced by Jessica Darrow) possesses superhuman strength, Isabela (Diane Guerrero) has the ability to make flowers burst into bloom, Pepa (Carolina Gaitán) can control the weather with her mood. It’s only bespectacled Mirabel (Stephanie Beatriz) who hasn’t been blessed with magic. An outsider in her own family, she fits right into a lineage of recent Disney animation heroines, including Moana and Frozen’s Elsa. When the Madrigals’ prized enchanted candle begins to dim (and with it, everyone’s powers), cracks appear in the foundation of the family casa. It’s Mirabel who must figure out how to keep the flame alight. Set among the mountains of Colombia, this sparky musical covers plenty of well-trodden terrain, including sibling rivalry and the crushing weight of family expectations. What’s interesting and unexpected is the film’s subtle acknowledgement of culturally specific generational trauma and displacement. “We can’t lose our home,” repeats matriarch Abuela Alma (María Cecilia Botero), who recounts being forced from her house by “unknown forces” once before. The film also boasts a soundtrack of earworms written by Lin-Manuel Miranda; the slinky, salsa-influenced We Don’t Talk About Bruno rattled around in my head for days.In one bewildering and painful scene in the hit TV drama Succession, Cousin Greg sees his future of ease and wealth turn to dust. His grandfather, Ewan, announces he is giving away his entire fortune to Greenpeace, depriving Greg of his inheritance. Now Greenpeace is hoping to benefit in real life as well as in the fictional world of the media conglomerate Waystar Royco. Thousands of people have looked into leaving money to the environmental group since the darkly comic storyline about Cousin Greg losing his inheritance and then threatening to sue the organisation was broadcast. More than 22,000 people have accessed online advice about making donations in their wills to Greenpeace. The group’s legacy webpage has also seen a tenfold surge in traffic since the episode was first broadcast earlier this month. Greenpeace UK’s head of donors and legacies, John Hutchin, says the Emmy award-winning HBO series has brought an important but rarely discussed subject to the fore. “It’s incredible the amount of interest we’ve seen off the back of this storyline,” he says. “Our planet needs protecting now more than ever, and the gifts that people leave to us in their wills really are vital to funding our campaigns.” Greenpeace UK gets around a sixth of its income from gifts left in wills. This year it expects to receive about £5.5m. The fifth episode of the current series of Succession, which follows the bitter struggle to succeed ageing media mogul Logan Roy, revels in Cousin Greg’s impotent anguish as Ewan announces he is leaving his entire estate to charity partly to spite his grandson. Greg, a peripheral and permanently insecure family member, then threatens to sue Greenpeace, before his erstwhile confidant, Tom Wambsgans, remarks approvingly: “I like your style. Who are you going after next? Save the Children?” After the episode was broadcast, Greenpeace digital team changed the group’s Twitter handle to “Gregpeace” and tweeted Nicholas Braun, who plays Greg: “we heard Cousin Greg wants to sue Greenpeace” with a link to advice on donating. Braun replied, in character, “still gonna do it”. Save the Children got involved too, asking Braun if they were next. He responded: “No no, the children are safe.” The exchange has generated more clicks than any other link shared on Greenpeace’s Twitter account. The original tweet has over 3m impressions. Hutchin adds: “Whether you’re a lifelong environmentalist whose work is not yet finished, or, like Uncle Ewan, you have ulterior motives, leaving a gift in your will is a great way to achieving that.” In the following episode, broadcast last week, Greenpeace gets another mention. Greg is glimpsed being held aloft by Republican supporters chanting his name, with one calling out: “Fuck Greenpeace.” In a case of life imitating art, James Cromwell, who plays Ewan, is believed to be a long-term Greenpeace supporter. Cromwell, who starred in LA Confidential and Babe, is a seasoned activist who was jailed after a protest at the site of a gas-fired planned power plant. Although mainly set in the US, with a strong American cast, Succession was created by British writer Jesse Armstrong, who made his name with the innovative Channel 4 comedy Peep Show. The show’s writing team includes two prominent British writers, Lucy Prebble and Georgia Pritchett. The cast also draws on talent from this side of the Atlantic: the menacing patriarch, Logan Roy, is played by Scottish actor Brian Cox, and Tom is played by English actor Matthew Macfadyen. Legacy gifts have helped many charities survive as normal fundraising activities have been curtailed in the pandemic. The amount of money donated to charities in the UK has increased over the past 30 years, with gifts rising from £800m in 1990 to £3.4bn in 2020. More than 16% of wills now contain a charitable gift. Analysts expect the baby-boomer generation to pass on large amounts of wealth, with many charities in line to benefit. Research by the charity and bequest analysts Legacy Foresight estimates legacy income will be worth £19.6bn between 2021 and 2025 and climb to £23bn in the second half of the decade.Ridley Scott is responsible for many of the best proper films in the history of cinema and by proper I mean the massive, blockbuster, event-type ones, the ones you’d make an effort to go to the cinema to see, the ones that practically smell like popcorn. Thelma &amp; Louise? Ridley Scott. The Alien movies, Blade Runner, Gladiator and I would make a case here for GI Jane, all directed by him. It must help with the hit rate that his work ethic is astonishing: he’s had two films out in the UK in six weeks. His latest, House of Gucci, out now, has divided critics so sharply that seeing it has become a matter of urgency: is it “boring”, “audacious”, “so bad it’s bad” or “stylish”? Is anything better than Lady Gaga in the trailer, saying: “Father, son and house of Gucci”, a line that gets stuck in my head like the chorus of a catchy pop song? The big question is whether it will do better than Scott’s The Last Duel, which was released in cinemas last month and effectively bombed. If times were different, you could wonder why The Last Duel did not do very well, with that cast (Matt Damon, Ben Affleck, Jodie Comer), and that story, and Scott behind it. It was perfectly placed to be a Proper Cinema Film, yet its box-office takings were miserable. Scott talked about it with Marc Maron on the WTF podcast last week, suggesting that the reason it had tanked was young people and phones. “What we’ve got today [are] the audiences who were brought up on these fucking cellphones. The millennian [sic] do not ever want to be taught anything unless you’re told it on a cellphone,” he said. It’s hard to argue with the first part, though older millennians are the last generation who remember life without the internet, never mind cellphones, and have queued up for Gladiator. And I have many thoughts on screen size (I can barely read a crucial-to-the-plot text on my television, much less my phone) and what is lost when beautiful films are shrunk into a tiny box. But surely it is more that, at this time, it remains a big ask for people to go and sit in the cinema to watch a film for two hours or more. I have heard stories of sold-out music gigs that were only half full because ticket holders either wouldn’t or couldn’t attend. Pantomime ticket sales are down a third on pre-pandemic times. People are only half ready to get out there again and understandably so. Everything right now is uncertain and shaky and the blockbuster movie may have to wait a bit longer for its comeback. Dua Lipa: forget gender, we are all now music-fluid For the rest of time, a statement that, at this rate, is looking less hyperbolic than it should, Dua Lipa will be the last woman to have received a Brit award for British female solo artist, while J Hus will be the last man to have been crowned British male solo artist. The Brits have followed the Berlin film festival by scrapping gendered categories and will instead introduce more genre awards, opening up new slots for acts in four categories: alternative/rock, hip-hop/grime/rap, dance and pop/R&amp;B. The decision to do away with male and female categories has been the most chat-worthy, obviously, provoking a small ripple of a backlash that could have been predicted in photographic detail, though I will admit that Brian May going off on a tangent about Queen and diversity was a curveball. The worry seems to be that either men or women will be disadvantaged by this move, but this ignores the fact that music and pop trends are cyclical – women are dominating pop right now and men will perhaps come to dominate at another point. I doubt that judging work on its comparative merits rather than the sex of who made it will make much difference to that. More curious is the genre decision, which seems to have been necessary to bulk out the ceremony, but arrives in an age where genre has all but collapsed and it is increasingly difficult to categorise artists. In 2021, where would Little Simz sit? Arlo Parks? Adele? Ed Sheeran? All borrow bits and pieces from everywhere. I’ll have to check what Brian May thinks. Richard Madeley: gut response to I’m a Celebrity I have an ambivalent relationship with I’m a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here, currently trundling towards the end of a busy first week. I love Ant and Dec’s humour, the general camaraderie and watching people triumph over tough situations, but I hate seeing snakes wrap themselves around famous people’s heads and having to wonder if the snakes are OK or pitying rats just trying to go about their business only to have Ian Beale’s face looming large next to them. The RSPCA yet again asked the series to stop using live animals in bushtucker trials this year; yet again, the producers claimed that “rigorous protocols” were in place. It is not a show for the squeamish and may be tougher than we thought. Richard Madeley slid headfirst into a pit of rotten fruit and veg and had fish guts and offal dumped on him on a freezing cold night in Wales. The presenter, whose Partridge-isms set him up as the main attraction, was taken to hospital “as a precaution” when he fell ill and ended up leaving the series after just four days. Does it make it more watchable, or less, to wonder if the celebrities are actually going to make it through? • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistBorn in Gloucester in 1971, comedian Bridget Christie’s debut BBC Radio 4 series, Bridget Christie Minds the Gap, was first broadcast in 2013. That same year she toured her show A Bic for Her, which won the Edinburgh comedy award for best show and a 2014 Chortle award for best tour. In 2015 she published A Book for Her, followed in 2017 by Netflix special Stand Up For Her. She lives in north London with her husband, comedian Stewart Lee, and their two children. Christie’s new show, Who Am I?, is at Folkestone Quarterhouse on 2 December, then Leicester Square theatre, London, 14-18 December. 1. Podcast Jon Ronson: Things Fell Apart (BBC Radio 4/BBC Sounds) There’s no one quite like Jon Ronson. Meticulous, disarmingly charming, non-judgmental and very funny, he’s like the Columbo of investigative journalism. In his latest series he turns his genius mind to the culture wars currently raging across social media, and how they can cause a ripple effect that results in unforeseen, and often tragic, circumstances. In the first episode, on the abortion culture war, he traces it from a young film-maker in Switzerland to an abortion doctor being shot and killed in New York. What I love about it is the way he interviews people, like he’s trying to solve a puzzle, rather than pointing the finger. 2. Music Ex-Easter Island Head – Twenty-Two Strings I first saw this experimental Liverpool group years ago in Edinburgh and they blew my mind. I’d never seen anyone playing an electric guitar like it was a xylophone before. Using percussion, electric guitars and other instruments, they create a hypnotic, mesmerising wall of sound that builds and builds, with an almost ritualistic fervour, to its climax – before bringing it all back down again. The level of choreography involved, and the control, fluidity, intuition and care they apply to both their music and their unique performance style, are extraordinary. It’s like watching a penguin carry its egg. Everything they do is so deliberate and measured, from the slowly raising and lowering of a hand, to the precise, delicate ring of a bell. I love running to Six Sticks. I play it on my last lap of the park. It gives me that final push I need. 3. Food Dotori, London N4 Just a few minutes’ walk from Finsbury Park station, this little Japanese/Korean restaurant is a gem. I took my brother and his family there when they were visiting from Sweden once and everyone loved it. My favourite is the vegetarian bibimbap (yamchi), but it’s got a great and extensive menu. It definitely has more than just cabbage, which my husband managed to order for both his starter AND main course once. Nice, friendly staff and fast service too. I’d say downstairs has a better ambience: you can watch the sushi chef in action if you’re on a bad date or with your teenage children and the conversation dries up. Oh, and it’s very reasonably priced. 4. App Balance This is the app by menopause specialist Dr Louise Newson. It’s great. You can enter in all your menopause symptoms in your journal, track your periods, moods, sleep patterns, activity and food intake. I started drinking less caffeine because of this app, and found out yesterday that a humidifier would help with my dry eyes. Also, if you keep up to date with everything, it’ll generate a health report for you that you can email to your GP ahead of your next appointment, which is handy as you’ll probably have forgotten everything. 5. Film An Inspector Calls (2015, BBC iPlayer) I watched this last week with my teenage son, who is studying it at school. Based on JB Priestley’s 1945 play, it’s really well written (by Helen Edmundson) and brilliantly acted. It takes place on a single night and focuses on the upper middle-class Birling family There are excellent performances by Ken Stott and Miranda Richardson as the horrible parents, but David Thewlis as Inspector Goole is the star. Interrupting an engagement dinner, he informs them that a woman they have all individually mistreated, disrespected or exploited, has killed herself, and they are all to blame. His closing speech, about shared humanity and responsibility, could’ve been written yesterday. A critique of middle-class Edwardian hypocrisy, Priestley warned that if we weren’t kinder to one another, humankind would be taught a lesson, “in fire, and blood, and anguish”. 6. Book With the End in Mind: How to Live and Die Well by Kathryn Mannix This extraordinarily moving, profound (and funny) book genuinely changed my outlook on life. Dr Kathryn Mannix has spent her life working with people with incurable, advanced illnesses and in palliative care. She has experienced death thousands of times, and has used that experience to write a book to help us all. But it’s far from a miserable, frightening book about our worst fears. Mannix is such a skilled writer, she can make you cry one minute and laugh out loud the next, and there are moments of real joy in it. An essential read for anyone who thinks they might encounter death at some point – and that would be all of us.Will Sharpe has only been surfing a couple of times, but he really loved it. “So I’m not a surfer, I’m not very good at it, I’ve been twice,” clarifies the 35-year-old English-Japanese actor, writer and director. “But there’s something about being in this huge, loud, ‘other’ force and I never feel calmer than when I’m underwater in the sea. I just really took to it.” Sharpe sees parallels with his work, which has so far included the surreal, darkly funny sitcom Flowers starring Julian Barratt and Olivia Colman that he created for Channel 4, and a magnetic performance as sarcastic, self-destructive Rodney in the BBC drama Giri/Haji, which earned him a Bafta in 2020 for best supporting actor. “When I came back to writing, having been surfing, I found myself reflecting on how there are certain similarities: you have to get everything technically right, but you’re still at the mercy of this much greater power,” he says. “And how 95% of the time you are getting the shit kicked out of you, but the 5% of the time that it works, it’s so exhilarating you just want to do it again straight away.” Career-wise, Sharpe has just caught a couple of epic waves. First up is Landscapers, a four-part drama that he has co-written and directed for HBO and Sky. It features Colman, again, and David Thewlis as Susan and Christopher Edwards, a seemingly ordinary couple who in 2014 were convicted of killing Susan’s parents 16 years earlier and burying them in the back garden of their Mansfield home. Then, in the new year, he has the feature film The Electrical Life of Louis Wain, starring Benedict Cumberbatch and Claire Foy, which he co-wrote and directed. Also inspired by a true story, it recounts the life of a chaotic British artist who became renowned in the late 19th century for his whimsical, sometimes psychedelic drawings of cats. To describe Sharpe as a singular and precocious talent would be understating what an original and empathic vision he brings to these projects. The star power he can call on – both Colman and Cumberbatch picked him out specifically – is one indication. I ask Colman why she was so keen to enlist Sharpe for Landscapers. “Because I had loved working with Will on Flowers. He has the most wonderfully creative mind, and as a director I loved the notes he gave me,” she says. The American director Paul Thomas Anderson has said that he considers Flowers “fully formed” and “perfect”. Nick Cave, a collector of Louis Wain’s work who has a cameo as the writer HG Wells in The Electrical Life…, has noted: “It is a beautiful, heartfelt hallucination of a film about a most singular and extraordinary man. I highly recommend it.” In person, Sharpe, whose face is half-hidden by a Beatles mop of black tousled hair, is more modest and reticent than you might expect from these raves. “I’m socially pretty uncomfortable,” he says, over a coffee in a cafe in east London. “Or at least I think I am.” Sharpe traces this shyness in part to his upbringing. His mother is Japanese, and until the age of eight he lived mostly in Tokyo. His family then moved to Surrey, when his father, who now works for the Financial Conduct Authority, took up a new job. “If you’re mixed-race, when you’re in Japan you feel British, and when you’re in England you feel Japanese,” he says. “You’re trying to get your feet on the ground wherever you go. I definitely found it took some adjustment moving to England from Japan, and I think that has given me perhaps an outsider’s perspective on here. In the same way that I have an outsider’s perspective on there.” For someone with a degree of social awkwardness, a career in performance might not seem an obvious move. But as a child, Sharpe liked Japanese sketch shows and Mr Bean; he then played in bands (keyboards, guitar) as a teenager and would become president of Footlights at Cambridge, where he studied classics. After graduating, he went to London and tried to book standup gigs. What was his act? “I can’t really remember now,” Sharpe says, dubiously, before laughing at a salvaged memory. “Sometimes I’d be so nervous I would do it in an American accent. I guess it felt like safety or something because I wasn’t fully myself. I just like the feeling of trying things out. And in a funny way, even the times where it doesn’t go well, when there’s four people in a room and virtually no response, that felt motivating as well in a different way. It was a fun but strange time.” * * * Perhaps because of that outsider standpoint, Sharpe’s output as a director is defiantly and excitingly non-derivative. Nick Cave is not the first to note the hallucinatory quality to his work. This is especially evident in The Electrical Life of Louis Wain, which Sharpe co-wrote with Simon Stephenson (Paddington 2), based upon a story by Stephenson. What could have been a by-numbers biopic is rendered stranger, more fun but also deeply affecting. It’s not a spoiler to say that Wain wound up penniless and in Bedlam psychiatric hospital, but Sharpe’s film imbues his life with a posthumous dignity. Making The Electrical Life… felt like “a big step up” for Sharpe. He had not heard of the artist when he was approached by Cumberbatch’s production company, but was quickly won over. “I found him to be a very inspiring and heroic figure – he showed huge resilience in the face of countless challenges,” says Sharpe. “So I just fell in love with him.” Working with Cumberbatch – “he has this extraordinary stamina and he can always bring it” – turned out to be easier than herding Wain’s subjects. “Filming with cats, at times they give you spontaneous magic,” says Sharpe. “And often they behave like cats and do whatever they want and you just have to adapt.” His other big new project, Landscapers, came about after the American director Alexander Payne dropped out because of a scheduling conflict. The bones of the story could have made for a fairly conventional true-crime procedural: were the Edwardses really responsible for the death of Susan’s parents? How did they hide in plain sight for so long? Sharpe, though, pushed to go deeper; there is a dream-like, fantastical element to his retelling of events. One of the incongruities of the case was that Christopher and Susan Edwards were obsessed with Hollywood memorabilia, spending a six-figure sum on posters, photos and letters; when they finally handed themselves in to the police, their personal effects included handwritten notes from the actor Gérard Depardieu. “They’re both projects where the central characters are people who are difficult to understand, or who maybe didn’t quite sit in the world in as straightforward a way as they could have done,” says Sharpe. “I wanted to understand these people. I knew I could never fully achieve that, but I wanted to try as best as possible to get into their headspace.” Sharpe does not appear himself in Landscapers or The Electrical Life of Louis Wain, but believes that switching between acting and directing improves both disciplines. “I sometimes use the analogy that if you’re driving a car, but you’ve recently ridden a bicycle, then you have a greater sense of how it feels for the others,” he says. As for what he does next, Sharpe’s not sure. When we meet, in early November, his partner, the Loki actor Sophia Di Martino, is expecting their second child any day. He smiles and notes that that might preoccupy him for a while. But he is feeling the pull of acting again, and also wants to write something of his own from scratch. Colman seems convinced that with Sharpe we are witnessing the formative stages of a great creative talent: equally skilled as an actor, writer and director, and still just in his mid-30s. “All of those things should make me dislike him – it’s deeply unfair,” says Colman. “If he turned up playing some sort of sport for England, I wouldn’t be surprised. And it’ll be a sport he never even tried before.” Maybe we shouldn’t rule out Sharpe ending up as a surfer just yet. • Landscapers is on Sky Atlantic from 7 December • The Electrical Life of Louis Wain opens in UK cinemas on New Year’s DayIn early August Gideon Schreiber and a team of virologists at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel began playing around with the spike protein of the Sars-CoV-2 virus – the protein that allows the virus to enter our cells – to see if they could predict future mutations that could yield dangerous new variants of Covid-19. At the time, Schreiber noted with concern that there were a variety of ways in which the spike protein could evolve. If all of these mutations occurred at once, it could yield a variant that was both extremely transmissible and potentially capable of evading some of the body’s immune defences, blunting the efficacy of the vaccines. Schreiber published the findings in a paper, and thought little more of it. But three months later, his fears have been realised. A variant known as B.1.1.529 – which the World Health Organization named Omicron on Friday – has emerged in South Africa in the last two weeks possessing all of the mutations that Schreiber and his team predicted. “New variants are the norm,” said Schreiber. “This case is unique, as the variant has many more mutations than what is usually expected. These mutations may increase immune evasion, making it even more problematic. Whether the variant will cause more severe disease is at this stage not known.” Around the world, teams of virologists are racing to get their hands on Omicron’s genetic sequence, and try to figure out what might happen next. So far, work conducted by Tulio de Oliveira, a bioinformatician who runs gene-sequencing institutions at two South African universities, has revealed that the variant contains more than 30 mutations on its spike protein, compared with the original strain of Sars-CoV-2. The most concerning of these are mutations that enable it to evade antibodies, either from previous infection with Covid-19, or vaccination. “I’d expect [Omicron] to cause more of a hit on vaccine- and infection-elicited antibody neutralisation than anything we’ve seen so far,” tweeted Professor Jesse Bloom, a virologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre in Seattle. According to De Oliveira, Omicron already accounts for 75% of the Sars-CoV-2 genomes being tested in South Africa, while it has also been detected in Botswana, Hong Kong and Israel. “It seems to be highly transmissible,” said genomic scientist Yatish Turakhia, an assistant professor of electrical and computer engineering at UC San Diego. “In less than two weeks, it seems to have become the dominant variant in South Africa, surpassing Delta.” How exactly Omicron emerged remains something of a mystery. Scientists suspect that, like the Beta variant that also emerged in South Africa in 2020, the most plausible explanation is that the virus was able to grow and steadily evolve in the body of an immunocompromised person, probably an untreated HIV/Aids patient. With 8.2 million HIV-infected people, more than anywhere else in the world, South Africa’s fight against Covid-19 has been particularly complicated as these patients struggle to clear the virus, meaning it can linger in their bodies for longer. But while many virologists were expecting the next major Covid-19 variant to be an extension of Delta, Omicron is completely unrelated. Instead it combines some of the most problematic mutations seen in the Alpha, Beta and Gamma variants, along with some newly acquired ones. For Ravi Gupta, professor of clinical microbiology at the University of Cambridge, who said earlier this month in an interview with the Observer that he was 80% sure a new super variant would emerge, the evidence so far is worrying. “It’s not a twist on Delta as people were expecting, but a new thing based around mutations we have seen before all mixed into one virus,” he said. “That worries me. It’s had a long time to adapt and clearly has done a good job if we accept the rapid expansion in South Africa. Without concerted international action now, we are in for many more lost lives globally due to this variant.” Scientists say that travel bans will help slow the spread of Omicron, but stopping it in its tracks is almost impossible. Instead Gupta is calling for testing of all travellers for the novel strain, as well as worldwide S-gene target failure, a form of surveillance that can identify if a new variant is rapidly increasing in prevalence in a particular region. In the meantime, vaccine manufacturers and scientists are trying to work out just how much Omicron might be able to blunt the protection offered by the existing Covid-19 vaccines. The four cases identified so far in Israel – all individuals who had just returned from African countries – had still been infected despite being double-vaccinated. However, as William Hanage, an epidemiologist at the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health points out, the more important question is whether it causes severe disease in those it infects. “Delta is also found in vaccinated people,” he said. “So that’s not special. A lot of the noise about immune evasion is based on what we think we know from the mutations in the spike protein. It will be important to know what sort of disease results from the breakthrough infections and reinfections. However, for the parts of the world where high levels of vaccination are a pipe dream, this could well be serious.” BioNTech – which released the first authorised Covid-19 vaccine with Pfizer just over a year ago – expects to have laboratory data on how its jab performs against Omicron in two weeks’ time. The company revealed that it took steps earlier this year which mean that, if necessary, it can adapt its vaccine against a new variant within six weeks and begin shipping the new version to countries in 100 days. For high-income nations such as the UK, which has already begun giving booster jabs, the impact of Omicron may be less severe. Schreiber says that while the variant might be capable of evading some antibodies from the vaccines, all the available jabs still have many different ways of combating the virus – for example by stimulating T-cell immunity. Instead, the full impact of the variant is likely to be felt in countries like South Africa, where just 24% of the population has had two jabs. It is data from these nations in the coming weeks and months that will reveal the real potency of Omicron. “It seems to be quite good in immune evasion,” Schreiber said. “This may not be that surprising with the high number of mutations in the spike protein. The more important question is whether it will cause severe disease in vaccinated people. We just don’t know. Moreover, while the variant is spreading fast, it may disappear again, as happened to many other variants. One cannot know at the moment. What is clear is that we should be on alert and careful.”A Home Office minister has downplayed the diplomatic row between France and the UK over the refugee crisis in the Channel, insisting it was time to “draw up new creative solutions”. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, clashed earlier this week over how to deal with people attempting to cross the Channel in small boats as they flee war, poverty and persecution. Damian Hinds, whose brief covers security and borders, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “British and French officials have been working together throughout. In fact we’ve been working together for years, on these really important issues. The partnership is strong.” France was angered by Johnson releasing a letter he sent to Macron in which he set out his proposals, including reiterating a call for joint UK-French patrols by border officials along French beaches to stop boats leaving – a proposal that Paris has long resisted. Johnson also called for talks to begin on a bilateral returns agreement, saying it could have “an immediate and significant impact” on attempts to cross the Channel after the UK left a European Union returns agreement as a result of Brexit. Hinds defended the prime minister’s letter to the French leader as “exceptionally supportive and collaborative”. He said “nobody is proposing breaching sovereignty”, amid concerns over the request for UK officials to join patrols on French beaches. “The [letter] absolutely acknowledges everything the French government and authorities have been doing, that it’s a shared challenge, but that now, particularly prompted by this awful tragedy, we have to go further, we have to deepen our partnership, we have to broaden what we do, we have to draw up new creative solutions,” he added. However, Paris withdrew an invitation to the home secretary, Priti Patel, to attend a meeting of ministers from key European allies in Calais on Sunday. Despite Patel being disinvited, the No 10 spokesperson said Home Office officials had travelled to France for talks on Friday with French counterparts as planned. The French government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, rejected the proposal as “clearly not what we need to solve this problem” and said Johnson’s letter “doesn’t correspond at all” with discussions that the British prime minister and Macron had when they spoke on Wednesday. “We are sick of double-speak,” he added, and said Johnson’s decision to post his letter on his Twitter feed suggested he was “not serious”. On Friday, as the row between the governments continued, the first of the 27 people who died after a vessel capsized in the Channel on Wednesday was named as a young Kurdish woman from northern Iraq. Relatives identified 24-year-old Maryam Nuri Mohamed Amin, known to her family as Baran, as one of the victims on the deadliest day of the Channel migration crisis. Krmanj Ezzat Dargali posted a tribute to his cousin on social media and told Sky News: “The situation is just awful. She was a woman in the prime of her life. “I understand why so many people are leaving for a better life, but this is not the correct path. It’s the route of death.” He said he hoped the British and French governments would “accept us in a better way”, adding: “Anyone who wants to leave their home and travel to Europe has their own reasons and hopes, so please just help them in a better way and not force them to take this route of death.” While other victims have yet to be identified, relatives in a Kurdish village in Iraq are bracing for the worst. Loved ones in Ranya had been waiting for days for news from loved ones whose phones had gone silent as they attempted the dangerous crossing on Wednesday.Councils in England are looking for ways to provide housing for domestic abusers so their victims can stay in the family home, in response to growing calls from some charities and campaigners. The recently passed Domestic Abuse Act requires councils to publish a strategy to provide housing support for victims and children. Some councils are now drafting plans that include housing for perpetrators along with measures for victims. Sunderland city council’s draft strategy, which is awaiting sign-off, says alternative accommodation should be made available for abusers. “Women and their children should not have to leave their home. Women perceived this as disruptive for them and their children and unnecessary if safety plans can be put in place to protect themselves and their children. “Women identified a key factor for their recovery would be provision of alternative accommodation for the perpetrator.” There have been growing calls for more ways to rehouse abusers, including an open letter to the government last year. A recent report from the Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance said that “without the option to remove and rehouse a perpetrator, victims, including children, will continue to suffer by remaining trapped in abusive relationships or being forced to flee their home”. The report said any such approach must be led and informed by the victim, with risk assessment and management of the perpetrator. It referred to cases where police and judges have been reluctant to issue domestic violence protection notices and orders in case they made the perpetrator homeless, and other instances where abusers are housed in mixed-sex homelessness accommodation alongside homeless abuse victims. Dorset council has put housing for perpetrators in its domestic abuse strategy. Such plans build on recent pilot schemes in London, North Yorkshire and the north-east. However, some organisations are sceptical of such initiatives. Isabelle Younane, head of policy, campaigns and public affairs at Women’s Aid, said: “While staying in their homes may be the right choice for some women, a woman may not feel safe in her own home, as the perpetrator knows the address and could easily come back. “Furthermore, for many women this is not a possibility and the only option is to flee to a life-saving refuge. “We also know that women frequently face complex, expensive legal issues, such as transferring a joint tenancy into their name, when trying to remain at home, and affordability is often an ongoing concern. “Based on these and other challenges, Women’s Aid does not endorse funding this scheme while refuges remain hugely underfunded. Refuges are more than just a roof over a survivor’s head: they provide vital holistic support, community therapy, financial stability and more. “Yet despite the services that refuges provide, women are still being turned away, due to the lack of capacity and funding. This gap must be adequately addressed to ensure women and children’s safety.” A Local Government Association spokesperson said: “Developing a comprehensive and effective perpetrator response is an integral part of preventing domestic abuse. We firmly believe the right interventions at the right time can stop abuse from occurring, recurring, or escalating. “We would like to see this prioritised at a government level – and eagerly await the government’s National Domestic Abuse Strategy, which is expected to have an emphasis on perpetrator interventions. We would also support cross-departmental efforts to addressing perpetrator accommodation options, so that the abusive partner is removed, and victims are not forced to leave their own homes for their safety.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to radically changing how we end violence against women, by supporting survivors and pursuing perpetrators, committing £25m this year to hold them to account. “The duties in the Domestic Abuse Act are about providing the right support to victims and their children who need to find safe accommodation, rather than supporting perpetrators. “We would expect perpetrators to make their own living arrangements. However, councils have statutory duties to prevent and relieve homelessness, ensuring that help and advice is provided to all eligible people.”Islamophobic remarks by Lauren Boebert are “no laughing matter”, Ilhan Omar said, demanding action from congressional leaders – after the Colorado Republican said sorry. “Saying I am a suicide bomber is no laughing matter,” the Minnesota Democrat tweeted. “[House Republican leader] Kevin McCarthy and [Speaker] Nancy Pelosi need to take appropriate action, normalising this bigotry not only endangers my life but the lives of all Muslims. Anti-Muslim bigotry has no place in Congress.” Boebert made the remarks in her home district. To laughs and whoops, she joked about encountering Omar, one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress, in an elevator on Capitol Hill. “I see a Capitol police officer running to the elevator,” she said. “I see fret all over his face, and he’s reaching, and the door’s shutting, like I can’t open it, like what’s happening. I look to my left, and there she is. Ilhan Omar. “And I said, ‘Well, she doesn’t have a backpack, we should be fine.’ We only had one floor to go. I said, ‘Oh look, the Jihad Squad decided show up for work today.’” That was a reference to the “Squad”, a group of prominent House progressives of which Omar is a member. Boebert, a far-right Trump ally and controversialist, has also used the term on the floor of the House. In response, Omar said: “Fact. This buffoon looks down when she sees me at the Capitol, this whole story is made up. Sad she thinks bigotry gets her clout. “Anti-Muslim bigotry isn’t funny and shouldn’t be normalised. Congress can’t be a place where hateful and dangerous Muslims tropes get no condemnation.” In the face of widespread condemnation, Boebert apologised “to anyone in the Muslim community I offended with my comment about Representative Omar”. She also said she had “reached out to [Omar’s] office to speak with her directly. There are plenty of policy differences to focus on without this unnecessary distraction”. Democratic House leaders including Pelosi indicated that was not enough. “Racism and bigotry of any form, including Islamophobia, must always be called out, confronted and condemned in any place it is found,” they said in a joint statement. “Congresswoman Boebert’s repeated, ongoing and targeted Islamophobic comments and actions against … Ilhan Omar are both deeply offensive and concerning … we call upon Congresswoman Boebert to fully retract these comments and refrain from making similar ones going forward.” The statement also condemned as “outrageous” McCarthy “and the entire House Republican leadership’s repeated failure to condemn inflammatory and bigoted rhetoric from members of their conference”. Another far-right Republican, Paul Gosar of Arizona, was recently formally censured for tweeting a video in which he was depicting killing Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, another leading progressive, and threatening Joe Biden. Only two Republicans voted for censure: Liz Cheney of Wyoming and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois, who both broke with the pro-Trump wing over the Capitol attack. On Friday, Kinzinger called Boebert “trash” and said: “I take sides between decency and disgusting.” Perhaps alluding to McCarthy’s silence on controversies involving pro-Trump figures, he wrote: “Ask some of the normal members when they last talked to Kevin? Been a while for most.” On Friday evening another pro-Trump extremist, Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia, tweeted that she “just got off a good call” with McCarthy. “We spent time talking about solving problems not only in the conference, but for our country,” she said. “I like what he has planned ahead.”Boris Johnson is to announce further measures to curb the spread of coronavirus after two cases of the Omicron variant were detected in the UK. Four more African countries will be added to the government’s red list with immediate effect from Sunday and Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has ordered targeted testing in two areas in England. Javid said the prime minister will “set out further measures” during a Downing Street press conference later on Saturday. The moves come after the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said two cases of the new variant, which is feared to have a higher re-infection rate, had been discovered in England. Travellers arriving in England from midday on Friday who have been in red-listed countries within the last 10 days will have to self isolate and take PCR tests. After 4am on Sunday, they will have to quarantine in a managed hotel. The two people infected and members of their households have been told to enter self-isolation. One case was detected in Brentwood, Essex, and another in Nottingham. Health officials are racing to track down people with whom the two individuals have recently been in contact. The UKHSA confirmed the cases after genomic sequencing overnight. A government source confirmed the two cases were linked and involved travel to southern Africa. On Saturday, health officials began carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to have been infectious. Javid said “this is a real reminder that this pandemic is far from over” as he urged people to get their vaccines, including boosters. “We were concerned from the moment we first identified this new variant,” he added. Javid did not say what further measures would be added ahead of Christmas. Some health leaders and scientists have been calling on the government to introduce its plan B for more than a month after Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told the Guardian that immediate action was required on 20 October. Downing Street has so far resisted adopting the plan, which includes compulsory face masks in some settings, asking people to work from home and introducing vaccine passports. Johnson will address the nation alongside the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, and England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, at 5pm on Saturday. Javid said that anyone who had travelled in the last 10 days to the 10 countries now on the red list – with Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola due to be added to South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini (formerly Swaziland), Zimbabwe and Namibia – must self-isolate and take PCR tests. “If anyone has travelled to these four countries or any of the other red-listed countries in the last ten days then they must self-isolate and take PCR tests,” Javid said. “We’ve always been very clear that we won’t hesitate to take further action if that is what is required. “Today I can announce one thing that we are doing immediately is carrying out targeted testing and sequencing of positive cases in the two areas that are affected.” Whitty said: “We will continue to work closely with the international community to quickly gather and analyse information on this variant to understand any possible increase in transmissibility or resistance to vaccines.” The UK is the second European country to have reported the presence of Omicron after Belgium said it had identified a single case on Friday. Ministers said that from 4am on Sunday, non-UK and non-Irish residents who had been in Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia or Angola in the previous 10 days would be refused entry into England. Those permitted to return will be ordered to isolate in a government-approved facility for 10 days. South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia and Zimbabwe were added to the red list on Friday, and the UK imposed a ban on flights leaving from those nations.The Cabinet Office has been accused of “delay and deception” over its blocking of the release of files dating back more than three decades that reveal the inside story of the intelligence agent Peter Wright and the Spycatcher affair. Wright revealed an inside account of how MI5 “bugged and burgled” its way across London in his 1987 autobiography Spycatcher. He died aged 78 in 1995. Details of Wright’s disclosures and the mostly futile attempts by Margaret Thatcher’s government to quash publicity of Wright’s revelations are detailed in 32 files containing government documents from 1986 and 1987. Tim Tate, an award-winning documentary-maker and author who is seeking access to the files, accuses officials of withholding documents that may cause political embarrassment. “They have behaved appallingly, as if the law does not apply to them,” he said. “It is a waste of public money over documents which should be in the public domain.” Most government documents are released after 30 years, but officials have cited various exemptions under the Freedom of Information Act to block publication of the Spycatcher files. They initially said the request was “vexatious” because of the amount of work involved in collating the files and redacting any sensitive material. It is the latest controversy involving the Cabinet Office and freedom of information laws. It has been accused of wasting public funds in a legal battle over the personal diaries of Lord and Lady Mountbatten in which costs are expected to exceed £600,000. Wright was a senior MI5 officer from 1955 to 1976. After retiring to Australia, he wrote his memoirs, which alleged illegal activities by the security services. Wright claimed that he was a member of a small group of MI5 officers who plotted to try to force the resignation of the Labour prime minister Harold Wilson because of their suspicions he was a communist spy. He also alleged agents burgled and bugged the embassies of hostile countries and allies. One of his most sensational claims was that Sir Roger Hollis, the former head of MI5, was a Soviet agent. A review in 1974 by Lord Trend, a former cabinet secretary, found there was no evidence to show that Hollis had been a Soviet agent. The government launched legal proceedings to stop the book being published in Australia, but lost the action in 1987. During the hearing, Sir Robert Armstrong, Thatcher’s cabinet secretary, admitted he was prepared to be “economical with the truth” to protect national security under cross-examination from barrister Malcolm Turnbull, who later became Australia’s prime minister. Ministers also gagged newspapers in England from reporting on Wright’s claims against MI5. The government was found in November 1991 to have violated the right of freedom of speech because of gagging orders against the Observer and the Guardian. Tate first made a request for the files to the Cabinet Office in April 2019. Under the Public Records Act 1958, records selected for permanent preservation are required to be transferred no later than 30 years after their creation either to the National Archives in Kew, south-west London, or another suitable place of deposit. The government is reducing this timeframe from 30 to 20 years. Tate says the Cabinet Office acted unlawfully by failing to transfer the files to the National Archives within the required time period. Officials say they were permitted under the rules to delay transfer. On 12 December 2019, Tate submitted a new request to the Cabinet Office, covering only the first two files in the Spycatcher series. The Cabinet Office said in April 2020 that material was exempt because it was intended for future publication. Tate complained to the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) on 22 June 2020. The Cabinet Office then said it was also withholding the material because it all related to the intelligence services. The ICO has upheld the Cabinet Office’s decision. “It is like playing a game of Whac-a-Mole,” said Tate last week. “One excuse pops up and you take the time to go through the process and say: ‘No, that’s not lawful’, and then they change tack. It is public money that is paying for this obfuscation and delay, but it never faces any sanctions for failing to meet deadlines imposed by law.” Maurice Frankel, director of the Campaign for Freedom of Information, said the case raised questions about the Cabinet Office overseeing a large number of freedom of information requests. It is under investigation by the Commons’ public administration and constitutional affairs select committee over its clearing house unit, which supports the handling of freedom of information cases across government. He said: “There are errors scattered throughout their decisions. There is a real question of whether they are competent enough to advise government on their own freedom of information requests, let alone to advise government on round-robin and sensitive requests.” The Cabinet Office said: “The information commissioner concluded the Cabinet Office was legally entitled to withhold the information requested under the Freedom of Information Act. We handle all FOI requests in line with the legislation.” The Observer’s battle to publish On 22 June 1986, an article published in the Observer revealed details of a court battle on the other side of the world which was sending shockwaves through the British establishment. The story revealed how Margaret Thatcher’s government was fighting in the Australian courts to block publication of memoirs written by former MI5 officer Peter Wright. He had retired to Tasmania where he was breeding Arabian horses. The Observer article set out some of the allegations in the Spycatcher memoirs, including Wright’s claim that Britain had bugged diplomats from France, Germany and Greece. It was also claimed that the suite at Claridge’s in London where Nikita Khrushchev, who led the Soviet Union during the height of the cold war, stayed, had been bugged during his visit to London in the 1950s. The next day, the Guardian detailed further claims in the case. Sir Michael Havers, the attorney general, instituted proceedings for breach of confidence against both newspapers, winning an injunction restraining them from publishing any of the Spycatcher material. The actions triggered a two-year legal battle over the gagging orders, which were extended to other British newspapers. The government lost its case in the Australian courts in 1987 and the memoirs were also published the same year in the US, as Wright’s revelations went around the world Spycatcher became an international bestseller. On 13 October 1988, the appellate committee of the House of Lords said the injunction against the two newspapers and other media outlets should be lifted because Spycatcher was now in the public domain and its revelations were no longer confidential. Both newspapers subsequently took the government to the European Court of Human Rights, claiming violation of freedom of speech over the gagging orders. The judges ruled in November 1991 that the government had violated article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights – freedom of expression – by keeping the injunction in force once the revelations were in the public domain. They ruled the government should pay £100,000 to the two newspapers.The green, yellow and white colours of Trevor Hemmings, who died last month, have been a constant thread in National Hunt racing for nearly four decades and the former owner’s “friends”, as he liked to call them, continue to honour his memory on the track. Cloudy Glen, a 33-1 shot trained by Venetia Williams, became the latest big-race winner in the Hemmings silks in the Ladbrokes Trophy Chase here on Saturday, staying on strongly to hold the late challenge of Fiddlerontheroof by half a length. His performance embodied the courage and stamina Hemmings always hoped to see in one of his chasers. Whether Cloudy Glen would have prevailed had Remastered not crashed out at the fourth-last fence is an impossible question to answer. David Pipe’s chaser, who had sufficient stamina to line up for the National Hunt Chase at last season’s Cheltenham Festival, was apparently about to ease into the lead when he hit the top of the fence and sprawled horribly on landing. Pipe thankfully reported that Remastered was “none the worse” for his fall. That left Cloudy Glen, who was foaled at Hemmings’s Gleadhill House Stud, in a clear lead, and though Fiddlerontheroof, the 9-2 second-favourite, made ground to threaten the winner approaching the last, Charlie Deutsch, Cloudy Glen’s jockey, was always getting just enough from his mount to keep the runner-up at bay. Brahma Bull (40‑1) and Ontheropes (8-1) filled the remainder of the frame. It was a second successive victory in the race for the Hemmings colours after Cloth Cap’s success 12 months ago. Last year’s winner led the way until the final turn but faded to finish sixth. “It was written in the stars. Trevor was looking down,” Williams said. “To have his two horses making the running in the [former] Hennessy, turning for home. “He understood horses, you had to be patient. In his business he was really on it, but with his horses he was so patient and knew what it took. “This fellow [Cloudy Glen] has always been a weird one and he did a piece of work last week and I thought ‘Blimey. Where did that come from?’ “I decided then I was going to run him in this. He was always capable of pulling something out of the bag, but you never knew if he would do it here or at Fontwell.” Conditions at Newcastle deteriorated throughout the afternoon as Storm Arwen continued to wreak havoc in the north-east. However, the seven-race card managed to survive the elements and saved the best for last as Epatante, the 2020 Champion Hurdle winner, and Not So Sleepy dead-heated in the Grade One Fighting Fifth Hurdle after a thrilling battle from the final flight. Not So Sleepy jinked violently and unseated his rider at the first hurdle in last year’s renewal but was much more amenable on Saturday and fought for every inch of ground on the run to the line. Epatante, who was running for the first time since surgery for a back problem over the summer, will now head to the Christmas Hurdle at Kempton Park. Nicky Henderson’s mare has been clipped to around 10-1 for the Champion Hurdle in March, while Not So Sleepy – Hughie Morrison’s first Grade One winner over jumps – can be backed at 50-1 for the same race.Bars are full, restaurants are turning away customers who don’t have reservations and, judging by the people laden with bags, the Christmas shopping season is already under way. Belfast has known plenty of crises down the decades but this doesn’t feel like one of them. Instead, on a Thursday evening in November, Northern Ireland’s capital has the air of any other big provincial UK city, with a thriving hospitality sector and plenty of money changing hands. Were it not for the accents, it could be Leeds or Manchester. But as with Leeds and Manchester, scars are visible just a short walk from the city centre, and in Belfast these result not just from the impact of industrial decline but from the Troubles, too. The Berlin Wall may have come down; the “peace wall” separating the Falls and Shankill roads has not. Brexit has added a new level of complexity to the highly charged politics of Northern Ireland. The protocol agreed by London and Brussels prevented a hard border being created between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland by putting a barrier between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK in the Irish Sea. If the plan was to make the peace process more secure, it didn’t work. Unionist politicians say strict interpretation of the protocol by the EU has made the agreement unworkable, and Brexit minister Lord Frost has for weeks been threatening to invoke article 16, which puts an emergency brake on the Northern Ireland chapter of the UK-EU deal. That could trigger a full-blown trade war, which would be devastating for businesses already feeling the impact of the extra trade friction. Archie Norman, chairman of Marks &amp; Spencer, says: “At the moment things are not too bad. We do have border constraints but they are deal-able-with. Things are a lot better than they are in the Republic of Ireland or in continental Europe, where we’ve announced a restructuring of our food operations.” Norman insists there isn’t a food safety problem. “Our food standards are higher than those in continental Europe. The sensible thing would be to agree to product equivalence, where we would agree not to drop standards. If we were planning any variations, we would notify the EU and they could then decide what to do about it. “In the grand scale of things the economic issue is so trivial. Northern Ireland has a similar population to Hertfordshire. Of course it matters hugely politically, but there is no hazard to anyone from produce from the rest of the UK arriving there. We are at risk of going to war over nothing.” Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis wants a deal that gives exporters the best of both worlds – access to the EU single market and the UK internal market. “The conditions are met to trigger article 16,” he said, “but we don’t want to use it. We would much rather come to an agreement with the EU. That’s achievable with a different implementation process.” Lewis says the public discourse over Northern Ireland focuses on Brexit and the Troubles, and it is hard to “cut through” that so businesses and individuals see the opportunities that exist. “Everyone wants to talk about the protocol and the legacy of the past. There is a different story going on.” One part of that story is the boom in Northern Ireland’s film and TV industry catalysed by Game of Thrones. What began with some modest pump-priming in 2010 led to eight blockbuster series and acted as a magnet for other productions. “We invested heavily in the pilot. We took a risk and it paid off,” said Richard Williams, chief executive of Northern Ireland Screen. GoT blazed a trail: after it came, among others, Line of Duty, Derry Girls, Dalgleish, a new mini-series based on Henry Fielding’s novel Tom Jones, and The Northman, a new Viking revenge film starring Nicole Kidman. Belfast now has three film studios, and Williams says the success of the industry is a “shining example of what was meant to happen post the Good Friday agreement”. PAC group – a manufacturing firm in north Belfast that comes up with solutions to engineering problems – may lack the stardust of a new Kidman movie, but in its way it is emblematic of the Northern Ireland economy: small (45 employees) but growing fast post-lockdown, and now running into supply constraints. Darren Leslie, the company’s business development director and one of its founders, said: “Things are starting to bounce back. Everybody is busy. Nobody can get people. Workload is going through the roof. We are having trouble finding the right people and keeping them.” More than any other part of the UK, Northern Ireland is a land of contrasts. It has by far the highest share of public sector employment, yet Queen’s Belfast boasts the most spin-offs of any university, and over the past 25 years public-private partnership has helped build an impressive cybersecurity cluster. It is the poorest region and the happiest. John Turner, professor of finance at Queen’s, said Northern Ireland had an abundance of social capital that may explain high happiness levels. “People have come through the Troubles and can deal with adversity. Maybe it has made people a bit more resilient.” Graham Brownlow of Queen’s University’s management school said Northern Ireland had three sets of economic problems. First, it shared in the problems of the UK economic model and was entwined in that. Second, the UK’s weaknesses – such as poor productivity and low investment in R&amp;D, were magnified in Northern Ireland. Finally, it had its own unique problems: the protocol, the shared border, and the fact that the Good Friday agreement didn’t really take account of the need to run for economic reconstruction alongside political reconciliation. “A lot of people suggest solutions that don’t deal with all the sets of problems. They’ll suggest a silver-bullet solution – such as having the same low rate of corporation tax as the republic – but there isn’t one,” Brownlow says. The Troubles held the economy back, leading to weaker investment and trade. Public spending plugged the gap, and has been rebadged since the Good Friday agreement to form part of the peace dividend. But political instability has been holding back the economy since partition in 1921, and in the early 1960s the Treasury pressed for closure of the shipbuilders Harland and Wolff as part of an economic restructuring. The close links between politicians and businesspeople foster cronyism. The education system remains largely fractured along Catholic-Protestant lines. Northern Ireland has the largest proportion of Neets – young people not in employment, education or training – in the UK. Small businesses tend to stay small. Owen Reidy, assistant general secretary at the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, also complained of a lack of a long-term strategy, and of squabbling local politicians possibily over-estimating their importance: “This is a little place on the fringes of Europe. There is too much emphasis on looking south, looking east or looking across the Atlantic. “Some look to daddy in London; some look to mummy in Dublin. But mummy and daddy are not that interested any more.” Giving ‘helicopter money’ a whirl Ever since Milton Friedman coined the phrase, economists have been arguing about the merits of “helicopter money” – drops of free cash designed to encourage consumers to spend. Northern Ireland is putting the theory to test. Taking its lead from a scheme tried in Jersey last year, every adult in the country has been given a Mastercard loaded with £100 that they have to spend before mid-December. In an attempt to support local businesses and encourage high street footfall, the money can’t be spent online. Gordon Lyons, Northern Ireland’s minister of the economy, says if every adult spends up to the £100 limit, there will be a £140m boost to the economy. “We wanted to give businesses an immediate shot in the arm and we are at the peak of the scheme right now.” Lyons is hoping for an even bigger boost thanks to a multiplier effect from, say, someone buying a new washing machine and needing to hire a plumber to fit it. Mastercard says there was a discernible multiplier effect in Jersey. Even so, some say the money from the UK government’s Covid recovery fund might have been used more effectively. Peter Bryson of Save the Children in Northern Ireland said helicopter money would be better spent on topping up the incomes of those on universal credit or child payments to the one in four Northern Irish children living in poverty. SDLP politician Matthew O’Toole asked: “Is this the right time for a stimulus? People are going to be using it on Black Friday and it is hard to see it having an added stimulus.” He thinks it a fascinating economic experiment, though. “People will be doing PhDs on it for years.”In 1934 Agatha Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express was published and became a bestseller. That same year another murder mystery appeared, to rather less fanfare, by “Torquemada”, a contributor to this newspaper famed for his inscrutable crosswords and his concealed identity – he was, in fact, a poet and translator called Edward Powys Mathers. It was a good year for modern classics with F Scott Fitzgerald’s Tender is the Night, Evelyn Waugh’s A Handful of Dust and Robert Graves’s I, Claudius all making their debuts. But it’s Powys Mathers’s novel, entitled Cain’s Jawbone, that is set to fly off the shelves this Christmas. Thanks to a series of TikTok postings by Sarah Scannell, a young documentary assistant in San Francisco, which have been watched by some seven million people, the book has sold out. It is currently unavailable on Amazon and in bookshops, with new stocks not arriving, according to its publisher, Unbound, until 12 December. The distinctive, not to say brain-aching, novelty of Cain’s Jawbone is that its 100 pages are numbered out of sequence. And it’s the reader’s job to discover what the real order is and thereby identify six murder victims and their killers. The number of possible combinations of pages is a figure that is 158 numbers long. Scannell decided to try to find the right sequence by fulfilling a “lifelong dream”, as she put it, to turn her “entire bedroom wall into a murder board”. She cut all the pages out of her paperback copy and pasted them on her wall, rearranging them as she attempts to make progress in what is billed as “the world’s most fiendishly difficult literary puzzle”. What makes her task, and that of all readers, so taxing is that the pages begin at the start of a sentence and end on a full stop, allowing no simple matching up. To make matters even more challenging, the prose is an enigmatic combination of literary allusions, word plays, spoonerisms and buried clues. It’s a little as if Agatha Christie had been rewritten by TS Eliot and then all the pages thrown off a tower block and randomly collected below. Here’s a typical couple of sentences. “Agriculture was to take back her own, it seemed, and I rejoiced to have my last sight of the bent broad back. I couldn’t think why I became suddenly aware of Yeats ; and then it came to me : we find heartedness among men that ride upon horses.” And there are a thousand more where those came from. I spent several days reading the text, scratching my head, rubbing my temples, emitting quiet groans of despair, as I marked down names and what I took to be possible pointers; and I was no wiser as to what was going on than I had been at the beginning. At a certain point, I convinced myself that someone called Henry, who gets the most mentions, was in fact a dog. At others, it seemed that the sexuality of the characters was adventurously omnivorous. But essentially I hadn’t a clue. The short novel was originally published with a £25 prize for whoever could solve the puzzle. Only two people managed to successfully identify the correct page order and name the victims and killers. The legend of Powys Mathers, who died aged 47, lives on among puzzle lovers because he is seen by many as being the first person to compile cryptic crosswords, with clues requiring lateral thinking as well as general erudition. His crosswords became enormously popular at the Observer – with thousands of solutions sent in each week. But Cain’s Jawbone – so named after the supposed first murder weapon, an ass’s jaw – slowly faded into remaindered obscurity. Then, in the summer of 2018, on a trip to visit his father in North Yorkshire, Unbound’s co-founder and publisher John Mitchinson dropped in on the Lawrence Sterne Trust at Shandy Hall in Coxwold. JB Priestley called Shandy Hall the “mediaeval house where the modern novel was born”, referring to Sterne’s Tristram Shandy, the 1759 precursor to the “stream of consciousness” that would be the mark of literary modernism in the 20th century. Mitchinson got talking to Shandy Hall’s curator, Patrick Wildgust, mentioning that he’d recently done a podcast on BS Johnson, the experimental novelist who famously published a novel that was a collection of pages in a box. “And that was when Patrick got out this 1930s puzzle book called The Torquemada Puzzle Book,” remembers Mitchinson. He got the idea that it would be fun to republish it, first as paperback and then as a box of 100 cards. Unbound also revived the original prize, this time set at an inflation-linked £1,000. The winner and, so far, sole person to solve the puzzle this century was the comedy writer and actor John Finnemore, who also sometimes sets crosswords. When Finnemore first read the book he thought the challenge was “above my level”. He was ready to give up almost immediately. “I like a tough puzzle,” he says, “but I just didn’t have the time it would take to solve it. And then lockdown came along and gave me all the time in the world.” Without giving away any trade secrets, he began at the most obvious entry point. There are several poems, written in italics, that run over pages, and they are the most easy to match. “It’s clear that he’s signalling to you that this is your free leg-up,” says Finnemore. “Although it is extremely difficult,” he says, “it is a very well designed puzzle that continually unfolds. As you make each new breakthrough, then your next task becomes clear to you.” It took Finnemore four months to come to the right conclusion, an achievement that he considers to be impossible nowadays without the aid of the internet. For one thing, the book is full of references to British culture and literary concerns of the 1930s that would defeat anyone today without a search engine. But does the book make sense when all the pages are reassembled in their correct positions? Or does it remain as opaque and baffling as it appears in its published form? For a long time, Finnemore thought he’d never find a coherent narrative because there was so much “poetic word association nonsense” to get through. “But sure enough,” he says, “it does tell a story. It tells a bizarre story but it’s a story and it works. It’s funny in places as well, once you understand a bit more about what’s going on and the characters involved. There are some properly good jokes in it.” Scarcely can a chortle have felt as well-earned as that experienced by a reader of Cain’s Jawbone who actually gets the joke. Anyone in search of that laughter should be prepared to endure some tears of frustration. In one of her TikTok videos, Scannell speculates that the narrator is gay or bisexual, which would be bold for 1930s England. Little is known about Powys Mathers, other than some evocative descriptions left by his wife. She recalled him “prowling around his shelves in baggy flannel trousers, his shirt open at the neck and sleeves rolled above the elbow, in search of a quotation through which he would lead his solvers to read or reread some favourite in verse or prose.” Although he didn’t have any children, Powys Mathers did have a nephew who is still alive. Bill Medd is now 97 and has suffered a couple of strokes, so he isn’t readily able to talk about his uncle. However Medd’s wife Julia told me that Powys Mathers wrote poems that were accompanied by “the most lovely illustrations” of lesbian figures, so maybe Scannell is on to something. For the time being, the former Observer man’s 87-year-old mystery remains surprisingly intact. And although there are people in reddit groups claiming to have solved it, there has been no leakage on the internet – which rather suggests they haven’t. Most intriguingly of all, the puzzle seems to have captured the imagination of a generation that is supposedly spoilt by technological ease. The whole thing is enough to make you stroke your jawbone and then ponder what it means that no such weapon is mentioned in the Bible, but it is in Hamlet. Hmmm, time for another read. • This article was amended on 28 November 2021. Powys Mathers wrote poems that were accompanied by illustrations of lesbian figures, but did not draw these illustrations himself as an earlier version said.Forget shining skyscrapers, gleaming office blocks or swanky shopping centres; in commercial property, big sheds are where it’s at. Warehouses may not be sexy, but they’ve proved extremely lucrative in the surging world of e-commerce. Most consumers won’t have heard of Segro, but it will have touched their lives. Items they use every day may have passed through its warehouses: vast landmarks of an online boom that has made it Britain’s most valuable property company. “We get everyday things. That could be a coffee cup, or it could be something you’ve downloaded on your phone that’s gone through a data centre,” says David Sleath, Segro’s chief executive, seated in a boardroom at the company’s Mayfair head office behind Regent Street. “We create the space to enable extraordinary things to happen,” he adds, without a hint of irony. There is indeed something extraordinary about Segro’s rocketing trajectory, from its humble roots as Slough Estates Group to a £17bn behemoth in the top third of the FTSE 100. What was once an uninspiring property firm with a disparate bunch of assets including office blocks and a US golf course has become a serious player. That elevated status can be traced back to Sleath’s decision to bet big on warehouses and industrial property when he took the helm a decade ago. During his tenure, the company has ridden the wave of online retail to overtake competitors with higher-profile assets, such as Land Securities and its Bluewater shopping complex in Kent. Few would have put money on Segro climbing to where it is today; nor, perhaps, would Sleath have himself. The affable 60-year-old was initially something of a reluctant boss, and unsure whether he wanted to step up after five years as finance director. “I didn’t necessarily see myself as a natural chief executive,” he says. One of the aspects of running a company which didn’t appeal was newspaper interviews, he laughs. “I thought there’s a good business in here, trying to get out,” he recalls. “The company had a decent-sized portfolio, but was struggling to work out: where did it want to go?” The glass and polished-wood Mayfair office, with meeting rooms named after innovators including Turing and Newton, feels a world away from the colossal grey cathedrals of consumerism that have sprouted along Britain’s main roads over the past two decades. Segro has been responsible for developing and renting warehouses to the likes of Amazon and Netflix. A fan of Mark Twain, Sleath quotes the writer’s maxim “buy land – they’re not making it any more”, and has taken it to heart. Segro owns and manages 8.8m square metres of space – the equivalent of an area three times the City of London. It has another £1bn of land that it has yet to develop. Logistics, he says, is “unseen, unnoticed”, but its smooth functioning is vital, as the supply chain crisis has shown. Ten years ago, when Sleath took over, many had their doubts about his plan to concentrate on the industrial properties needed for e-commerce. Was it luck or design? “I’d love to be able to say that even in 2011, when we launched the strategy, we could see exactly what was going to happen to Amazon and how it was going to become a major driver of e-commerce and demand for warehousing space,” Sleath says. “But the truth of the matter is, while we had all probably bought some things on Amazon and were aware of them, as Segro we hadn’t done much business with them, and didn’t really see them as a major player in our core markets. At that point they were mostly building very big warehouses in quite remote locations where labour and land were cheap.” Slough, Segro’s humble birthplace on the western edge of London – a location where the Mars bar was invented, and more recently the setting for the TV series The Office – befits Sleath’s self-effacing manner. He labels himself “an accountant”, but is well regarded in the property industry, according to analysts. Segro remains the owner of the estate where it all started – now the largest privately owned business park in Europe, home to tenants such as DHL, Ferrari and O2. Not bad for a firm once nicknamed “slow grow” by City wags. Sleath was educated at a Swansea comprehensive after his father moved the family from England to work at the local Ford plant. No trace of a Welsh accent remains, although a love of rugby does, albeit supporting England. After studying accountancy at the University of Warwick, he spent 17 years working as an accountant at Arthur Andersen, before moving to become finance director of engineering firm Wagon. He has built a considerable fortune off Segro’s boom: his shares and options are worth more than £21m. Segro’s latest plans include multi-storey warehouses. Critics argue that soulless sheds do little for the British countryside, and have exacerbated the the nation’s high street’s decline and a throwaway consumer culture. Sleath is unconvinced. “Ultimately the consumer decides what gets built and what’s required,” he says. “What we are doing is trying to facilitate that: we’re very thoughtful about what we build and where we build it.” Demand for logistics hubs was already booming before the pandemic, but since Covid, space has never been at such a premium. Shipping delays and broken supply chains have seen companies calling up asking for extra warehousing so they can store more stock close to their factories and shops. Fears of a disorderly Brexit amplified that demand. In the past few months, transactions were agreed for about 1.2m square metres of UK warehousing lettings, according to Jonathan de Mello, a partner at independent retail property consultancy CWM. This represents 80% of the space rented out in the whole of 2020, and he reports London remains especially sought-after. Meanwhile analysts at stockbroker Liberum reported in the summer that availability of warehouse space was at the lowest level ever recorded. It’s not just retailers who are on the hunt for warehouses, Sleath says: “We’ve got lots of last mile delivery facilities and parcel hubs. But we’ve also got food preparation companies, we’ve got media companies that are storing their theatre production equipment.” Many of the goods ordered online for Black Friday may well pass through Segro’s warehouses at some point on their way to shoppers, who will mostly remain oblivious to its existence. Not that this matters to Sleath, who doesn’t mind his – or his company’s – lack of profile, as he utters a maxim fitting of any accountant. “I quite like flying under the radar, to be quite honest: I think, ‘Let the numbers do the talking’.”I honestly think that Danish singer Sinne Eeg must be one of the best jazz vocalists alive today, although I confess I haven’t heard them all. She just seems so at home with the idiom, no striving for effect, always in control. I last heard her with the Danish Radio Big Band, and now with this brilliant bassist Thomas Fonnesbæk, and the impression is the same. It’s an unlikely combination, voice and double bass. With no piano or guitar to provide the harmonies, and no drummer to take care of the time, it calls for exceptional skill and mutual understanding. Think of them not as singer and accompanist, but as two equal voices, and their combined inventiveness will keep you happily listening for the album’s full 50 minutes. These 11 tracks include compositions by them both, plus songs ranging from Irving Berlin to the Beatles, Thelonious Monk to Joni Mitchell. Eeg brings exactly the right touch to everything, occasionally breaking into a wordless scat chorus that raises faint echoes of Ella Fitzgerald. Meanwhile, Fonnesbaek’s acoustic bass, fluent and melodic, with a touch of sly humour, keeps them both effortlessly airborne.The interior designer Dorothée Delaye spent two years searching for what she calls “a village life in Paris”. She and her family – husband François and children Faustine, 11, and Jules, nine – had outgrown their apartment in the central Marais district. “I really wanted to have a garden – that was my priority,” says Delaye. “A place where my children could have their friends over to play. I also wanted a large entertaining space where my husband and I could gather with friends.” For Delaye, a chance for “village life” showed up a few kilometres east in the 12th arrondissement, at the back of a courtyard that once housed a mirror factory. “I immediately fell in love with its volume and its factory elements,” says Delaye of the cavernous, open-plan workshop. “It was such an unusual space – the perfect challenge for a designer.” Delaye’s eponymous design studio specialises in bringing buildings out of hibernation. She has spent more than a decade transforming hotels and restaurants into “places where people come to love, dance, eat, share, reflect and get emotional…” (She has just completed the interiors for Mimosa, Jean-François Piège’s latest restaurant at Hôtel de la Marine in Place de la Concorde, as well as the interiors for Sookie, a Marais hotel and coffee shop she likens to visiting a friend’s house.) “A project begins by immersing yourself in a place, in a neighbourhood,” explains Delaye. “By listening and interacting … I find creativity begins to bubble.” With a self-imposed deadline of just eight months, Delaye restructured the 200-square-metre space, creating a large, open-plan central living area plus three bedrooms and a home office. One of the two internal garages was converted into a master bedroom with en suite, and a previously roofed courtyard garden was reimagined as an enclosed paved patio, now thick with foliage. With the floorplan set, Delaye focused on fixtures and fittings. “My main decision was to give the space a countryside feel,” she says. “I didn’t want it to feel like a new house, built from scratch.” Delaye sourced a variety of reclaimed materials for the interior. The panelled doors and herringbone floor are from a Haussmann apartment in the 16th arrondissement; the red marble fireplace came from a grand house in Belgium; and the shutters are from a villa in the south of France. “Each item brings it own story,” says Delaye. “They give the impression that they have always been there.” Though the apartment is open-plan, transitional thresholds have been created through the clever use of texture and colour. The wall surrounding the fireplace has, for instance, been painted a rich shade of burgundy (Farrow &amp; Ball’s Brinjal). “This was a way of setting the decor around the fireplace in the same tones,” explains Delaye. “It makes the living room warm and – at the same time – very different from the kitchen and bar area.” The baroque mirror above the mantle once hung in Château de Chantilly, north of Paris (Delaye was partly inspired by Stanley Kubrick’s 1975 film, Barry Lyndon), and the patinated pillars have been left in situ as a reminder of the building’s industrial past. “With each project, I get very attached to the history of a place,” Delaye says. “I like to imagine that time will continue to pass through it, intervene in my work and eventually appropriate it.” In the kitchen, the leaden walls pick up the grey finish of the marble splashback, while the change in flooring (a marble mosaic designed by Delaye) demarcates a change of use. Similarly, in her daughter Faustine’s country-style bedroom, various shades of blue on the walls and in fabrics create layered interest. “I like things that last,” Delaye says. “You can be bold in your choice of colour without falling for the latest trends.” Paris’s famous flea market, the Marché d’Aligre, is next door to the apartment and Delaye has reflected its vintage eclecticism by mixing secondhand pieces with contemporary furniture. In the living area, a series of chairs – Faye Toogood’s Roly-Poly, a classic bentwood Thonet and a pair of 1950s Danish designs – create an inviting scene. “I enjoy mixing periods, styles and materials,” says Delaye. “I think it brings real warmth to the house.” At the start of any project, Delaye asks: “Would I still like this decor in five years?” Having lived in the mirror factory for five years, she still finds her richly layered home fresh and functional: a countrified corner of the city that is a true reflection of the people who live there. dorotheedelaye.comIn a few weeks, the most ambitious, costly robot probe ever built, the £6.8bn James Webb space telescope, will be blasted into space on top of a giant European Ariane 5 rocket. The launch of the observatory – which has been plagued by decades of delays and massive cost overruns – promises to be the most nervously watched liftoff in the history of unmanned space exploration. The observatory – built by Nasa with European and Canadian space agency collaboration – has been designed to revolutionise our study of the early universe and to pinpoint possible life-supporting planets inside our galaxy. However, its planning and construction have taken more than 30 years, with the project suffering cancellation threats, political controversies and further tribulations. In the process, several other scientific projects had to be cancelled to meet the massive, swelling price tag of the observatory. As the journal Nature put it, this is “the telescope that ate astronomy”. Now scientists are about to discover if those sacrifices and soaring costs are justified when, according to current schedules, the telescope is fired into space on 22 December. “It’s the launch of a generation,” says Daniel De Chambure of the European Space Agency (Esa). Designed as a replacement for the Hubble space telescope – still in operation after its 1990 launch – the James Webb is a far bigger, much more complex instrument with many more ambitious goals. For a start, it will not study the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum – as does the Hubble and most ground-based telescopes – but will gather only infrared radiation. “There are many reasons for this,” says Prof Gillian Wright, director of the UK Astronomy Technology Centre in Edinburgh. “For a start, infrared is the perfect part of the spectrum for looking through dust, and that is important because stars and planets form in regions full of dust. So if you want to understand where and how other solar systems are being created, the James Webb should provide crucial data.” In addition, atmospheres of planets that might contain chemicals such as methane – a gas associated with biological processes – are also best studied by gathering infrared radiation and could indicate if they are capable of supporting life. “Spectroscopy is an important way of looking at the formation of promising planets in our own galaxy,” adds Wright, who is the European principal investigator for the team that built one of the Webb’s four main instruments: the MIRI or Mid-infrared instrument. (The other three devices will also study the infrared spectrum but at differing wavelengths.) This part of the James Webb’s operations is essentially a local affair and will involve looking at stars in our own galaxy. However, astronomers also want to study the very early universe in the period that followed the birth of the cosmos in the big bang 13.8bn years ago. That means focusing on very, very distant galaxies. And again studying infrared radiation provides key advantages. “A telescope is a time machine. It lets you see what the universe was like in the past – because light takes a finite time to reach us from a distant object,” says Prof Martin Ward of Durham University, who is a member of the MIRI science consortium. “However, light gets fainter and redder the further back you look into the universe until its wavelength reaches the infrared part of the spectrum. So if we want to study how the first stars, black holes and galaxies formed, you also need an infrared telescope.” Ground observatories can operate at infrared wavelengths but for prime-quality observations telescopes really need to be lifted above Earth’s warm, wet atmosphere, which blocks much of the infrared radiation that reaches us from space. Unfortunately, putting such a telescope into orbit has been so demanding it has led to countless delays as thousands of scientists and engineers have struggled to overcome the technical hurdles thrown up by the James Webb’s ambitious design. One problem has been the simple fact that the telescope will not be able to rely on human aid once launched. Hubble still flies in low Earth orbit, where astronauts on the space shuttle were able to repair and service it. But the shuttle was grounded a decade ago and so the James Webb has been designed to operate without any prospect of hands-on help from humans. Instead, it will be fired on a trajectory that will take it into orbit round the sun – to a region known as the second Lagrange point (L2), where, 1m miles from the Earth, the gravity of our planet and the gravity of the sun align in such a way that the telescope can be kept almost stationary in roughly the same position and can operate continuously for 24 hours a day. In addition, small gas engines will be burned to ensure the craft remains at L2. At Lagrange 2, it will also be easier to keep the James Webb cold. The telescope has been designed to operate at around 40C above absolute zero (about -233C) so that its instruments do not generate spurious heat signals that could swamp the faint infrared radiation it receives from the other end of the universe. Far away from its warm home planet, the telescope will be protected by a five-layer-thick shield that will block out radiation from the sun and Earth, and its MIRI will also be chilled by a liquid helium refrigerator, the James Webb should be able to keep its cool for up to a decade, its designers hope. But first the observatory will have to overcome a journey riddled with risk. For a start there is the danger of launcher failure. The Ariane 5 has notched up a total 111 liftoffs since 1996, 106 of which were successful. More importantly, its failures occurred early in the rocket’s development schedule and it is now rated as a highly reliable launcher. Nevertheless there is a chance it could fail as it lifts off from Esa’s space port at Kourou in French Guiana. And given the amount of money, time and effort already expended on the project, that is still a scary prospect. And that is just the beginning. On its months-long journey to its new home at Lagrange 2, the telescope will be slowly unfurled as it cruises across space. First to be released will be huge sheets of wafer-thin foil that will act like giant parasols for keeping the telescope cool. Next to appear will be James Webb’s main mirror, the heart of the telescope that will collect that infrared radiation from across the universe. It is seven times bigger than Hubble’s mirror – far too large to be accommodated as a single item. As Wright says: “It is a simple fact that putting large objects in space is a lot harder than launching small ones. That has been a key technical challenge for the telescope.” To get round the size issue, the James Webb’s designers have built a mirror that is constructed of 18 hexagons of gold-coated beryllium mirror. These will unfurl like a blooming flower and slot together automatically to create a 6.5-metre (21ft) mirror. Everything to do with this unfolding, this unprecedented automated self-assembly, will have to work flawlessly, a process that will take around six months to complete. Only then will astronomers find out if the James Webb is going to be one of the great technological triumphs of the 21st century or a dollar-devouring disaster. As Thomas Zurbuchen, Nasa’s associate administrator for science missions, puts it: “Those who are not worried or even terrified about this are not understanding what we are trying to do.” A different perspective on the caution and delay that has affected the telescope is provided by Faye Hunter of Airbus, who acted as project manager for the MIRI instrument 10 years ago. “I was just going into secondary school when the idea of the James Webb telescope was agreed,” she says. “Now I am a mother, and a successful project manager and the telescope still has not been launched.” However, Hunter stresses the care and attention that has been taken to make sure the observatory operates perfectly once in orbit, a process that has involved more than 200 engineers and scientists working on MIRI alone. “A European consortium provided the components and MIRI was assembled from these at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire,” she adds. “Then it was put in test chambers, which had all air sucked from them, and temperatures were reduced to levels that the telescope will experience in space. After it passed these tests, MIRI was sent to Nasa, integrated with the telescope’s other three infrared detectors and again put through more cryovac tests. It takes a long time to do this sort of thing but it will be worth the effort.” The decades-long delay inflicted on the James Webb has had other consequences, however. Since it was originally named in 2002, politics has moved on. In 2021, many scientists regard the name as inappropriate since they accuse James Webb – a former Nasa administrator – of purging gay and lesbian people from jobs in Nasa in the 1950s and 1960s and have pressed for the telescope to be given another name. The space agency has refused such demands, though the controversy is likely to linger. It also remains to be seen what the James Webb will discover. In its three decades of operations, Hubble helped pin down the age of the universe to 13.8bn years ago; determined the rate at which the universe is expanding; and showed that nearly every major galaxy is anchored by a black hole at its core. This time, astronomers will be expecting even more. Among their hopes is the prospect of imaging the first galaxies to form after the big bang, understanding how stars are born and evolve, and investigating the potential for life to appear in planetary systems. All this will have to be done in a decade, the maximum likely lifetime of the James Webb. After 10 years, it is expected that it will run out of fuel and the telescope will no longer be able to keep itself located at L2. Then it will drift off course – to become the most expensive piece of space junk ever built. “It is unlikely an observatory as costly and complex as the James Webb will be constructed again for a very long time,” says Ward. “Big observatories like these are like Christmas trees. They are fitted with so many different instruments that are attached like baubles. In future, we can expect that smaller and cheaper telescopes with more specific roles will be preferred by space agencies. So yes, in a sense, this could be the last Christmas for space astronomy.” • This article was amended on 1 December 2021. An earlier version referred to “the second Lagrange point (L2), where ... the gravity of our planet and the gravity of the sun cancel each other out“. In fact it is the case that the gravity of Earth and the sun align at L2 in such a way that the telescope can be kept almost stationary in roughly the same position.If you were compiling a list of the most toxic tech companies, Facebook – strangely – would not come out on top. First place belongs to NSO, an outfit of which most people have probably never heard. Wikipedia tells us that “NSO Group is an Israeli technology firm primarily known for its proprietary spyware Pegasus, which is capable of remote zero-click surveillance of smartphones”. Pause for a moment on that phrase: “remote zero-click surveillance of smartphones”. Most smartphone users assume that the ability of a hacker to penetrate their device relies upon the user doing something careless or naive – clicking on a weblink, or opening an attachment. And in most cases they would be right in that assumption. But Pegasus can get in without the user doing anything untoward. And once in, it turns everything on the device into an open book for whoever deployed the malware. That makes it remarkable enough. But the other noteworthy thing about it is that it can infect Apple iPhones. This is significant because, traditionally, iPhones have been relatively secure devices and they are overwhelmingly the smartphone of choice for politicians, investigative journalists, human rights campaigners and dissidents in authoritarian countries. Pegasus is so powerful it is classed as a munition and, as such, requires the permission of the Israeli government before it can be sold to foreign customers. And those customers, apparently, have to be governments. It’s not available as a consumer product. (The company insists it is only intended for use against criminals and terrorists.) And it doesn’t come cheap. We don’t know what the current price is, but in 2016 NSO was apparently charging government agencies $650,000 for the capacity to spy on 10 iPhone users, along with a $500,000 setup fee. Government agencies in the United Arab Emirates and Mexico are believed to have been among NSO’s early customers, but my guess is that by now there isn’t an authoritarian or despotic state anywhere in the world that’s not on the company’s books, despite NSO’s claim that it vets its customers’ human rights record before selling to them. And those governments – it can be assumed – make predictably heinous uses of it. Evidence suggests Pegasus has been used in targeted attacks against human rights activists and journalists in various countries, was used in state espionage against Pakistan and, most grisly of all, may have been used by Saudi Arabia to spy on contacts of murdered dissident Jamal Khashoggi. In a slightly farcical turn, at the same time that Emmanuel Macron’s iPhone was on a leaked list of potential targets for NSO spyware, it transpires that French government officials were allegedly in the final stages of contract negotiations to purchase Pegasus! The French have, needless to say, denied this, which only goes to support the old foreign correspondent’s adage that “you can never believe anything until it has been denied three times by the Élysée palace”. Until quite recently, NSO was riding high. All that began to change at the beginning of this month when the Biden administration added NSO Group to its “Entity List” for acting “contrary to the national security or foreign policy interests of the US” and effectively banned the sale of hardware and software to the company. And last week Apple filed a lawsuit against NSO to hold it accountable for the surveillance and targeting of Apple users. The company is also seeking a permanent injunction to ban NSO from using any Apple software, services or devices. Needless to say, the Israeli government is up in arms about this, possibly because of revelations that phones of Palestinian human rights defenders have been “Pegasused”. What’s mostly missing from coverage of these developments is that none of this would be happening had it not been for the skill, dedication and persistence of an extraordinary group of academic researchers at the Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy at the University of Toronto. The school’s Citizen Lab was set up in 2001 by Ronald Deibert, a political scientist who realised that the world would need a way of digging beneath the surface of our global communications networks to uncover the ways that power is covertly exercised in its subterranean depths. Over the past 20 years, Deibert has built a formidable team that functions, in a way, as a kind of National Security Agency for civil society. For years, it was the only place where one could get an informed picture of what NSO was up to and without the lab’s work – and the personal courage of some of its researchers – I doubt that the US would have moved against the company. But even if NSO now slides into insolvency, Pegasus will not disappear, because there are plenty of non-democratic customers for its capabilities. What the Citizen Lab has shown is that the price of liberty is tech-savvy vigilance. What I’ve been reading Classic storytelling Interesting interview on the Public Thinker site with the Oxford academic Merve Emre, who’s done a handsome annotated edition of Virginia Woolf’s Mrs Dalloway. American nightmare The Terrifying Future of the American Right is a fascinating report by David Brooks in the Atlantic on a weekend spent at the National Conservatism conference. Geared for failure Tech Can’t Fix the Problem of Cars is a good New York Times piece by Shira Ovide. EVs won’t wean us off cars.Britain is to add four more countries to its red list, health officials have announced, after two cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant were detected in the UK. After fresh advice from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola will join the travel red list from 4am on Sunday. Travellers who have returned from these four countries in the last 10 days must isolate and get a PCR test, officials said. The Guardian understands the UKHSA is now following up on recent arrivals from these countries. Ministers have not ruled out adding further countries to the red list. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said: “We will do all we can to protect the UK public against this emerging threat and that is why we are surging testing capacity to the impacted communities and introducing travel restrictions on a further four countries: Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola. We will not hesitate to take further action if required.” From 4am on Sunday, non-UK and non-Irish residents who have been in Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola in the previous 10 days will be refused entry into England, officials said. This does not apply to those who have stayed airside and only transited through any of these countries while changing flights. UK and Irish residents arriving from 4am on Sunday must isolate in a government-approved facility for 10 days. During their stay, they will be required to take a PCR test on day two and day eight. South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini (formerly Swaziland), Zimbabwe and Namibia were added to the UK’s travel red list on Thursday and passengers arriving in the UK from these countries from 4am on Sunday will be required to book and pay for a government-approved hotel quarantine for 10 days.Bonnie’s cafe in St George, Bristol, was something of an institution. Serving fry-ups from breakfast to dinner and what one reviewer described as “the strongest cup of tea in BS5” it had been going since 1996. But it was no longer breaking even. A few weeks ago it reopened as a coffee shop and Mediterranean restaurant. Its owner, Suat “Sam” Tezgel blames changing eating habits and gentrification. “When I came to the UK in 1996 I’d never heard of gluten-free or vegan food,” he said. “It was all about fried food. I am a chef and wanted to make a living, so this is what I did. But in the last two years especially, the area is changing. I noticed different types of customers coming in. They were asking for more healthy foods like fresh fish and halloumi.” Bonnie’s is not alone. It is just one of many “greasy spoons” to have shut down altogether or been repurposed in recent times. In the capital The Shepherdess on City Road, Hoxton. had been a fixture for four decades, with a celebrity clientele including All Saints and Jamie Oliver. But it finally became unviable amid rent rises last year. Even the UK’s most famous fictional iteration, Kathy’s Cafe of EastEnders fame had a recent brush with threatening developers. Hospitality sector expert James Hacon estimates that the number of greasy spoons that have closed in the last few years “is many thousands, maybe even tens of thousands”. “In the past couple of decades we’ve seen the rise of branded pub, fast food and coffee shop venues: think JD Wetherspoon, Pret and Costa,” he said. “These brands offer good value with a focus on consistency, often across multiple meal times – directly pulling custom from the traditional cafe or greasy spoon. Even petrol station forecourts and convenience stores see food on the go as big business.” There have been other pressures too, with traditional cafe offerings perhaps considered old-fashioned by younger consumers – millennials have long been caricatured as fans of smashed avocado – and processed pork products linked to cancer and obesity. But this newspaper’s restaurant critic Jay Rayner believes the decline is the result more of social change than food fashion. “The indicator was that these places usually had funny opening hours – 6am to 3pm, typically – and the reason was that they were all about providing highly calorific food to people who needed it as they were working physically very hard in manual jobs. And the reality is that there are far fewer people in these jobs now.” Rayner added: “Many cafes were founded by first-generation immigrants whose children or grandchildren don’t want to work sixteen-hour days keeping the family business going when they can instead go into a profession. But there is a social cost when they go.” In Wales these migrant founders were often Italian. One of the last survivors, Station Cafe in Treorchy had been going for 84 years when it closed in May 2019. Its owner, Dom Balestrazzi, was long ready for retirement and his children did not want to take it on. “It was particularly sad for my husband, as he had spent practically his whole life there,” said his wife, Virginia, who helped run it for over 40 years. “But it was also sad for the wider community. We had no idea of the strength of feeling until the final days when so many people got in touch.” Writer and photographer Adrian Maddox documented many of the country’s archetypal cafes in his 2003 book Classic Cafes. “I became obsessed with a particular type of cafe – the signage, the Formica tables, the fonts of the menu, the windows, the counters, those giant silver tea urns,” he said. “And I spent years documenting them. But then as I finished the project I realised I’d also been sounding their death knell. “Most of the places I photographed have since gone – it’s been depressing to learn of each new closure.” Another who has chronicled the demise of the traditional cafe is filmmaker Bruce Gill, who made an award-winning documentary about the Caledonian in Huddersfield before it closed just shy of its 50th anniversary in 2018. It is now a pizzeria. “You can’t get a full English and a cup of tea for £4 any more,” Gill said. “A bit of Huddersfield’s soul was lost. It’s so sad. It was an extraordinary asset for the town.” In Margate, Kent, the Dalby had been going since 1946 but only came to national attention three years ago when rock star Pete Doherty managed to eat all of its “mega breakfast – a local challenge. Owner Mark Ezekiel said: “We get Londoners down who miss a fry-up because their local has closed. But even with big numbers coming in it’s hard to make any money when costs are rising from wages to utilities and ingredients. The best thing that could happen to our trade is a VAT cut.” Yet even in this tough climate there are some signs of hope for the future. The handful listed in Classic Cafes that have clung on are reporting an upturn. Places like Pellicci in Bethnal Green, east London, and the Workers Cafe in Islington are crammed with young hipsters. The Regency in Pimlico is on “alt tourism” trails. There are even new places opening repurposing the caff tradition. The Breakfast Club, offering both avocado and egg and bacon, prices its full English iteration at a not insignificant £14 – but has still has queues outside its dozen branches. A Jay Rayner tip: Norman’s in Tufnell Park celebrated its first anniversary last week serving reasonably priced classics such as ham, egg and chips (£7.00) but with refinements like a wine list. Founder Richie Hayes said: “We grew up eating in these kinds of places and have always wanted to open our own cafe serving the classics. We are doing all right.” It was with reluctance that Sam Tezgel decided to close Bonnie’s. But, for him at least, a restyle as Laila, with all traces of greasy spoon gone, may turn out to be more profitable. “People no longer want fry-ups,” he said. “Something had to change.”Ministers are facing renewed calls to rethink the controversial “loan charge” imposed on tens of thousands of workers, after it emerged that there had been eight cases of suicide among those facing demands for payments under the scheme. A cross-party group of MPs has already raised concerns over the charge, which has seen the self-employed and contractors including nurses and social workers facing large bills from HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC). While the UK’s tax authority has ruled that they avoided tax through “disguised remuneration schemes”, those facing bills say that they are victims of misselling, and that they used the schemes in good faith after professional advice. Officials have now said there have been eight cases of suicide by taxpayers facing a charge. HMRC has referred the cases of suicide to the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which oversees certain serious complaints about the conduct of tax inspectors. It comes weeks after more than 200 MPs demanded that HMRC provide a 24-hour suicide prevention helpline for those affected. In a letter to chancellor Rishi Sunak, MPs on the all-party Loan Charge and Taxpayer Fairness Group said that there was “an identified and serious risk of further suicides”. They warned that the sums involved would lead to bankruptcies and the loss of homes. HMRC has levied the charges on people who took part in loan schemes that HMRC believe to be “disguised remuneration” devices, allowing people to avoid paying national insurance and income tax. Because the schemes were used for many years without being closed down, some of the bills involved are very large. It is thought that about 50,000 people are being pursued for about £3bn in total. A government review limited the power of HMRC to impose retrospective bills. However, there is still concern across parliament about their effect. “Time and time again the government has been warned of the serious mental health impact the loan charge is having on people,” said Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader. “In July, I wrote to the prime minister and the chancellor to urge them to change course and help those struggling. “This newest revelation that eight people have taken their own lives in connection to the charge is tragic and my thoughts are with their families and friends. We can and must do more to resolve this issue and prevent further lives being lost to this cruel policy. The loan charge is not fair, and it will lead to thousands of people facing bankruptcy. This will have a huge cost to the taxpayer and in many cases, being declared bankrupt will prevent people from working again or paying taxes.” Greg Smith, the Tory MP for Buckingham and co-chair of the group on the Loan Charge and Taxpayer Fairness, said some of the individual bills ran into six figures, adding: “The loan charge continues to severely affect so many individuals and families across the UK, facing thousands and thousands – if not tens and hundreds of thousands – of pounds in retrospective demands off the back of schemes they were advised to take by professionals. “Retrospective changes to taxation are simply never fair and I call on the government to urgently think again before more people take the horrendous step of taking their own lives, and so families can be freed of the living hell, stress and uncertainly this continuing debacle brings to them.” HMRC said it had conducted independent investigations into the eight suicides and found no evidence of misconduct. Treasury minister Lucy Frazer said that HMRC operated a settlement helpline and call handlers were trained to identify taxpayers who might need additional support. “For taxpayers who need specialised help, HMRC advisers suggest they contact organisations like Samaritans or Mind,” she said. “The government is working with HMRC to consider what additional specialised support could be provided.” An HMRC spokesperson said: “Loss of life is complex and there is rarely a single cause when someone takes their own life. HMRC will cooperate fully with any inquest where asked to do so. We take concerns about the wellbeing of all taxpayers seriously and recognise that large tax liabilities can add significant pressures for some taxpayers. “Where customers are facing difficulty in making a tax payment, they should ask us about affordable payment options. We’ll work with them to try to agree a payment plan which allows payment of the amount due over time based on their financial position.” • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThe Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) has said it remains “deeply concerned” about the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, weeks after she disappeared following her allegations against a high-ranking Chinese former politician. The WTA said in an email statement on Saturday that its chief executive, Steve Simon, had attempted to contact Peng through “various communication channels” including two emails. It said it was concerned about her welfare and ability to communicate freely and that her responses were “clearly” influenced by others. A spokesperson said Simon “remains deeply concerned that Peng is not free from censorship or coercion and [he] decided not to re-engage via email until he was satisfied her responses were her own, and not those of her censors.” “The WTA remains concerned about her ability to communicate freely, openly, and directly,” they added. Peng, a former women’s doubles world No 1 and one of China’s highest-profile sport stars, disappeared from public view after she accused the Chinese former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of forcing her into having sex at his home in 2018. Her social media posts containing the allegations on the Chinese social network Weibo were quickly deleted, and the 35-year-old was not seen in public for more than a fortnight. It provoked a campaign on social media using the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai, and it is the first time that China’s #MeToo movement has touched the highest echelons of the ruling Communist party. Simon has threatened to pull the WTA out of China unless he is given proof she is safe. There are 10 WTA events scheduled to take place in the country next year, including the Wuhan Open and the WTA finals in Shenzhen. After not being seen for weeks, Peng took part in a video call on 21 November with the International Olympic Committee’s president, Thomas Bach, as well as a Chinese sport official and an IOC representative. A statement released by the IOC said Peng appeared to be “doing fine” and that she “would like her privacy respected”. It did not explain how the call had been organised. The IOC was criticised two days later by the advocacy group Human Rights Watch for working with Chinese authorities. Its China director, Sophie Richardson, said: “It’s a whole different order of magnitude to see Thomas Bach, in a photograph with a woman, Peng Shuai, under intense pressure, we can reasonably assume from other cases, to walk back her claims of sexual assault, rather than figuring doing everything in his and the organisation’s power to call that out and make sure that she is afforded the support and investigation and prosecution that may well be warranted.” Beijing is due to host the Winter Olympics, starting in February. Zhang, now in his mid-70s, had been head of a government working group for the Beijing games before retiring as vice-premier. He was pictured meeting Bach during a meeting in the Chinese capital in 2016, but has largely faded from public life since his retirement in 2018.When Millie Bright lashed the ball goalwards from 25 yards in the first half, it flew wide of Manuela Zinsberger’s net. It was inconsequential, an unremarkable moment in a comfortable win in uncomfortable conditions, but it spoke to the confidence of the centre-back, who has flourished as anchor at the base of England’s spine. Steph Houghton, England’s captain, has not played a minute of international football since Team GB’s heartbreaking 4-3 extra-time defeat to Australia at the Olympics. An ankle injury has limited her to just four games this season with Manchester City. In the absence of the 33-year-old, Bright has taken up her mantle at the back and marshalled the likes of Leah Williamson, Alex Greenwood and Lotte Wubben-Moy to great effect. When playing in tandem with Williamson in particular, who looks most likely to break apart the Bright/Houghton axis but missed this camp with a hamstring injury, there is a symmetry and balance to the centre-back pairing. The Arsenal defender is the ball-playing, forward-looking half with Bright the long-ball and positional specialist who allows her teammate’s creativity to flourish. Houghton is still a very good centre-back. One desperately needed at City, but the stylistic balance between her and Bright has been increasingly off when paired together for England. Of late, given Houghton’s form, it has been Bright who has looked the more likely to be ousted, despite her Chelsea form suggesting something was not quite clicking at international level. With Houghton missing, though, Bright has grabbed the defensive reins and, for now at least, has been rewarded with the armband too. “I like to lead by example, with or without the armband, keeping my standards high every day, and I’m just here for the team to do well, that’s the aim,” said Bright on being named captain. At 28, Bright has more years ahead of her than Houghton and has had the chance to play consistently under the new manager with next summer’s home Euros approaching. It may not yet be time to move Houghton out of the fold entirely: at the 2017 European Championship Casey Stoney travelled but did not play, there for her experience, leadership and as a high-quality stand-in as the baton was passed. Houghton and her club captain Magda Eriksson have provided inspiration for Bright. “Whenever it gets tough on the pitch, they’re always the first ones to bring the team back to its core and get us back on track in that moment. But every captain is different. Every captain will lead in different ways. It’s important not to put everyone in the same category. With or without the armband I always remain myself, the same Millie; the same player, the same person.” It is important to note that under Wiegman, and without Houghton, England have barely been tested defensively, scoring 33 goals without reply against North Macedonia, Luxembourg, Northern Ireland, Latvia and Austria. In the lashing rain, with flurries of snow and a whipping wind at the Stadium of Light, controlling the game was not easy but England’s defence passed its toughest test to date under the Dutch manager, with Manchester United’s goalkeeper Mary Earps twice being called on to maintain the unblemished defensive record. The real test will come in the friendly tournament in England in February when the Lionesses face Spain, Germany and a yet-to-be-announced third team. By then, Houghton and Williamson should be back in the fold, giving Wiegman the chance to put her defenders up against high-quality opposition. Who will line up at the back for England on 6 July when they open the delayed Euro 2021 against Austria at Old Trafford is still up in the air. Bright, however, is proving to be increasingly undroppable.Three people have died after being hit by falling trees as Storm Arwen brought winds of almost 100mph to parts of the UK overnight. A headteacher in Northern Ireland died after a tree fell on his car, another man was hit by a falling tree in Cumbria, and a third died after his car was hit in Aberdeenshire. Tens of thousands of homes have been left without power as the storm lashed electricity lines and caused significant travel disruption across the country. High winds, rain and snow brought “damaging gusts” across a wide swathe of the UK overnight, according to the Met Office. The forecaster said on Saturday that the rare red warning for Storm Arwen had expired, but people were still being urged to stay indoors and avoid driving, where possible. Further warnings were issued for wind, snow and ice across the UK on Saturday, and police said conditions on a number of roads were hazardous because of falling trees, high winds and snow. Yellow warnings for wind are in place across most of England and Wales, and eastern parts of Northern Ireland, and are expected to last until 6pm. The Met Office said a wind speed of 98mph (158kmh) was recorded in Brizlee Wood, Northumberland, on Friday. In Orlock Head, County Down, gusts of 87mph were recorded, and 78mph winds were recorded in Inverbervie, Kincardineshire, Scotland. The man who died when a falling tree hit his car in County Antrim was named as Francis Lagan, the principal of St Mary’s primary school in Maghera. Police in Cumbria said a man from Lancaster had been killed after a tree fell on him in Ambleside on Friday evening. About 80,000 homes in Scotland, mainly in Aberdeenshire, Angus, Perthshire and the Moray coast, were affected by power cuts. There were also some outages in Northern Ireland. Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks (SSEN) said on Friday night that 80,000 customers were off-supply, but it had restored power to more than 30,000 homes. Mark Rough, director of customer operations at SSEN, said: “Storm Arwen has brought some of the most severe and challenging weather we have experienced in recent years, resulting in significant disruption across the north of Scotland. “Despite detailed preparations, the prolonged and severe nature of the weather front has hampered efforts to restore supplies, with the high winds expected to continue until the early hours of the morning. “We therefore expect many customers to remain without power into tomorrow [Saturday], particularly in the Aberdeenshire area.” The 35-year-old killed in Aberdeenshire was driving a Nissan Navara pickup truck on the B977 Dyce to Hatton of Fintray road when it was struck by a falling tree at about 5.45pm on Friday. Emergency services attended but the man was pronounced dead at the scene. Sergeant Craig McNeill, of the Divisional Road Policing Unit at Inverurie, said: “Our thoughts are very much with the man’s family and friends at this time. “Officers responding to this crash had parked a distance away due to weather conditions. On returning to their van they discovered a tree had fallen on it. No one was injured.” In the north-east of England, 112,000 homes were left without power, with Northumberland, County Durham and Tyne and Wear the worst-hit. Northern Powergrid said that homes affected would probably remain without electricity “well into Saturday”, as weather conditions were making it impossible to safely carry out repair works. Its major incident manager, Rod Gardner, said: “Storm Arwen has already caused significant disruption to parts of our network and the storm force winds, which are continuing to batter our region, are not expected to ease until later today. “The storm is still ongoing and our engineers are doing everything possible to assess the scale of the damage and extensive repairs required. “We have all our resources in place and our priority is to deal with emergency situations, support our customers and ensure our people can work safely as soon as the conditions allow.” Electricity North West said it was responding to a high number of power cuts, with thousands of properties in Cumbria and Lancashire affected. More than 13,000 homes were left without electricity in Wales, as wind speeds of up to 81mph were recorded at Aberporth, Ceredigion. Train services across the country have been disrupted as a result of the storm damage and high winds. ScotRail warned passengers to expect “major disruption” for most of Saturday, with people advised not to travel given the weather warnings in place. Transport for Wales said it had suspended train services because of “significant damage caused overnight by Storm Arwen … with multiple fallen trees and debris blocking lines”. It said it was working with Network Rail “to get services back up and running as quickly as possible”. “Numerous roads are also inaccessible and closed due to fallen trees and flying debris, making replacement road transport options difficult,” it said. Dozens of crashes were reported by police agencies across the UK, and many roads were closed as a result of fallen trees, snow or ice. More than 120 lorries were stranded for hours in heavy snow in Greater Manchester after conditions rapidly deteriorated overnight.Unless you’re loaded, booking theatre tickets is like Russian roulette. When to hit the website? Leave it until after the reviews and, if they’re good, you’ll struggle to get a seat. But jump too soon and you may come to regret it, your spirits falling faster than a safety curtain as the demolition jobs roll in. Last week, the National Theatre’s production of Moira Buffini’s new play Manor received some truly atrocious notices, the critic at the Times deigning to award it no stars at all, which spelled bad news for me. I booked my tickets ages ago, a decision based on the fact that Buffini has written good things in the past, that one of its stars, Nancy Carroll, is amazing, and that the other is Shaun Evans, on whom I seem to have developed a crush following his appearance in the BBC’s preposterous submarine drama, Vigil. Oh, woe. My seats for this turkey cost more than an easyJet flight to Rome. Should I go anyway, in the hope it’ll be so bad it’s good? Or should I beg the theatre (more gambling) for a voucher for some as yet unknown future production? Right now, the second strategy seems to me to be as risky as the first. Where have all the good plays gone? Last week, we were trapped at one so cringe-inducing – for minutes at a time an actor was required to impersonate Maggie Smith – my companion bolted in the interval, making at speed for the nearest martini or three (this may have helped when we met up later and I performed the second act in its entirety at our restaurant table). When I interviewed Eileen Atkins in September, she told me she’d reached the point in her life – she is 87 – when she never wants to see another production of The Deep Blue Sea. I’ve now reached the point in mine where all I want to see is The Deep Blue Sea. I miss you, Terence Rattigan. New lease of life In middle age, it’s important to remember that lives can have second, even third, acts. Away in the Lake District, I stayed at the Hare &amp; Hounds in Bowland Bridge, a formerly closed pub that (I can hardly believe I’m writing this) was recently leased to my old friends, Andrew and Simon. Not so long ago, these two were in London, doing their whizzy media jobs. Now they’re in Windermere, where Simon grew up, pulling pints. At supper, I looked up from my corn on the cob and for a few moments watched them smoothly criss-crossing the packed room in their long, brown aprons. What a sight. I mean, it was inspirational. I’m not sure I knew it was possible to look both so knackered and so happy and yet still to be upright. All over the map On Black Friday (ugh), I did not purchase a flatscreen television, a sofa or a Fitbit; I did not even treat myself, as I see the Rev Richard Coles did, to a new potato masher. No, I bought a kimono with a 1903 ordnance survey map of Sheffield on it, an item for which I’ve longed since the day I first clapped eyes on it online, and wasted an hour trying to work out if the street where I grew up would cover my chest or my backside. The only question now is whether I’ll be able to resist wearing this lovely thing outside the house as well as in it. Someone perhaps needs to warn the neighbours. I can already hear my friend the fashion director urging me to “style it up with jeans and sneakers”. • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistThe Exploding Library: The Third Policeman by Flann O’Brien (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Famous Firsts With Jenni Falconer | Smooth Radio Ry-Union | Sky Bingo Bed of Lies: Blood | The Telegraph There was a lovely, funny, odd programme about Flann O’Brien’s The Third Policeman on Radio 4 on Thursday morning, the first episode of a three-part series, The Exploding Library, which focuses on novels that are lovely, funny and odd. (Maybe not lovely, exactly.) O’Brien’s wild nightmare of murder, bicycles, policemen and atomic physics will be followed by programmes on Jean Rhys’s Good Morning, Midnight and Kurt Vonnegut’s Mother Night. The comedian Mark Watson was our host for the O’Brien programme, and he helped weave an entrancing, poetic examination of the book. Descriptions of its wild content, as well as swift, detailed personal and historical context, were all delivered without the portent and heavy-handedness of an “educational” programme (no In Our Time-style showing off). Exceptional production touches from Overcoat Media’s Steven Rajam and Benjamin “Beef and Dairy Network” Partridge included the ticking sound of a spun bicycle wheel, an ominous chord on a church organ, some truly bananas band noises and, at the point when the book’s notorious “bicycle sex scene” was discussed, Don McLean’s Vincent, which made me laugh a lot. You don’t need to have read the book to enjoy this programme. It’s a treat; the sort of show that reminds us why we need the BBC. A couple of other BBC audio gems, The Reunion (Radio 4) and The First Time With… (6 Music), have recently been repurposed (copied) by commercial radio and turned into podcasts. I don’t mind the format rip-off; much excellent art has resulted from someone trying to make an existing thing better or different. But the two new shows are, sadly, not the best. First up is Jenni Falconer’s new Smooth Radio podcast, Famous Firsts. This is billed as a chat with celebrities about their first times: first single bought, first gig, first time they realised they were famous and so forth. Fine. But what the podcast format hides is that these interviews are, effectively, just press junket mini-chats. The launch episode featured a perfectly nice talk with Ed Sheeran. But the whole show lasted just 17 minutes, and much of that was music. Essentially, poor Falconer was making a programme out of a 10-minute encounter with the singer. Last week’s show featured Michael Bolton, who, similarly, is on the press trail (he also popped up on Radio 2). This suffered from the opposite problem to the Sheeran show: Bolton waffled on in his dull monotone for far too long. In both, Falconer did very well, but this is less of a “first-time” interview show, more of an afterthought for various stars’ press campaigns. She deserves better. The Reunion has been reimagined as Ry-Union, in which Rylan Clark-Neal, who I very much like, brings celebrities back together with significant people from their career. The opening episode featured the not-very-famous Cher Lloyd, who, 10 years ago, when she was just 16, appeared on The X Factor and was quickly labelled a bad ’un. The programme, at nearly an hour, was half an hour too long; we spent a good 10 minutes on “hello”s and “how are you”s. And what of the reunion, sorry, Ry-Union? Well, Lloyd did say she would like to get “all members of One Direction in a room together … they were such genuinely nice people”, but, unsurprisingly, they did not appear. Instead, we heard from The X Factor choreographer Brian Friedman and fellow contestant Mary Byrne. Hmm. Someone needs to get a tougher producer on this show and quick. Podcasts are relying more and more on celebrity encounters (I can’t bring myself to call them interviews), and stations need to be aware that these only can work with ruthless production. Access is not enough. Work needs to be done. This is our time you’re wasting. I’m late to the new second series of UK investigative podcast Bed of Lies, but, hooray, this meant I could binge all seven episodes. Anyone who listened to the first series, about women tricked into long-term relationships by undercover police officers, will expect an excellently researched but upsetting listen, and this is what we get. Bed of Lies concerns British people given blood infected with HIV and hepatitis C in the late 1970s and early 1980s. It sounds an unpromising topic, but the Bed of Lies team – reporter Cara McGoogan and producer Sarah Peters - ensure that the true, heartbreaking tales of those who suffered are given time and dignity. These real-life stories run alongside the podcast’s relentless uncovering of the facts. There are moments in this show that I won’t forget; its dogged humanity reminds me of Nick Wallis’s audio uncovering of the Post Office computer scandal. Highly recommended.The government repeatedly insists that sophisticated criminal networks are driving the Channel crossings by people seeking asylum in Britain. Of all the contested claims advanced by the home secretary on the issue, it remains among the most pervasive. True to form, in the aftermath of Wednesday’s drownings, Priti Patel wasted little time reiterating her determination to “smash the criminal gangs” behind such crossings. Talk to those working on the frontline, or to asylum seekers themselves, and a far more nuanced picture emerges, one that challenges attempts to blame the crossings on an ill-defined and homogenous “evil” criminal underworld. Many crossings – some argue it is the vast majority – are facilitated by families clubbing together to buy dinghies from stores in France, a straightforward and legal thing to do in pursuit of a legitimate objective, namely to claim asylum in the UK. Families may have met on the long journey from, say, Syria or Iran; friends and relatives swap tips and receive advice from those who have previously made the crossing. Women and children are said to have been given free berths by compassionate fellow asylum seekers. Corroboration for this alternative reality comes from none other than the National Crime Agency, tasked directly by Patel to lead the UK’s investigations into the Channel smugglers and whose insight into the issue is crucial. Hours after news of the tragedy, the NCA confirmed it was witnessing “self-facilitation” by asylum seekers, in other words those buying boats to make the crossing. To underline the lack of criminality, it added they were seeing “migrants working informally together without OCG [organised criminal group] involvement”. Patel treats such evidence as an inconvenient truth. Instead her statement following the tragedy only cited the “criminals behind journeys who threaten, intimidate, bully and assault the people who get into these boats”. Clearly some smugglers are unscrupulous, but those that end up relying on them often view them as components of a service industry. They want to reach the UK and smugglers provide the means. Patel has various motives for wanting to create the impression that the migrants are being ruthlessly exploited. First, her rhetoric against the “evil” business model of criminal gangs allows the government to present itself as the good guy. It is a particularly disingenuous position. After all, it is argued, by denying safe asylum routes, the Home Office has created the very business model it demonises. Second, by focusing on a criminal element it can be argued that she hopes to plant the narrative that there is something illegal about people trying to claim their right to asylum. Finally, the focus on criminality allows the Home Office to promote greater securitisation of the Channel border, the very process that saw increased checks on lorries and led directly to small boat crossings. Ironically, some analysts believe that the government’s preoccupation with asylum seekers in northern France (historically numbers are low) may have encouraged some criminals to get involved, largely low-level opportunists who could never meet the criteria of “organised criminal groups”. Again, the NCA offers more helpful corroboration, stating that the boat crossings require a “relatively low level of sophistication”. An organised criminal network is not required – unlike, for instance, the narcotics trade, where large amounts of money, the contacts to acquire high purity product at wholesale prices and discreet, trusted distribution systems are required just to stay in the ring. How many smugglers are involved is a matter of conjecture. So far, despite deploying huge resources, Patel admits having “dismantled” only 17 OCGs – that works out at one for every 4,500 migrants who have attempted the crossing this year. Beyond the political noise lies an immutable truth. And that is the futility of trying to halt what humans have always done: migrate.The question was not whether Liverpool would score yet again but how long Southampton would make a contest of their latest daunting assignment at Anfield. The answer was two minutes. When Diogo Jota scored at the end of Liverpool’s first meaningful attack Jürgen Klopp’s team took their cue to deliver another procession on home soil and expose the vast gulf between the Premier League elite and those in their slipstream. Jota scored twice, Thiago Alcântara and Virgil van Dijk one apiece, as Liverpool made it 10 goals without reply at Anfield inside a week. In doing so they became the first top-flight team to score at least twice in 17 consecutive matches since Sunderland in 1927. Liverpool needed 113 seconds to open the scoring to be precise and signal a long old afternoon for Southampton who, had they planned to stay compact and frustrate, did the exact opposite from the outset. The visitors’ three-man rearguard of Jan Bednarek, Mohammed Salisu and Lyanco, making his first Premier League start, were a blessing for a rampant Liverpool attack with their stray touches, hesitant challenges and misjudged rushes out of defence. Ralph Hasenhüttl, the Southampton manager, insisted he was to blame for the comprehensive defeat by switching the team’s defensive shape. A more realistic assessment is that Liverpool are simply on a different level and the visitors were ultimately grateful to contain the rout to four. “We wanted to surprise them a little bit and we surprised ourselves,” said Hasenhüttl. “That is not a good idea against a team on fire. It was my mistake. I sent them out with a plan that didn’t work. We tried it the way we tried it against Chelsea but it didn’t work. Liverpool are super hungry, super motivated and have an unbelievable flow. I think there is no team that doesn’t have problems to stop them.” Bednarek was at fault for the breakthrough when misreading Trent Alexander-Arnold’s long ball out of defence and allowing it to bounce over him. Jota raced through and, though Southampton smothered the striker’s initial attempt, Andy Robertson and Sadio Mané kept the pressure on down the left. Mané picked out the left-back’s darting run into the area with a delightful pass and the outstanding Scotland captain pulled his cross back for Jota to steer a finish beyond Alex McCarthy. Mané thought he had made it two when beating McCarthy with an emphatic header from a Robertson free-kick, awarded for a nasty foul by Bednarek on the Senegal international’s calf. VAR intervened for a fractional offside, although this merely delayed the inevitable. Jota claimed his and Liverpool’s second after a precise, flowing move that started with Alexander-Arnold winning a challenge before finding Mohamed Salah in space on the right. Salah exchanged passes with Jordan Henderson and, with the visiting defence completely exposed, centred for the unmarked Portugal international to tap in at the back post. VAR assessed a possible handball by Alexander-Arnold in the build-up but did not ruin Anfield’s celebrations on this occasion. There was still almost an hour to go and the third goal arrived minutes later from Thiago who, as against Porto in the Champions League in midweek, pounced on a weak headed clearance to the edge of the area. The midfielder was first to react when Tino Livramento headed away Salah’s cross and fooled Bednarek with an exquisite roll of the foot before driving towards McCarthy’s top left-hand corner. A deflection off Lyanco sent the shot flying into the top right instead. Southampton were completely outclassed. They were also reliant on Liverpool errors for something, anything, to comfort the admirable number of fans who had trekked up from the south coast. Even then Alisson stood in their way. The Liverpool goalkeeper reacted smartly to smother at the feet of James Ward-Prowse when the visiting captain dispossessed Thiago and found himself through on goal. He saved from Armando Broja when the striker seized on a poor throw-in by Alexander-Arnold and held off Ibrahima Konaté to sprint into the area. And he denied Adam Armstrong on the stroke of half-time when, collecting Broja’s cross from the right, the striker drilled low towards the bottom corner. The second half also opened in worrying fashion for Hasenhüttl’s team when Van Dijk scored his first Liverpool goal since returning from injury. Another Southampton old boy was involved in the fourth, Mané forcing McCarthy into action when attempting a curler into the top corner from distance. From the resulting corner by Alexander-Arnold, Oriol Romeu switched off on the penalty spot and left Van Dijk free to volley under the exposed and overworked Southampton keeper. Jota missed a chance for a hat-trick when steering Robertson’s low cross wide at full stretch and Salisu prevented Salah’s goalbound shot from reaching the target with a well-timed header. Hasenhüttl had made a double substitution at the interval, replacing Che Adams and Bednarek with Nathan Tella and Nathan Redmond respectively. But, while Southampton stemmed the tide of clearcut chances in the second half, the game was long gone – from minute two.The first meeting between two of the greatest midfielders to have graced the Premier League in their new habitats as managers ended with a triumph that Steven Gerrard must have savoured. Trailing to Matt Targett’s early goal and having delivered their worst performance since Patrick Vieira took over from Roy Hodgson in the summer, Crystal Palace were left frustrated by a stubborn rearguard effort from Aston Villa before John McGinn made sure of the points for the visitors late on. Marc Guéhi’s consolation goal arrived far too late for Palace. The victory not only made it two in succession for their new manager since his arrival from Rangers but, as Gerrard acknowledged, can also provide a benchmark for the rest of the campaign as they inflicted Palace’s first home defeat of the season in his first away match before facing Manchester City on Wednesday. “Our first-half performance was excellent and we knew we would have to roll our sleeves up in the second half,” he said. “It’s a fantastic away performance because this is a difficult place to come. We have to take confidence from this.” Gerrard has spoken of his admiration for Vieira as a player, describing the former Arsenal captain as a “role model” and admitting to have based large parts of his game on the Frenchman. He also paid tribute to the start his old midfield rival has made to life as a Premier League manager whereby Palace began this game three points ahead of their opponents having lost only to Chelsea and Liverpool. The absence of the outstanding Joachim Anderson from the heart of his defence due to a hamstring injury forced Vieira to hand James Tomkins a first league start of the season, with Michael Olise the other change from Palace’s draw with Burnley last week. Perhaps surprisingly Gerrard opted to leave the summer signings Emi Buendía and Danny Ings on the bench and chose Ashley Young and Leon Bailey to support Ollie Watkins. Having survived an early scare when Wilfried Zaha dragged his shot just wide of the post after a flowing Palace attack, Villa won a corner and promptly took the lead. A misjudgment from Cheikhou Kouyaté allowed Targett the opportunity to take a touch before firing through the Senegal midfielder’s legs – the 10th goal Palace have conceded from a set piece this season. “We didn’t defend well enough as a team,” admitted Vieira. “I’m very disappointed with the performance.” Missing the industry of the injured James McArthur, Palace struggled to find a response as Zaha and Conor Gallagher were denied space by a compact defence. Indeed Villa looked more likely to extend their lead as McGinn curled a sumptuous effort just wide of Vicente Guaita’s far post before Tyrone Mings made a hash of Young’s brilliant free-kick into the penalty area. There were more than a few murmurs of discontent among the home supporters after a bizarre moment of indecision in which Tomkins and Guaita each left a cross to the other before Joel Ward came to the rescue. Palace emerged in determined mood for the second half. A raking crossfield pass from Olise that either manager would have been proud of set the tempo, even if Zaha failed to pick out Christian Benteke with the resulting cross. A moment of madness from Luka Milivojevic almost gifted Villa a second when his short free-kick was intercepted and the Serbian brought down Watkins just outside the box. Gerrard was next to count his blessings when Matty Cash and Ezri Konsa nearly conspired to turn Gallagher’s cross into their own net. The return of Eberechi Eze after nearly six months out with a knee injury raised the atmosphere inside Selhurst Park. A VAR check then spared Villa’s substitute Douglas Luiz after replays showed he had hardly made contact with Kouyaté’s shin despite being initially shown a red card by the referee, Michael Salisbury. Benteke’s volley straight at Emi Martínez after being set up by Tomkins became even more costly when Buendía and Anwar El Ghazi combined to set up McGinn’s brilliant curler that ended Palace’s resistance. Guéhi’s late strike could not spoil Gerrard’s day.This was London Irish’s second win of the season, but you would never have known it. To claim it at the home of their local rivals, the champions of England, will have gratified still further. A game in which both sides tried to outdo each other on the missed-opportunity front ended in a win for the side less profligate. Irish started among four sides level on 17 points, from which deadlock they now emerge to nestle in behind the top six in the customarily tight mid-table. Quins remain second, but their old obsession with extravagance haunted them on a bitterly cold day that could have favoured something more prosaic. This was not quite the exhilarating affair we might have expected from last season’s kings of the comeback against this season’s, but Irish did recover from a half-time deficit, so their status on that front remains intact. Most of their fightbacks this season have ended in draws, three of them to be precise, hence that place in mid-table with only two wins. “It was an emotional game for us,” said Les Kiss, the Exiles’ head coach. “To get away from a draw is very welcome.” Two tries midway through the second half were the obvious clinchers of victory, but Irish will also cherish the 10 points they took from the first, which was spent mostly in worthy defence with that cold wind in their faces. The clash of the South African inside centres, André Esterhuizen in the home corner, Benhard Janse van Rensburg in the away, was as eye-watering as one might expect. Quins were without their three England internationals, with Marcus Smith and Alex Dombrandt voluntarily rested and Joe Marchant as a precaution. Smith’s understudy, the admirable Tommy Allan, was then lost just before the break to a shoulder injury. By then Quins had set out their stall, and it was a familiar tale. They were awarded only three penalties in the first half, but two of them were kickable; both were sent to the corner – for no return. When they did open the try-scoring, it was from open play, Danny Care teasing Irish with a chip behind. Kyle Rowe missed the bobbling ball, and Oscar Beard scooped up to score. Irish were not afraid of sending penalties to the corner either. A try for Agustín Creevy from one such driven lineout reestablished the visitors’ lead, after Paddy Jackson’s early penalty, which ultimately proved the difference between the sides. But Quins struck on the approach to half-time. Jack Walker and Luke Northmore picked fantastic lines, and the latter finished to establish the home team’s 14-10 lead at the break. They will feel, given the disparity in penalties against them, that they were good for at least that, but rugby places such a premium on efficiency. Irish, who had barely threatened, were still in the game. Then they pounced suddenly and out of the blue. Tom Parton is tipped by many for England. His break down the right had Quins turning this way and that. Curtis Rona’s flat pass put Rob Simmons over in the corner. Five minutes later and Irish sent another penalty to the corner, Quins style. They scored from it again, Ben White darting through the bodies to put Irish more than a score ahead as the game entered the final quarter. Quins made their next penalty to the corner tell. Another punishing carry by Esterhuizen, and Tom Lawday sucked in two defenders to send Beard away for his second. Now it was Irish who were starting to miss their chances. Parton’s break earlier had featured a missed man outside him. They scored that time anyway, but Ollie Hassell-Collins was guilty of the same crime twice as the game entered its edgy endgame, with no points accruing. It nearly cost the Exiles. Quins were awarded one last scrum, deep in their own 22, from which they sent Huw Jones haring away. But by now the bitter wind was whipping a cold drizzle into their faces. The move broke down, and Rona won the game’s last penalty over the ball. Only Irish’s second win, but their first came at the home of Exeter – and now this in the lair of Exeter’s successors as champions of England. They may not be contenders themselves, but London Irish are typical of so many teams in this league. No easy games, as they say.Days after reports of shortages of Thanksgiving turkeys proved premature, the American Christmas Tree Association was moved to promise Americans that “Christmas will not be cancelled”, amid reports of looming problems. The statement from ACTA, which represents the artificial tree industry, came amid concern that supplies of both plastic trees and live Noble, Frazer and Balsam firs will be subject to supply chain issues and the effects of the climate crisis. ACTA said shipping costs for plastic trees could quadruple compared to 2020, because of supply chain problems. Chinese-made artificial trees on ships unable to unload at US west coast ports have been re-routed through the Panama Canal to the east coast, doubling delivery times. Supplies of natural trees have been hit by problems including rising labour and transportation costs and extreme heat and wildfires that scorched north-western farms this summer. Last year, 94m US households erected a Christmas tree. Of those trees, 85% were artificial and 15% were live. Artificial trees can cost as much as 80% more, which may also place more pressure on live growers. Doug Hundley, a seasonal spokesman for the National Christmas Tree Association, which represents live growers, told the Washington Post prices would be 5% to 10% higher than last year. The Pacific north-west is the largest US regional producer of live trees, producing 5m annually and accounting for nearly 25% of the US supply. Hundley said the region’s stock was down 10%, or roughly 500,000 trees, after a year of harsh weather. Cubby Steinhart, a grower who produces 1.5m trees annually at farms in Oregon and South Carolina, told the Post this year saw the loss of 20% of his Noble firs to fire, freight charges going up by a quarter, and pay to seasonal farmworkers rising to $16 an hour from $13. Demand in 2020 was “nuts” because of the coronavirus pandemic, Steinhart said, adding: “People were tired of being at home, so live tree nurseries were unbelievable.”Premier League: Both sides could do with a win as Marcelo Bielsa takes his side to Brighon, who are without a win in seven league games. Scott Murray has the latest ... Premier League: Wolves had their goalkeeper Jose Sa to thank for their escape from Carrow Road with a point against rejuvenated Norwich City. Premier League: Matt Targett and John McGinn got the goals for Aston Villa to give Steven Gerrard his second consecutive win since taking over as manager of the club. Premier League: Newcastle’s forlorn search for a first win of the season continues after goals from Buklayo Saka and Gabriel Martinelli consigned them to their eighth consecutive defeat at the hands of Arsenal. Nick Ames was on hand to see the latest. Premier League: “The question was not whether Liverpool would score once again but how long Southampton would make a contest of their latest daunting assignment at Anfield. The answer was two minutes. Andy Hunter reports ... Preston 1-1 Fulham Bournemouth 2-2 Coventry City Birmingham City 1-0 Blackpool Huddersfield Town 1-2 Middlesbrough Hull City 2-1 Millwall Luton Town 1-2 Cardiff City Peterborough United 0-0 Barnsley Stoke City 0-1 Blackburn Rovers Swansea City 2-3 Reading View the Championship table Scottish Premiership results Dundee 3-0 Motherwell Hearts 2-0 St Mirren Ross County 1-1 Dundee United St Johnstone 1-2 Hibernian View the Scottish Premiership table Arsenal 2-0 Newcastle Liverpool 4-0 Southampton Norwich City 0-0 Wolves Crystal Palace 1-2 Aston Villa Brighton v Leeds United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table League One: Max Rushden, your boys have taken one hell of a beating. One hell of a beating!!! Premier League: Marc Guehi scored a late-, late consolation for Crystal Palace but it wasn’t enough to help their cause. Villa move level in the table with their hosts following their second win in succession under the new management of Steven Gerrard. Premier League: Norwich City guarantee themselves bottom billing on Match of the Day yet again after a scoreless draw against Wolves. It’s a decent enough result for the Canaries, who have a huge avian derby against the Magpies of Newcastle on Tuesday night. Championiship: Incredible scenes at the Vitality Stadium, where Coventry City have scored a late equaliser against 10-man Bournemouth. It’s 2-2, with Coventry having scored both their goals since Jefferson Lerma got sent off for the hosts. Premier League: It’s all over at Anfield, where Southampton were somewhat fortunate to lose by only four goals against imperious Liverpool. Norwich 0-0 Wolves: Norwich City are huffing and puffing but can’t quite blow the Wolves door down. Teemu Pukki stretches every sinew but can’t steer the ball goalwards from a cross. Premier League: John McGinn rifles a shot past Vicente Guaita in the Palace goal to double Villa’s lead. Crystal Palace’s unbeaten home record for this season is about to end. Championship: Coventry City have pulled a goal back against 10-Bournemouth through Matt Godden. It’s 2-1 to Bournemouth at the Vitality Stadium. Championship: Birmingham City go one up against Blackpool courtesy of Lukas Jutkiewicz, who looked a mite offside. Championship: Sean Morrison restores Cardiff City’s lead against Luton at Kenilworth Road, where the Welsh side lead 2-1. Scottish Premiership: Hearts double their lead against St Mirren, with Stephen Kingsley making it 2-0 in the 75th minute. Scottish Premiership latest Dundee 3-0 Motherwell Hearts 2-0 St Mirren Ross County 0-1 Dundee United St Johnstone 1-0 Hibernian Premier League: After a pitchside review, referee Michael Salisbury, who is making his Premier League debut today, rescinds the red card he’d shown Douglas Luiz and gives him a yellow instead. Premier League: Just on as a sub after his return from injury, Douglas Luiz gets a straight red card for a late challenge on Cheikhou Kouyate. Norwich City 0-0 Wolves: Norwich striker Teemu Pukki finds himself in a one-on-one with Jose Sa but takes a heavy touch and is foiled by the Wolves goalkeeper. Championship: Philip Billing sidefoots into an empty net to double Bournemouth’s lead against Coventry City. In slightly worse news for Bournemouth, Jefferson Lerma has just been sent off for serious foul play after lunging into an opponent. At Kenilworth Road, Luton have restored parity against Jordan Clark. Scottish Premiership: Gary Mackay-Steven puts Hearts one up against St Mirren. Crystal Palace 0-1 Aston Villa: Ashley Young sends a free-kick over the Crystal Palace wall but the ball drops on to the roof of the net. Championship: Swansea equalise against Reading, with Ryan Manning making it 2-2 at the Liberty Stadium. Within a minute, Danny Drinkwater – yes, that Danny Drinkwater – fires Reading back in front. Meanwhile at the MKM Stadium, Ryan Longman has put Hull ahead by the odd goal of three against Millwall, while Reda Khadra has opened the scoring for Blackburn Rovers in their game against Stoke City on what must be a bitterly cold day at the Bet365 Stadium, which is perishing at the best of times. Premnier League: Virgil van Dijk volleys home his first goal for 14 months from near the penalty spot, swinging his boot to convert an inswinger from a corner. Southampton are getting an absolute hiding at Anfield. Scottish Premiership: Second from bottom Dundee go 3-0 up against Motherwell, while Ross County, the only side below them in the table, trail Dundee United by a Luis Appere goal on 49 minutes. Liverpool 3-0 Southampton: Liverpool begin the second half much like they played throughout the first, swarming forward with Mo Salah and Diogo Jota causing terror among the Southampton defence. Southampton have brought on a brace of Nathans – Tella and Redmond – and switched from a 3-4-3 to a 4-4-2, for all the good it is likely to do them. Sheffield Wednesday 1-1 Wycombe Wanderers: We brought you news of a medical emergency in the stands at Hillsborough which prompted the removal of the teams from the field so a fan could be treated. Sky Sports are reporting that the fan in question seems to be OK, which is obviously great news. Play has resumed and Olamide Shodipo has restored parity for Wednesday in the ninth minute of added time at the end of the first half. Arsenal 2-0 Newcastle (result) Liverpool 3-0 Southampton Norwich City 0-0 Wolves Crystal Palace 0-1 Aston Villa Brighton v Leeds United (5.30pm) Championship half-times Preston 1-1 Fulham (result) Bournemouth 1-0 Coventry City Birmingham City 0-0 Blackpool Huddersfield Town 0-2 Middlesbrough Hull City 1-1 Millwall Luton Town 0-1 Cardiff City Peterborough United 0-0 Barnsley Stoke City 0-0 Blackburn Rovers Swansea City 1-2 Reading Scottish Premiership half-times Dundee 2-0 Motherwell Hearts 0-0 St Mirren Ross County 0-0 Dundee United St Johnstone 1-0 Hibernian Championship: Bournemouth take the lead against Coventry City at the Vitality Stadium, with Jaidon Anthony scoring on the stroke of half-time. Meanwhile at Hull City, Millwall have equalised through Tom Bradshaw. Norwich City 0-0 Wolves: Jose Sa is called into action to save from Teemu Pukki after good work from Norwich full-back Max Aarons. Liverpool 3-0 Southampton: Liverpool almost score a fourth, with Mo Salah stretching every sinew but just failing to get the touch that would have diverted Diogo Jota’s cross into the net. League One: Cambridge United had equalised against Sunderland with a Sam Smith goal I hadn’t got around to mentioning yet. All is well in the world again, however, as Nathan Broadhead has just fired Sunderland back into the lead in the 36th minute. Premier League: Southampton’s annual shipping of nine goals is looking more and more likely. Thiago picks up a headed clearance outside the penalty area, advances and unleashes a shot. The ball takes a wicked deflection off Lyanco on its way in. Crystal Palace 0-1 Aston Villa: Tyrone Mings misses a decent chance to double Aston Villa’s lead with a far post volley. Championship: There’s a medical emergency in one of the stands at Hillsborough, where Sheffield Wednesday are hosting Wycombe Wanderers. The players have left the pitch as a stricken spectator is tended to by the medical staff from both teams. We wish whoever it is well. Premier League: Unmarked at the far post, Diogo Jota sidefoots home a Mo Salah cross from a couple of yards out after good work down the right by the Egyptian and Jordan Henderson. Championship: Andy Carroll - yes, that Andy Carroll – scores his first away league goal since 2017 to put Reading ahead by the odd goal of three against Swansea City at the Liberty Stadium. Championship: Jacob Greaves whips a cross into the Millwall penalty area for George Honeyman to put Hull City a goal to the good at the MKM Stadium. Championship: Cardiff City lead Luton Town at Kenilworth Road courtesy of a Rubin Colwill goal I didn’t notice 20 minutes ago. Championship: Duncan Watmore scores his second of the game to make it Huddersfield Town 0-2 Middlesbrough at John Smith’s Stadium. From just inside the penalty area, he lobbed Town goalkeeper Lee Nicholls with what can only be described as aplomb. League One: Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! Goal! In the only game that matters today, Cambridge United goalkeeper Dimitar Mitov has been credited with the (own-)goal that leaves Sunderland one up at the Abbey. Alex Pritchard may beg to differ - it looked like he scored directly from a corner. Championship: completely unmarked, Duncan Watmore takes a pass in the Huddersfield Town penalty area and sidefoots home to put Middlesbrough a goal up. Premier League: Matt Targett scores a rare goal, converting at the far post after a free-kick had sailked through the Palace penalty area. Villa are in front. Liverpool 1-0 Southampton: Mohammad Salisu is lucky to avoid a booking after leaping into Jordan Henderson, leaving the Liverpool skipper lying on the deck clutching the back of his head. Not long afterwards, Sadio Mane has an effort ruled out for offside after heading home a free-kick curled in from the left. That is an outstanding call by the eagle-eyed linesman. Championship: Swansea City and Reading have traded early goals at the Liberty Stadium, where Jamie Paterson put the Swans in front after three minutes, only for Tom Dele-Bashiru to equalise for the visitors a minute later. Crystal Palace 0-0 Aston Villa: Aston Villa win a free-kick in a perfect position directly in front of the Palace goal. Ashley Young and Leon Bailey stand over it for an eternity, before the Jamaican international hammers the ball straight into the defensive wall. Liverpool 1-0 Southampton: Alisson saves splendidly at the feet of James Ward-Prowse, dashing off his line after being sold short by a terrible backpass from ... I think, Thiago. It’s a frantic start at Anfield. Premier League: Diogo Jota slides the ball home from an Andrew Reobertson pull-back to the edge of the six-yard box. There’s a VAR inspection for a possible Robertson offside in the build-up but the goal stands. Peep! And at Anfield, Southampton, playing in yellow shirts and blue shorts, win a corner straight from the gun after good work from Adam Armstrong. Nothing comes of it and Liverpool break on the counter. Women’s World Cup qualifier: Ellen White scored the only goal of the game at the Stadium of Light on her 100th appearance for England. Louise Taylor was there ... Premier League: Newcastle briefly threatened to defy the norms established both by their work this season and a decade’s worth of endeavours at the Emirates, but ultimately normal service was resumed, writes Nick Ames from The Emirates Stadium. Championship: It’s finished all square at Deepdale, where league leaders Fulham went ahead through Tim Ream, only to be pegged back by Ched Evans’s equaliser in the 72nd minute. View the Championship table Premier League: Newcastle United remain anchored to the bottom of the Premier League after 13 games without a win, having gone down to second half strikes from Bukayo Saka and Gabriel Martinelli. Arsenal stay fifth, level on points with West Ham, six behind leaders Chelsea. Women’s World Cup qualifier: Ellen White scored the only goal of the game on the occasion of her 100th cap to help England pull five points clear at the top of their group. England were far from clinical but a win is a win is a win is a win etc and so on. Norwich City v Wolves: Josh Sargent returns to the Norwich starting line-up, in place of Todd Cantwell, who he replaced at half-time during their win over Southampton last weekend. Wolves are without Daniel Podence, who is absent from a depleted matchday squad that only has six outfield players on the bench. Francisco Trincao replaces Podence in the Wolves line-up. Liverpool v Southampton: Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp reverts to what looks like his strongest line-up for the visit of Southampton with six changes from the Champions League win over Porto. Trent Alexander-Arnold, Virgil van Dijk, Andy Robertson, Fabinho, Jordan Henderson and Diogo Jota all return. Centre-back Ibrahima Konate keeps his place at the expense of Joel Matip. Southampton make three changes from last weekend’s defeat at Norwich, with Lyanco, Armando Broja and Romain Perraud all coming in. Championship: Ched Evans has equalised for Preston against Fulham at Deepdale, where it’s all square at one goal each. Crystal Palace v Aston Villa: For Palace, Michael Olise is handed his second top flight start in place of one-man goal drought Jordan Ayew, who drops to the bench following last weekend’s 3-3 draw at Burnley. James Tomkins is recalled in Joachim Andersen’s absence. New Villa boss Steven Gerrard brings Ashley Young and Leon Bailey into his starting XI, with Danny Ings and Emi Buendia named among the substitutes. Hmmm. Crystal Palace: Guaita, Ward, Tomkins, Guehi, Mitchell, Gallagher, Milivojevic, Kouyate, Olise, Benteke, Zaha. Subs: Butland, Ayew, Eze, Hughes, Schlupp, Clyne, Edouard, Kelly, Riedewald. Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Mings, Targett, McGinn, Nakamba, Bailey, Jacob Ramsey, Young, Watkins. Subs: Douglas Luiz, Sanson, Buendia, Steer, Tuanzebe, Ings, El Ghazi, Hause, Carney Chukwuemeka. Referee: Michael Salisbury (Lancashire) Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Konate, van Dijk, Robertson, Henderson, Fabinho, Thiago, Salah, Jota, Mane. Subs: Milner, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Minamino, Tsimikas, Origi, Matip, Kelleher, Williams, Morton. Southampton: McCarthy, Bednarek, Lyanco, Salisu, Livramento, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Perraud, Broja, Adams, Adam Armstrong. Subs: Walker-Peters, Long, Redmond, Smallbone, Tella, Diallo, Walcott, Valery, Forster. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands) Norwich: Krul, Aarons, Hanley, Gibson, Williams, Gilmour, Normann, McLean, Rashica, Pukki, Sargent. Subs: Rupp, Dowell, Cantwell, Tzolis, Lees-Melou, Gunn, Giannoulis, Idah, Omobamidele. Wolves: Jose Sa, Kilman, Coady, Saiss, Nelson Semedo, Neves, Joao Moutinho, Ait Nouri, Trincao, Jimenez, Hwang. Subs: Hoever, Marcal, Moulden, Silva, Ruddy, Dendoncker, Traore, Cundle. Referee: Simon Hooper (Wiltshire) Premier League: On for injured goalscorer Bukayo Saka, Gabriel Martinelli has doubled Arsenal’s lead with a splendid volley that may have been his first touch of the game. Newcastle’s long wait for their first league win of the season looks set to continue ... Championship: Table-topping Fulham are a goal up against Preston at Deepdale, where Tim Ream scored for the visitors after 15 minutes. There’s just under half an hour left in that one. Premier League: Arsenal have taken the lead against Newcastle at The Emirates, with Bukayo Saka darting in behind the Newcastle defence to latch on to a through ball from Nuno Tavares to fire his side ahead at the end of a 16-pass move. Scott Murray has the latest ... Premier League clubs are coming together this weekend and next to support the inclusion of all LGBT+ people in football and beyond. The length and breadth of the country, players will be showing their support for the campaign by wearing rainbow laces, with skippers wearing rainbow captain’s armbands, fourth officials hoisting rainbow decorated electronic boards and referees picking match-balls from rainbow plinths. Love is love, y’all. The Lionesses: Despite the best attempts of Storm Arwen, England’s women are in action this afternoon, with Ellen White winning her 100th cap as she and her team-mates take on Austria in Sunderland. The striker has marked the special occasion with a goal to give England a half-time lead at the Stadium of Light. England are top of Group D, two points ahead of today’s opponents, with Northern Ireland a further point back in third. England face bottom side Latvia in their final qualifier in Doncaster on Tuesday. Luke McLaughlin has the latest ... Today’s Scottish Premiership fixtures Dundee v Motherwell Hearts v St Mirren Ross County v Dundee United St Johnstone v Hibernian View the Scottish Premiership table Today’s special guest game There are 11 games being played in the third tier of English football today but in truth, only one of them actually matters. Guardian Football Weekly podcast bragging rights are up for grabs as Max Rushden’s Cambridge United taken on the mighty Sunderland for the first time since the Mackems thrashed Rushden’s beloved Us 7-0 at The Abbey in the League Cup on October 2, 2002. Not only that, it’s the first league meeting between the sides since they played out a thrilling 3-3 draw in England’s second tier at Roker Park in 1993. Today, Sunderland sit sixth in League One, five points behind pace-setters Rotherham, while Cambridge United are 15th, nine points behind today’s visitors. Today’s Premier League fixtures Arsenal v Newcastle Liverpool v Southampton Norwich City v Wolves Crystal Palace v Aston Villa Brighton v Leeds United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Today’s Championship fixtures Preston v Fulham (12.30pm) Bournemouth v Coventry City Birmingham City v Blackpool Huddersfield Town v Middlesbrough Hull City v Millwall Luton Town v Cardiff City Peterborough United v Barnsley Stoke City v Blackburn Rovers Swansea City v Reading View the Champi0onship table Today marks the 10th anniversary of the death of Gary Speed, the much-loved former Wales legend, who counted the supporters of Leeds United, Everton, Newcastle, Bolton and Sheffield United, for whom he made a combined 841 appearances, among those who held him in the very highest regard as a player and leader. But it wasn’t just them - Speed was widely admired by fans the length and breadth of the country, most of whom would have been delighted to see this combative, consumate professional pull on their club’s shirt. Speed died at the age of 42 on this day in 2011, taking his own life upon his return home from appearing on the BBC lunchtime show Football Focus. News of his death rocked the world of football to its very foundations and a decade on, Dan Walker recorded this moving account of the morning he spent with Speed in the Football Focus studio and his total devastation upon learning what happened afterwards. “Gary felt for whatever reason that there was no other way out and that’s incredibly sad and distressing,” said Dan. “Particularly for his family because his two boys absolutely adored him and he loved them.” Dan goes on to say that “if Gary had spoken to somebody that night I think he’d still be here. “I think that’s the hard thing. I do think that if two blokes had gone to a game a decade ago, they’d just talk about the football. I’d like to think now, a decade on, things are different and they might have a conversation about how they’re feeling. What happened to Gary has and still makes people think about their friends around them and I’d like to think that’s a good thing.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. Arsenal and Newcastle got the Premier League ball rolling at the Emirates in today’s noon kick-off, a match which many travelling supporters won’t have got to following the cancellation of trains from Newcastle to London last night due to Storm Arwen, when winds of almost 100mph were recorded in Northumberland. It’s scoreless at the break and whether they’re at the ground or watching on TV, Toon fans will have been encouraged by a first half performance in which Jonjo Shelvey brought a world class save out of Arsenal goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale with a long-range effort. Arsenal fans will be less enthused, having seen Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang sidefoot off the post from a couple of yards out with the Newcastle goal gaping after Martin Dubravka had saved superbly from Emile Smith-Rowe. It was an astonishing miss. We have just three top flight three o’clock games to focus on before Brighton take on Leeds at 5.30pm, with Liverpool hosting Southampton, Crystal Palace entertaining Aston Villa and Norwich welcoming Wolves to Carrow Road. We’ll keep tabs on all of those, as well as bringing you news of any major talking points in the EFL and beyond. Don’t touch that dial!The lights of theatres all over the West End of London will dim on Monday evening to honour the life of Stephen Sondheim, it has been announced. The tribute, reserved for the passing of only the most significant talents, comes as many of the biggest names in entertainment joined international stars of musical theatre to mourn the composer’s death at the age of 91 this weekend. In an outpouring of admiration and sorrow, American showbusiness figures such as singer Barbra Streisand and the Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, spoke of Sondheim’s innovative influence and of the many memorable songs he composed, including Send in the Clowns, from A Little Night Music, and I’m Still Here and Losing My Mind from Follies. Steven Spielberg, whose new film version of the 1950s musical West Side Story, for which Sondheim wrote the lyrics, is out in cinemas next month, revealed that although he only got to know the composer in his old age, they became close. “Stephen Sondheim was a gigantic figure in American culture – one of our country’s greatest songwriters, a lyricist and composer of real genius, and a creator of some of the most glorious musical dramas ever written.” A statement from Spielberg continued: “When we spoke, I couldn’t wait to listen, awestruck by the originality of his perceptions of art, politics and people – all delivered brilliantly by his mischievous wit and dazzling words. I will miss him very much, but he left a body of work that has taught us, and will keep teaching us, how hard and how absolutely necessary it is to love.” Posting on Twitter, Streisand said: “Thank the Lord that Sondheim lived to be 91 years old so he had time to write such wonderful music and GREAT lyrics,” while Miranda shared a recent Twitter exchange with Sondheim in which he had thanked the Broadway legend for mentoring other younger talent. In reply Sondheim told Miranda he was especially proud of this part of his life and that it had been driven partly by his desire to repay the great musical creator Oscar Hammerstein, of Rogers and Hammerstein, for all his early advice. “Steve: you repaid your debt to Oscar 1,000 times over,” Manuel had privately replied. This weekend he added a public tribute to Sondheim’s talent: “Future historians: Stephen Sondheim was real. Yes, he wrote Tony &amp; Maria AND Sweeney Todd AND Bobby AND George &amp; Dot AND Fosca AND countless more. Some may theorize Shakespeare’s works were by committee but Steve was real &amp; he was here &amp; he laughed SO loud at shows &amp; we loved him.” In Britain, Andrew Lloyd Webber, the world’s best known and most successful musical theatre name, saluted Sondheim’s towering skill as a lyricist in particular, calling him “the musical theatre giant of our times, an inspiration not just to two but to three generations”. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Lord Lloyd-Webber, composer of Phantom of the Opera and Evita, revealed that the two men once planned to work on a stage show together on the subject of rivalry. Singer Elaine Paige, the original stage Evita and later exponent of Sondheim’s music, wrote on social media of her devastation at hearing of the death while the prominent British theatrical producer Sir Cameron Mackintosh said: “The theatre has lost one of its greatest geniuses and the world has lost one of its greatest and most original writers.” He added that Sondheim will “still be here as his legendary songs and shows will be performed for ever more.” Among leading musical performers to pay tribute were Hugh Jackman, who hailed Sondheim for having been someone “that fundamentally shifts an entire art form.” In Spain, the film star Antonio Banderas said he had learned the news shortly after performing in a production of Sondheim’s acclaimed show Company, recently revived. “Just about 1h ago I was singing Being Alive, the final musical number,” he wrote on Twitter. “Now I am home, still with rests [sic] of make-up on my face crying the death of our maestro.” Actor Vanessa Williams, who played the witch on Broadway in the 1994 revival of Sondheim’s Into the Woods, tweeted: “What a privilege to have soaked up the incredible aura of legendary Stephen Sondheim in person many times in my life. I only ever got a few musical notes from him which were about diction but immediately incorporated and cherished every word.” Speaking only a week ago at his home in Connecticut, and apparently in good health, the man now being celebrated as the late great dominant voice in American musicals for the last 50 years offered a typically humble and drily detached commentary, from the perspective of an aged theatrical sage. He told the New York Times that he avoided taking grand overviews. “Whither Broadway? I don’t answer the question,” Sondheim said. “Who knows. I don’t really care. That’s the future. Whatever happens will happen.” The lights across London’s theatreland will go down for two minutes at 7pm on Monday, said Julian Bird, chief executive of the Society of London Theatre and UK Theatre. “The theatre world is a smaller place tonight after the passing of Stephen Sondheim,” he said. “His legacy of extraordinary shows and songs will live on for many generations to come – but now, we pay tribute to his outstanding contribution to our theatres and celebrate his talent.”Index Entry, the shortest of the very short stories for which the American writer Lydia Davis is best known, runs to just four words: “Christian, I’m not a”. When Davis won the Man Booker International prize in 2013, Ali Smith called her a “daring, excitingly intelligent and often wildly comic writer who reminds you… what words such as economy, precision and originality really mean”. Besides eight story collections and one novel, Davis has published more than a dozen translations, most notably of Madame Bovary and the first volume of Proust’s In Search of Lost Time as well as, more recently, Night Train, a collection of very short stories by the Dutch author AL Snijders. These and other translation-related projects, including her 2014 modernising of Alfred Ollivant’s 1898 children’s classic Bob, Son of Battle: The Last Gray Dog of Kenmuir, are among the subjects of her latest book, Essays Two, a sequel to Essays One, published two years ago. Davis, 74, spoke to me from her home in rural upstate New York. You talk here about how useful translating has been in times when you were stuck with your own writing. The text is already there – you can really bend all your energies to it – and when you can’t do your own work, it’s very liberating to create something that may even be better than what you might have written. You also say that translating always comes fraught with afterthoughts – you mention, for instance, revising your Proust text post-publication. It seems the problem of when or how to stop is an important one throughout your work, which often draws energy from extending a line of inquiry beyond expected limits… Yeah, I find it a little paradoxical that I know when to stop when it’s a short piece of fiction, yet have a lot more trouble in the case of something like researching Alfred Ollivant’s family and sheepdogs, sheep-herding, different sheep-counting systems … It all becomes interesting; I think, well, I could just keep going, until it embraces the whole world. I did envisage at some point an edition of my version of Bob, Son of Battle which would be infinitely large, with infinitely long notes. The essay in the book just has a list of all the things I might have covered; I had to stop. Another essay that maybe tries the patience is the one about learning Norwegian. Because I was discovering the language on my own, each detail fascinated me, and I wanted to include it all. A reader can throw his or her hands up and say, that’s enough, and that’s OK; I write it the way I want to write it. In your stories, as well as in these essays, your refusal to let something drop can be very funny… It’s true that even the quite short stories can be exhaustive: it might just be one paragraph, but it exhausts all possibilities to the point of slight absurdity. There are others that don’t have that exhaustive impulse – they just make a statement and that’s it – but often I’m assuming a persona of someone who wants to uncover every angle, whatever the thing is. It’s not exactly me – I wouldn’t tire a friend out with this kind of lengthy reasoning – but it’s also my own mind. Grammar Questions [from 2007’s Varieties of Disturbance] was heartfelt and serious, even while at the same time it might have been absurd, because it’s my own honest inquiry into how you talk about someone who’s no longer there. [The story, a two-and-a-half page disquisition on tense, begins: “Now, during the time he is dying, can I say, ‘This is where he lives’?”] When I wrote it, I had not had much experience – I still haven’t – of people very close to me dying, so it was really an inquiry into a problem we all struggle with, of how you talk about someone who is no longer there, which is also a problem of how you deal with someone who was so present and now isn’t. There’s a passing half-joke in one essay about how using online dictionaries means you have to learn to ignore the news, which isn’t something your work usually mentions. No, it doesn’t. I have been asked if I would write about the pandemic, or how we read in times of pandemic, or this or that, and I did start something about Trump, imagining him having a long conversation with his therapist, you know, down the road, once he’s gone completely mad; that still interests me but I haven’t gone far with it. Another current-related piece [How He Changed Over Time, published last year in the Virginia Quarterly Review], which isn’t in a book yet, but which I did complete to my satisfaction, is about a fictional president’s transformation from Thomas Jefferson into Trump. But I think my preoccupations tend to slip in more sideways, sort of. The Cows [in 2014’s Can’t and Won’t] was just 80-something observations of the cows across the road from here; I realised later that it was my indirect way of saying, let us pay attention to things like the individuality and wellbeing of cows. Instead of writing an essay on animal welfare, I let the preoccupation come out indirectly. What are you working on at the moment? I have a pile of stories ready to be put in order for another book, and I’ll do that now that winter is coming and the ground is already freezing; I’ve planted my last shrub for the year. During the growing seasons, starting in March or April, I’ve kind of turned my attention away from writing to our land and garden, but also more and more to my immediate community, partly in reaction to the real crisis we’re in with climate change. I think we all have to give that more priority than business as usual with writing. I’ve been on the administrative board in my village for several years and I got us to agree to sign up for this initiative by which municipalities in New York state can become climate-smart: it means recording your greenhouse gas emissions, instituting an emergency flood-management plan, that sort of thing, so a lot of time actually gets taken up with that. What you have been reading lately? I’m engrossed in Dirt to Soil by Gabe Brown, about regenerative agriculture and how to build healthy soil. Not quite what you might expect, maybe, but one of my big current preoccupations is to create a healthy environment in the small piece of land where we’ve been for about 15 years. It’s five acres, not a lot. A few years ago I began learning about permaculture and we put in a young orchard and just went on from there. Last year I was reading Isabella Tree’s Wilding, which fed into all this, and Douglas Tallamy, who writes about creating an environmentally supportive spot in your own yard. His belief, which I agree with, is that we have to start in our own little plots; we can’t wait for governments. • Essays Two is published on 2 December by Hamish Hamilton (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyBoris Johnson has announced fresh measures to curb the spread of coronavirus including mandatory masks in shops and PCR tests for travellers entering England after two cases of the Omicron variant were detected in the country. Amid mounting global concern over Omicron, named a “variant of concern” by the World Health Organization on Friday, the prime minister set out a series of steps the UK is taking to maximise its defence against Covid-19. Speaking at a Downing Street press conference, Johnson said anyone arriving in England will be asked to take a PCR test for Covid-19 on the second day and must self-isolate until they provide a negative test. The rules on face coverings in shops and on public transport in England will also be tightened, he said. Contacts of all confirmed cases of people infected with the Omicron variant in England will have to self-isolate for 10 days. Health officials are also examining the case for widening access to the booster vaccine programme, he added. The measures will be reviewed in three weeks. The devolved administrations in Scotland and Wales confirmed on Saturday evening they will apply the same measures on international travel as announced by Johnson. A spokesperson for the Welsh government said: “We have repeatedly raised our concerns with the UK government about its decision to relax international travel rules quickly, precisely because of the risk of introducing new variants into the UK. We also warned against the removal of PCR tests for returning travellers. Omicron is potentially more contagious than previous variants, although experts do not know yet if it will cause more severe illness. Johnson warned it could reduce the effectiveness of vaccines, as he announced a strengthening of England’s rules after two cases were identified in Nottingham and Brentwood in Essex. In an effort to slow the spread, Johnson announced “temporary and precautionary” measures to be reviewed in three weeks, alongside an expansion of the vaccine booster campaign. Johnson said he remained confident that this Christmas “will be considerably better than last Christmas”. Asked about the prospect for this year’s festivities, the prime minister said: “We continue to be in a strong position largely thanks to the speed of the vaccine rollout, another booster rollout and I think I’m going to stick with the formula I’ve used before, which is I’m pretty confident to absolutely confident this Christmas will be considerably better than last Christmas.” The measures announced fall short of the government’s plan B, which involves advice to work from home and the use of vaccine passports. However, the UK may need to “face up” to the possibility of further action if the Omicron variant is very transmissible, the UK’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, said. He said: “I think we’ll get more information on transmissibility, we’ll get more information on the ability of the vaccines to protect against the virus, but that’s going to take a little bit of time. “At the moment, the models are more ‘if it spreads very fast, of course it’s going to spread very fast and go into a lot of places, and if it spreads less fast it’s going to do so less’. “But if it’s very transmissible and does cause a big escape, then clearly that’s a major issue we have to face up to. But that isn’t what we know at the moment, we need to get that information.” Prof Chris Whitty told the press conference it was “inevitable” the Omicron variant will spread across the world over the next few days. England’s chief medical officer said that while it is clear Omicron is highly transmissible, it is not yet known how effective the vaccine will be as protection against it – but said those who are vaccinated or receive the booster jab will be less likely to become seriously ill. Earlier on Saturday Sajid Javid, the health secretary, announced that the UK was adding four more southern African nations to the travel red list after two cases of the new variant were detected in Nottingham and Brentwood, Essex. The UK Health Security Agency confirmed the cases, which are believed to be connected and linked to travel from southern Africa, after genomic sequencing overnight. The individuals and their households were ordered into self-isolation and targeted testing was being carried out in areas where they are thought to have been infectious. Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola will face travel restrictions from Sunday. Javid said “this is a real reminder that this pandemic is far from over” as he urged people to get their vaccines, including boosters. “We were concerned from the moment we first identified this new variant,” he added. He said anyone who has travelled in the last 10 days to the countries now on the red list, which also includes South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia, must self-isolate and take PCR tests. The UK is the second European nation to have reported the presence of Omicron after Belgium said it had identified a single case on Friday. In the Netherlands authorities said 61 people tested positive for Covid-19 arriving on two flights from South Africa on Friday. Further tests are under way to determine if any of them had the Omicron variant. It was unclear when the two individuals in the UK were infected, or their full travel history, as countries scrambled to close their borders to much of southern Africa. Ministers said non-UK and non-Irish residents who have been in Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola in the previous 10 days will be refused entry into England from 4am on Sunday. Those who are permitted to return will be ordered to isolate in a government-approved facility for 10 days. Numerous pharmaceutical firms have said they are working to adapt their vaccines in light of the emergence of Omicron after the WHO warned that preliminary evidence suggests the variant has an increased risk of reinfection and may spread more rapidly than other strains. Commenting on two cases of the Omicron Covid variant being detected in the UK, Peter Openshaw, professor of experimental medicine, Imperial College London, said: “There is no need to get alarmed, but we do need to be prepared and to take rapid action. “It is better to act fast but be prepared to change as new information comes in. Travel restrictions may slow the rate of growth and buy time to establish the important facts about severity, immune evasion, transmission and susceptibility to treatment and prevention.” Openshaw added: “With or without this new variant, Delta is already a crisis in many parts of Europe and still causing a lot of illness and death in the UK, especially in those not vaccinated or in those who do not respond to vaccines.”Magnus Carlsen diced with danger in an entertaining second game of the world chess championships in Dubai before recovering to secure a 58-move draw. It leaves his 14-game match with Ian Nepomniachtchi level at 1-1 going into Sunday’s third encounter. It was a seesawing struggle, with Carlsen surprising his opponent early before missing a move that left him considerably worse off. However, his Russian opponent failed to find his wave through the thicket of variations and the game ended with a handshake, and a long post-mortem, as the players tried to fathom what happened. “The game was crazy, I had no idea what was going on,” said Nepomniachtchi. “During the game I thought: ‘We both are playing not so well’. But now I start thinking it was just very interesting and very chaotic.” Carlsen, who has held the world title since 2013, signalled his fighting intentions by playing the rare move, Ne5, on move eight. It sacrificed a pawn but also meant his opponent was on new ground in a tricky position. Understandably, he was soon behind on the clock. Not only was he playing the Norwegian but also his computer preparation. “It was a really nice idea, not the most popular, and I had a lot of trouble,” admitted Nepomniachtchi. However, he was able to weave his way through the complications without too much damage and, when Carlsen made a mistake with 20. Rb1, he was left staring at a worse position where he was rook for bishop down. “At some point I blundered because I didn’t intend to sacrifice quite as much material as I actually did,” admitted Carlsen, who looked visibly the more tired. “After that, I was trying to hang in there, not to lose. The position was very, very interesting.” But with Carlsen on the ropes, Nepo then gave up a pawn for little compensation and the position became a theoretical draw. “The games have been a bit atypical for both of us,” added the Norwegian. “They are not following any specific pattern. It’s just a fight.” The result means there have now been 16 draws in a row in world championship games played at classical time controls, dating back five years to game 11 of Carlsen’s match against Sergey Karjakin in November 2016. That is partly down to the time controls, which currently give players two hours for their first 40 moves and another hour for their next 20. Carlsen has long lobbied for shorter games in his world title matches, arguing that with less time to think there will be even more drama. But for now, at least, the Fide president, Arkady Dvorkovich, is sitting on the fence. “It’s an interesting dilemma,” he told the Observer. “We started experimenting with shorter controls of 45 minutes at the women’s world team championship and it was very dynamic and exciting. But when it comes to controls for classical chess, we will see. “On the one hand, it’s exciting to watch shorter games,” he added. “On the other hand when talking about the best players, I would prefer just a few mistakes – while in shorter games you have many.”An attack on Kamala Harris for buying expensive French cookware rebounded on the Republican party over Thanksgiving, moving social media users to compare the vice-president’s culinary outlay with the cost to taxpayers of Donald Trump’s four years in power. On a visit to Paris earlier this month, Harris reportedly spent more than $500 on cookware at E Dehillerin, a shop near the Louvre museum. She told reporters she was making the purchase with Thanksgiving cooking in mind, prompting laughter when she said her husband, Doug Emhoff, was her “apprentice” in the kitchen. Nonetheless, Republicans and rightwing media outlets seized on the purchase, attempting to use it to show that the vice-president, a former California attorney general and US senator, was out of touch with ordinary Americans. On Friday, the Republican party Twitter account, @GOP, said: “While Americans are struggling to pay more than EVER for the holidays, Kamala Harris is out buying a $375 pot.” Thanks to the medium involved, responses were short and to the point. Don Moynihan, a professor of public policy at Georgetown, wrote: “Just to put this in perspective: What Harris spent her own money on for cookware wouldn’t cover what Trump was charging taxpayers per room for Secret Service agents.” Moynihan linked to a Washington Post report from February 2020, which said the Secret Service paid as much as $650 a night for rooms at Trump properties while Trump was president. Many of those properties were golf courses. The journalist David Leavitt wrote: “While Americans lined up at food pantries and died from Covid, Trump spent $141m of taxpayer’s money playing golf.” Trump famously criticised Barack Obama for playing too much golf, said he would be too busy to play much himself, then spent considerable time on the fairways. Estimates of the cost to taxpayers vary. One dedicated website, Trumpgolfcount.com, put it at $149m. Other users responding to the GOP attack on Harris noted Trump’s payment of $130,000 to the adult film actor and director Stormy Daniels, while he ran for president, to keep her quiet about an affair. Republicans also criticised Joe Biden for spending the Thanksgiving holiday on Nantucket, an island off Massachussetts, at a house owned by David Rubenstein. The private equity billionaire is an alumnus of the Carter White House and a philanthropist who has spent millions on preserving historic documents and buildings. Nonetheless, Biden’s decision to stay at his $30m house attracted fire from the left as well as the right. David Sirota, a former adviser to Bernie Sanders and a Guardian contributor, said: “It’s already very Let Them Eat Cake for a president to hang at a billionaire’s Nantucket pad – but it’s some real Gilded Age shit when the billionaire’s private equity firm has all sorts of interests before the government right now.” In Washington before the holiday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki defended Biden’s choice of destination and said: “You are president no matter where you are.” Back on Twitter, in the continuing fight over the vice-president’s pots and pans, the reporter Victoria Brownworth wrote: “While Americans were struggling to pay more than EVER for the holidays, in December 2017 Republicans voted themselves the biggest tax cut in history and kicked 23m Americans off healthcare.” As it happens, the 2017 tax cut was only the biggest corporate tax cut in history and the Republicans only sought to kick 23m Americans off healthcare, an effort thwarted by the Arizona senator John McCain. But Brownworth wasn’t done. “Also,” she wrote, “Kamala Harris can buy whatever the heck she wants – it’s her money that she earned.”13,210. The number of people the UK granted protection to via asylum or resettlement routes in the year to September 2021 This is significantly lower than before the pandemic hit in March 2020. 64%. The proportion of initial asylum applications that were successful in the year ending September 2021. This rate has increased in recent years. In addition, almost half of unsuccessful applications are granted on appeal. 17th. The UK’s ranking against EU countries in terms of the number of asylum applications it gets, adjusted for population. The UK’s asylum application per capita rate is almost half the EU average. Germany received 122,015 asylum applications in the year ending March 2021; France, 93,475. 37,562. The number of asylum applications in the UK in the year ending September 2021. This is 18% higher than last year, which saw a dip as a result of the pandemic, and less than half the peak of 84,312 that was seen in the early 2000s. 25,700. The number of people who have arrived in the UK so far this year after making the dangerous Channel crossing in small boats. This is three times the total number who arrived via this route in 2020. 83,733. The number of people awaiting an initial decision on their asylum application at the end of September 2021. Delays in the asylum system have increased rapidly since 2018: this is 41% higher than a year ago. 86%. The proportion of refugees worldwide who live in low-income countries neighbouring their country of origin. A very small proportion choose to travel to Europe. The UK is home to just 1% of the 26.4 million refugees who have been forcibly displaced from their home country across the world. Around half of the world’s refugees are under the age of 18. £39.63. The amount that people seeking asylum get per week to subsist on in the UK. In France, it’s £42.84, and in Germany £65.63. In Germany, they are allowed to work 3 months from making their applications, in France it’s 6 months. In the UK they’re not allowed to work at all regardless of how long it takes for their application to be processed.There was a time when, if you googled the phrase “Dunkirk, small boats”, reports of one of Britain’s finest hours would stack up in the results. Not last week. The beaches near Dunkirk have now become synonymous not with the embarkation point of dramatic rescue but of despairing tragedy. Details of the 27 people, among them seven women and three children, who drowned in the Channel on Wednesday have been very slow to emerge, their anonymity itself an indication of their desperation. The first to be named was a Kurdish woman from northern Iraq, Maryam Nuri Mohamed Amin, a newly engaged student, who was WhatsApp messaging her fiance, who lives in the UK, when the group’s dinghy started deflating. The 24-year-old had travelled through Germany and France to join Mohammed Karzan in the UK, paying people smugglers thousands of euros to get across the Channel in the absence of other possible routes. Karzan said that he had been in continuous contact with his fiancee and was tracking her GPS coordinates. “After four hours and 18 minutes from the moment she went into that boat,” he said, “then I lost her.” Amin’s death, along with her 26 fellow passengers in their “paddling pool” boat, asks the question: what prompts these people to get into a dinghy in the freezing sea in darkness, in order to chase the distant lights of the UK? One answer lies in the makeshift camps near the Dunkirk beaches from where it seems that many of those who died had slept before setting out. At Grande-Synthe, a town a mile west of Dunkirk, between the dual carriageway to Calais and the docks, there are a couple of hundred people living along a disused railway line under tarpaulins or in pop-up tents pitched on mud or gravel sidings. Walking among them on Friday, I wrote in my notebook: how much more hostile can an environment be? There is no water or sanitation. Many of these people, nearly all Iraqi Kurds, had been cleared from a large site up the road a few days before, as part of the local police policy of “continuous removal”. Their tents had been trashed and many of their few belongings lost or stolen. For many, that clearance was just the latest in a long history in a journey that had started 3,000 miles south-east. The people I speak to in their halting English give blank smiles when they tell you how many months or years they have been here, or in places like this. Ribar Dhery, a man in his 30s, is sitting under the trees out of the rain. He lists the countries he passed through to get here from Iraq: Turkey, Greece, Bulgaria, Belarus, Poland. He escaped Iraq, he says, “because always people shooting”. He claims to have a brother in Leeds. “Here bad, England good,” he says. When I ask him how he will reach the UK, he answers by making undulating wave motions with his hands. Another, Abdul Rahman, tells me with a smile he has booked his passage – “Three thousand euros!” He arrived here a week ago from Afghanistan, “from Taliban”, paying for a lift from the Polish border. When I mention Wednesday’s tragic events he just shrugs. The majority of those camping out in the rain and mud are young men, but there are several families, too, small children bundled up in coats and hats, holding tight to the shiny plastic of their few toys. Adil and Sarah have four children with them under the age of six, including a baby. They sit around a smoky fire of damp sticks between the railway tracks, trying to mark out some space of their own. On Friday afternoons some charity trucks pull up with the offer of a hot meal and a cup of tea, and some clothes and blankets. Watching people jostle for children’s shoes or wait in line for the promise of a duvet in the rain, you feel like a voyeur of desperation, of lives exposed to the elements. There is much talk of the so-called “pull factors” of coming to Britain. In Grande-Synthe the push factors look far more urgent. If you are living in a child’s tent with no running water and little food, spending nights on the bone-cold ground, you would want to be anywhere but here. Having been forced out of home and everywhere else, the promise of the UK is the next place, or the last place, on the line. Certainly no one who has spent any time around these camps is surprised by last week’s tragedy. Anna Richel is a local representative of the charity Utopia56, which offers legal and practical help to refugees in Grande-Synthe. In recent months, she tells me, they have been forced to operate a 24-hour emergency line for those who get into distress in inflatable boats on the Channel. In the fortnight prior to the tragedy, she says, they had received at least 20 alerts on that line, many in the middle of the night, with a mayday signal and a pin location to enable Utopia56 to alert the coastguard: “Sometimes the boat is sinking, sometimes there is a hole in the boat, sometimes the motor is broken.” She sees no sign that the winter will halt these attempted crossings, as in previous years. “They take a lot of risks because they don’t have solutions.” She and her colleagues don’t attempt to dissuade people from using the boats, “because we know that is what they will do anyway – we just try give to them the most information to stay alive. They are all absolutely scared, but they feel they have no choice.” * * * There are many stories of that imperative being enforced by the trafficking gangs. Local reports suggest a 23-year-old Iraqi Kurd was shot twice in the leg by traffickers on Wednesday after refusing to get on a dinghy and was taken by ambulance to hospital. As of last week 31,500 people were believed to have left the coast in a bid to get to the UK since the beginning of the year, and 7,800 had been rescued. In the face of the latest tragedy – thought to be the biggest loss of life in the Channel since the war – politicians in the UK and France have been competing to imply that the blame lies elsewhere. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, in reporting that five people had been arrested for people-smuggling in the current case [among “1,500 arrested this year”] was at pains to emphasise that the fifth smuggler arrested had “a German licence plate” and had “bought zodiacs [dinghies] in Germany.” Our own prime minister didn’t even finish a full message of condolence before employing the “but” that implied the culpability first of the criminal gangs, then of the French police and government. In the shameful politicking of his tweeted letter to the French president, Johnson’s talked of “maritime patrol operations” and “ground sensors and radar” and “unmanned aircraft flying under joint insignia”; military solutions to a humanitarian crisis. “Boots on the ground” are one thing that the people in Grande-Synthe are desperate to escape. A couple of times, a different approach has been tried here. Damien Carême, now an MEP for the Greens, was mayor in Grande-Synthe from 2001 to 2019. In a conversation on Friday he explained how he saw the tragedy “as the direct consequence of the militarisation of the border between France and the UK: of the brutalisation and harassment of exiles on the French side and the inhuman hardening of the immigration policy of Johnson’s government to reassure the British of Brexit.” These approaches – clearing camps, fortifying the lorry crossing at Calais, closing legal routes to asylum – have created the system that allows the smugglers to exist, he argues. When he was mayor of Grande-Synthe, in 2016, Carême built, with Médecins sans Frontières, the only humanitarian camp for refugees in France to accommodate more than 1,000 Iraqi Kurds, against the wishes of the state. The camp had wooden huts and sanitation and medical care and schooling for children. After a number of attempts by the French government to dismantle it, it was eventually evacuated in 2019; the huts were destroyed and people were shipped to different parts of the country, only to quickly return or be replaced by others. For a short while, though, Carême says, “the population of Grande-Synthe was with us … in solidarity”. Despite the loud rhetoric of the right, “we must,” he says, “also stop underestimating [how], in spite of the obstacles put in their way by governments, human beings still take care of other human beings, heal, feed, welcome.” * * * For those now engaged with that effort in Grande-Synthe, the past week was the worst in years of bad weeks. At the railway encampment on Friday the British charity Care4Calais tried to fill some of the gaps in people’s lives. It bought a generator with sockets to charge mobile phones, around which a big crowd gathered, set up an ad hoc barbershop on chairs in the mud and a table with children’s games. Several teenage boys sat down and lost themselves for a while with coloured pencils; one drew the face of his girlfriend back in Iraq. Care4Calais was established by Clare Moseley six years ago. She sees the shifting population at Grande-Synthe as a barometer of the world’s crises. “Bad things happen elsewhere and people end up in here,” she tells me. “Whether it’s the war in Iraq or Syria, starvation in the Yemen, and now the collapse of Afghanistan.” She believes harsher approaches will only exacerbate the situation. “Some of these people have been in places where they didn’t eat for days, some have seen their family die, and by the time they get to Calais, they’ve already made that decision to cross to Britain.” Her decision to create her charity was prompted by reading an article about the deaths in the Mediterranean in 2015. She was working in a corporate job at Deloitte at the time, she says, with little interest in foreign affairs. “But I just thought: how can people be drowning in the sea in Europe in 2015?” She came down to Calais and saw the state of the camps, and gave up her job, thinking: “we must do better than this.” Since Wednesday’s tragedy she says she has done 20 interviews with the British media and, “apart from the Today programme”, she didn’t hear mention of a different approach in any of them. “As usual everyone was talking about ‘how do we stop them coming in?’” she says. “Most people have got used to the idea of thousands of desperate people drowning each year in the Mediterranean. If we ever get used to the idea of people drowning in the Channel, then I think we are absolutely lost as a country.” For some people, reading reports of the tragedy the surprise was that so many women were on the boat. Frances Timberlake helps to run the Refugee Women’s Centre in Dunkirk, which helps hundreds of women with “essentials and psychosocial support for gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health”. It is an easy political tactic, she says, “to suggest it is only young men making the crossings where there are nearly always women and children involved.” The charity’s work has got harder in the last year as the French police have stepped up their eviction operations, with British encouragement. People go further in their attempts to hide in the woods and dunes, she says, but also “staying put is increasingly not an option. On the ground women – like Amin – are not making comparisons about different government policies, they just want to rejoin their families or their partners.” If the government has its way even more legal routes to asylum will be closed to such women, increasing the likelihood of desperate journeys across the Channel. The forthcoming nationality and borders bill is advertised, in words that will send a chill through any beating heart, as “firm but fair”. Even internal Home Office documents acknowledge its measures could in fact “encourage [people] to attempt riskier means of entering the UK”. Last week Labour, SNP, Liberal Democrats and Green MPs laid down an amendment to the borders bill calling for a new “humanitarian visa system” under which people who can give good reason – family links – for wanting to travel from France to the UK can cross safely and apply for asylum here. In another amendment tabled on Tuesday, the Tory MP David Davis called for MPs to remove the clause in the bill that allows asylum seekers to be “processed offshore”. * * * Médecins Sans Frontières, which established the mayor’s camp at Grande-Synthe, has long experience in the effects of some of these policies in other parts of the world. Before the bill was announced, it sent a letter to the home secretary, outlining its research that showed the Australian model of “offshore processing” on the island of Nauru, on which Priti Patel’s idea seems to be based, caused “some of the worst mental health suffering we have seen in our 50 years of existence”, with a third of MSF patients attempting suicide, including children as young as nine. The letter also pointed out that the policy was recently revealed to cost more than £2.3m for each individual refugee, every year. MSF did not even get the courtesy of an acknowledgement that the letter had been received. Sophie McCann of MSF says that, contrary to the government’s apparent belief, “it’s certainly not illegal to seek asylum … by their own statistics two-thirds of people who come to the UK will be found to be refugees. The bill basically criminalises anyone who tries to come to the UK irregularly, while at the same time closing down all legal routes from within Europe.” One hope is that the fact of children drowning in the Channel might finally soften British attitudes to the crisis. The last time that happened – when the body of three-year-old Alan Kurdi washed up on a Turkish tourist beach in 2015 – the government announced it would take in 20,000 Syrian refugees. Since Brexit, similar commitments to unaccompanied minors and the reuniting of families have been shamelessly abandoned. On the dual carriageway outside Grande-Synthe there is one of those hangar-sized French Auchan supermarkets selling a dozen varieties of everything. The refugee camp is half a mile away. In the supermarket car park there was a bizarre divide between shoppers picking up their Christmas trees, and groups of young men and families from the camp, wandering up and down the hard shoulder, because they’ve nowhere else to go. Watching them, I wondered what a reinvented Dunkirk spirit might look like, one that included these great survivors of impossible journeys, rather than thinking of ever harsher ways to shut them out. Until we collectively start to imagine what that might look like, one thing is certain: many more people will take the risk of those 27 who lost their lives last week.That’s all for day two. Thanks as always for following along with us. Be sure check back later for Sean Ingle’s full report from Dubai and the move-by-move replay of today’s exciting draw. “I didn’t feel like I had any great (winning) chances, per se,” Carlsen says. “I did feel that my position was improving quite a bit. But when I went for this [37. Qg4], my time was ticking down a bit. I couldn’t really see a way to comfortably improve my position and that’s why I decided to basically force a draw there. It was probably the best position I had in the game, (but) I didn’t really see the way. Obviously after what had transpired earlier in the game, having a completely safe position was nice. In a must-win game, I might have treated it a bit differently.” Asked to assess Nepomniachtchi as an opponent, Carlsen says: “It’s very hard to say so far because the games, they’ve been – for lack of a better word – they’ve been a bit atypical for both of us. So I think we’ll see.” “In general I thought it was a very puzzling and I would say that during the game I thought we both are playing not so well,” Nepomniachtchi says. “But now I start thinking it was just very interesting and very chaotic.” Says Carlsen, about the sequence around his controversial 20. Rb1!?: “Somehow the move Nac5 just completely escaped my attention, so that was a pretty unpleasant surprise!” he says. “I did take some solace in the fact you usually need to work pretty hard to win such positions as black and I thought I had at least some reasonable winning chances.” The great champion Garry Kasparov has chimed in. “They also said it after Morphy, Alekhine, and Tal, that fantasy and dynamism had to make way for cold realism and science,” he says. “If chess is less dynamic and creative now, and I’m not so sure, it’s more about the players than their machines.” He continues: “The quality of play rises with each generation, and with fewer errors there are fewer opportunities for tactics. More is known, mapped out. But players can choose to enter the unknown at the board, to gamble their intuition against their opponent’s.” “At some point I blundered when I allowed [10. Kc3?!], because I didn’t intend to sac quite as much material as I actually did,” a visibly tired Carlsen says. “I think a lot of things could have been done differently. After that, I was trying to hang in there, not to lose. The position was very, very interesting. It was going my way for a bit but I couldn’t really find a plan.” The final moves are little more than a formality (50. ... Ra1 51. g4 Rh1+ 52. Kg3 gxh5 53. Re6+ Kg7 54. g5 Rg1+ 55. Kf2 Ra1 56. Rh6 Ra4 57. Kf3 Ra3+ 58. Kf2 Ra4) and this exciting encounter has ended in a peaceful result after 58 moves and nearly four and a half hours. Magnus is still looking for something, anything. But the final sequence, with both players unbound from time pressure, has veered inexorably into known theoretical draw territory with 42. f4 Qf5+ 43. Qxf5 Rxf5 44. Ra7+ Kg8 45. Kg4 Rb5 46. Re7 Ra5 47. Re5 Ra7 48. h4 Kg7 49. h5 Kh6 50. Kh4. Carlsen plays 41. Rxa6 and Nepomniachtchi answers with 41. ... Rf8. Not sure how much longer this one will continue. The players have left the board after reaching the time control with (39. ... Qxc5 40. Qxe6+ Kg7). But today’s thrilling, eventful matchup appears to be bound for a draw. Nepomniachtchi elects for 37. ... Rxd6. That’s followed by 38. exd6 Qxd6 39. c5, which looks like it may be headed toward a draw. Here’s a look at the position after Carlsen’s 37. Qg4. Three potential options stand out for Nepomniachtchi that are acres better than the others: Rxd6, Qd7 and Qe7. Which will he take? Nepomniachtchi plays 35 ... Kg8 before 36. c4 Qc7 37. Qg4. Carlsen is under four minutes while Nepo is below 11 minutes (and counting). Nepomniachtchi plays 33. ... a6 and Carlsen immediately answers with 34. Kh3. The challenger takes two minutes before attacking white’s queen with 34. ... Rc6. The champion takes 66 seconds before moving the queen out of danger with 35. Qd4. Nepomniachtchi plays 31. ... Rb6 and it’s Carlsen’s turn. Nearly five minutes pass before the champion takes the pawn with 32. Qxc5. He’s down to just over 10 minutes of time. Nepomniachtchi quickly plays 32. ... Rdb8 to keep the time pressure on, but Carlsen immediately responds with 33. Kg2. The challenger plays 29. ... bxe4 after two and a half minutes. Carlsen instantly responds with 30. Nxe4 and Nepomniachtchi doesn’t hesitate before playing 30. ... Kh8. Another two minutes passes before Carlsen plays 31. Nd6. Carlsen waits four minutes before playing 28. Ra1. Nepomniachtchi responds with 28. ... c5, followed by 29. Qc4 from the champion. The pace is picking up with both players running short on time: Carlsen at 23min and Nepomniachtchi at 18min. Remember, both players receive an extra 60 minutes after their 40th moves. Nepomniachtchi plays 27. ... Rfd8. The engines say it’s a dead heat though white’s position looks easier to play. A quick series of moves follows (25. Qc2 g6 26. bxc3 bxa4 27. Qxa4). The engine says Nepomniachtchi missed a big opportunity with the potential 26. a5. Time pressure starting to mount for both contestants. After an 11-minute think which includes a wander from his chair, Nepomniachtchi returns to his seat and plays 24. ... c3 almost instantly. A controversial decision as the engines favored no fewer than four moves before it (g6, Qe7, a6 and bxa4). According to the Norwegian supercomputer Sesse, Nepomniachtchi’s mounting advantage has been wiped out to a dead heat. Carlsen expends nearly nine minutes before playing 24. Be4. He’s below 34 minutes to make his next 16 moves until the time control (or about two minutes per move). A positively fascinating encounter that could go any one of three ways. Carlsen, looking a bit uncomfortable, plays 23. Rd1 after a five-minute think. Nepomniachtchi then inspects the position for nearly 10 minutes before deciding on 23. ... Ba8. That’s an inaccuracy according to the engines, which preferred either bxa4 or Qe7. But it gives Nepomniachtchi the chance to activate the bishop, which he’s willing to sacrifice material to do. Carlsen finds 19. Nd6, spending more than 11 minutes of clock. Nepomniachtchi needs only 33 seconds before answering with 19. ... Nb3. A big moment for Carlsen, who now must choose which exchange to give up. The champion play 20. Rb1!?, which the computers hate! Nepomniachtchi captures the bishop (20. ... Nbxc1) and consolidates his clear pawn advantage after (21. Rbxc1 Nxc1 22. Rxc1 Rb8). Carlsen is back on the clock, more than 12 minutes behind the challenger with 44 minutes to make 18 moves. And Nepomniachtchi finds 17. ... Bxe5 after about four minutes. Carlsen immediately takes the bishop with 18. dxe5 and the challenger responds with 18. ... Nac5. Carlsen is back on the clock now and the engines indicate he must play Nd6. There’s only one correct move for Carlsen and after nearly 15 minutes of consideration he finds it: 16. Ne4. Nepomniachtchi takes just one a minute before responding with 16. ... Na6. Carlsen, who’s slipped behind his opponent on the clock, answers with 17. Ne5. A very sharp position, this. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse evaluates the position as dead even ... but any response but Bxe5 by the challenger will give Carlsen an overwhelming advantage. Carlsen plays 15. exf6 as expected. Nepomniachtchi immediately takes back with the bishop (15. ... Bxf6). Nepomniachtchi takes six and a half minutes before opting for 14. ... Bb7. The obvious response for Carlsen is exf6, which gives him a clear edge. Good chance for a decisive result today. Carlsen has found 14. e5. Excellent for him, the best move by some distance according to the engines. He spent more than 15 minutes before doing it, but he’s still more than 16 minutes ahead of Nepomniachtchi on the clock. Nepomniachtchi plays the predicted 12. ... Nb4, which is clearly best. Carlsen immediately fires back with 13. Qe2 and the challenger answers with 13. ... Nd3. Remarkable prep by the world champion but Nepomniachtchi, under extreme duress, is matching him blow for blow so far. Nepomniachtchi finally decides on 11. ... Qd7. He’s spent more than 36 minutes on his last four moves, leaving him 82 minutes for his next 30 moves to reach the time control. Not a dangerous situation just yet but bears mentioning. Carlsen responds with 12. e4. For the second straight game Carlsen has sacrificed a pawn for tactical compensation. It’s a sharp position and the rapid pace of Carlsen suggests it may be something he’s worked on in preparation. Nepomniachtchi is having a lengthy think yet again, having already exhausted 27 minutes more of clock than the champion. “Kind of a hard choice here for Ian and Magnus still very much in book,” the Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says on Chess24’s broadcast. “(Carlsen) knows all the options in this position. I feel really, really worried for Ian. I think if he survives this game, it’s going be a huge achievement and a huge relief for him and his team.” Carlsen advances his a-pawn with 9. a4 after more than four minutes. Both players briefly leave the board before Nepomniachtchi returns to inspect the position. After a more than 10-minute think, he opts for 9. ... Nd5. Carlsen almost immediately fires back with 10. Nc3. Carlsen takes nearly four minutes before settling on 8. Ne5. An exceedingly rare move where the far more popular choice is a5. Clearly the intent is to pull Nepomniachtchi out of his opening preparation. The challenger, who appears legitimately surprised, takes more than nine minutes considering his options before responding with 8. ... c6. A very interesting start to Game 2. Carlsen playing with the white pieces opens with 1. d4. The Catalan Opening follows (1. ... Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3) and the players blitz out their first seven moves (3. ... d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 O-O 6. O-O dxc4 7. Qc2 b5) before Carlsen pauses to ponder the position. Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi have arrived at the playing hall. The challenger briefly took his chair in the sound-proof studio where play takes place before returning backstage. Photographers are already jockeying for position to capture shots of today’s opening move. We should be under way in the next few minutes. A quick refresher on the format for this world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Both Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi are on a half-point after Friday’s Game 1 draw.) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day (16 December) in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for Game 2 of the World Chess Championship. Feels like we only just said goodbye after yesterday’s four-hour, 45-move opener, where the Russian challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi was made to toil with the white pieces in a tense, fighting draw with Norway’s Magnus Carlsen, the longtime champion who perhaps gained a psychological edge by showing he was not afraid to sacrifice a pawn early for long-term initiative (9. ... Nxb3). Nepomniachtchi’s opening advantage ultimately didn’t hold up and he was forced to rely on precise endgame play to emerge with a result. For those of you just coming aboard, Carlsen, 30, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Viswanathan Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April with a round to spare. It’s the culmination of a rivalry that started nearly two decades ago when they first met across the board as boys at the 2002 European Under-12 Championship in Peniscola, Spain. Notably, Nepomniachtchi enters the title tilt with a winning lifetime record against Carlsen in classical matches (four won, one lost and eight drawn). That makes him unique among today’s top players, even if two of those victories came in youth championships. The best-of-14-games match is scheduled to take place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre over the next three weeks, with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games). We’re about a half hour from today’s first move, so not much longer now. In the meantime here’s our Sean Ingle’s interview with Carlsen from earlier this week. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Sean Ingle’s report from Friday’s opening game of the world championship match.Like most crazy ideas, this one started in a pub. In high school, competitive rowers Sam Horsley and Rob Wells had come across video footage from the Talisker Whisky Atlantic Challenge – an annual rowing race across the Atlantic, from La Gomera in the Canary Islands to Antigua in the Caribbean. Years later, over a few drinks, Horsley had a proposal for Wells and fellow school friends Louis Hugh-Jones and James Samuels: the group should enter the gruelling race. At first, they thought he was joking. “And then a few weeks later he brought it up again,” recalls Wells. “At the pub, again. He said: ‘No, I’m serious, let’s look at this, let’s commit.’ After a few more weeks passed, we thought: ‘Let’s do it.’ What started out as some pub chat quickly became more serious.” So serious that on Thursday the Sydney quartet, now all in their mid-20s, flew to London en route to the Canary Islands. In two weeks’ time, they will begin rowing across the Atlantic –an epic 5,000km voyage. The group will take turns rowing in pairs, for two hours at a time, 24 hours a day. They hope to reach English Harbour in Antigua in just over a month, as they aim to break the Australian record of 34 days, 10 hours and 46 minutes. One factor that helped Horsley persuade the group was their ability to use the crossing to make a difference. “We thought this would be a life-changing thing to do,” says Wells. “And we could really make money for a good cause at the same time.” Accordingly, the crew are fundraising for mental health charity Gotcha4Life. They have already raised $150,000 towards a target of half a million dollars, including through corporate support (the team is formally named Shaw and Partners Atlantic Crew, after a major sponsor). Ever since those pub discussions in early 2019, the friends have been working feverishly towards their departure. The logistics of rowing non-stop, unsupported, across the Atlantic are not for the faint-hearted. “We spoke to a number of former participants, and they all said to us that it’s 95% admin,” laughs Wells. “Getting to the start line is 95% of the battle. The actual row is the final 5%.” First, they purchased a specialist open-water rowing boat, from an English crew that competed in an earlier edition of the race. It cost $80,000 – and they have already agreed to sell it to a group of future competitors. The boat comes with solar panels and desalinating machines that allow them to drink sea water. Then they had to buy everything they would need for more than a month at sea, and ensure it would fit in the nine-metre vessel. “We’ve packed one and a half million calories of food into the boat,” Wells explains. While at sea, the crew will eat three main meals of rehydrated ration packs each day, and snack liberally. “I think in total we have 440 chocolate bars, 22kg of nuts, 20kg of dried fruit,” he continues. “It took us weekends and weekends to clear out Aldi and Coles of chocolate bars.” Despite all those calories, competitors typically lose up to one-fifth of their body weight during the race – which, for Wells, would be 20 kilograms. Another key element of preparation has been downloading music and podcasts to keep the crew occupied during long days and nights at sea. Wells has been busily crowdsourcing playlist recommendations from friends and family (they can recharge their devices from the solar panels, but have to pre-download everything before departing). “I think we’ll try and vary it as much as we can,” says Wells of the crew’s musical preferences. “Variety is going to be the spice of life out there when you’re looking at nothing but blue water and blue sky all day.” The Atlantic can be a wild place. In a bad storm, the swell can build to peaks more than 10m tall. For most of the crossing, the crew will be a long way from land – and support. “I’m definitely going to be nervous,” says Wells. “But I trust in the process.” The race organisers require all competitors to undertake extensive safety training; crew members will be harnessed to the boat at all times and they carry with them a range of emergency equipment. “We’re taking every precaution,” he adds. If conditions deteriorate significantly, the crew will stop rowing and take shelter in the small cabins at either end of the boat. They can also deploy a para-anchor, effectively an underwater parachute, that provides stability even in a heavy storm. In a worst-case scenario, race organisers can coordinate with passing tanker ships to arrange a mid-Atlantic pick-up. Fellow Australian Cam Mostyn knows all too well the dangers of rowing across the Atlantic, having competed in 2019. After weeks of good weather, they met a tropical cyclone only days out from Antigua. “We were getting 30-, 40-foot waves, 80-90km winds,” he recalls. “We spent the better part of a day fighting not to capsize. And then at 4am, just before the changeover of a shift, a huge wave came. It just literally picked us up, broke on top of us and threw us straight into the drink.” Fortunately, Mostyn and his teammates managed to return to the boat and battled through the storm to finish in an Australian-record time. They have been liaising with the 2021 team to ensure they are well-informed about the challenges ahead. “We love being able have a support and mentoring capacity with the guys,” he says. Provided the Shaw and Partners crew can navigate any capsizes or other mid-trip incidents, they are expected to arrive in Antigua in mid-January. They will be racing against 35 other crews – a mix of singles, doubles, triples and quads. “We’re hoping to win,” says Wells. But while winning is the aim, the group have agreed that making it to Antigua with friendships intact is the main priority. “It’s not just a physical task, but trying to get on with three blokes – who, in fairness, are my best mates – for 40-odd days, that might be pretty testing,” says Wells. “So we’ve said mateship has to take priority over field position.” The crew has been consulting a sports psychologist to aid their mental preparations. Waiting in Antigua at the finish line will be the crew’s families and partners. Or at least, that’s the plan. Coordinating international travel with an uncertain arrival time has been a challenge. Because their progress is so weather-dependent, they could finish within a month – or take a full two. Wells’s partner has booked flights assuming the crew will arrive on the 35th day of competition. “If we smash the record, she’ll arrive a few days later to find me sitting by the pool sipping on a piña colada,” he says. After a celebratory drink or three, the Sydney-based quartet will begin the long road to recovery. Mostyn’s team found that they were mostly healed within a few days, but full recovery took its time. “They told us that the last 5% took another couple of months,” says Wells. “For months they literally had to pry their fingers open – because you’ve spent half of your time just holding an oar non-stop.” Horsley and Hugh-Jones will return to their jobs as corporate consultants, Samuels, a builder, will head back to the construction site, and Wells – who has just finished his medical degree – will commence his career as a doctor. Ultimately, the crew are hoping to return home with the experience of a lifetime – and a new Australian record. Mostyn, the current holder, says his former team will bear no hard feelings if Wells’s crew are successful. “We’ve been happy to have had the record while we did,” he says. “But records are made to be broken.”In a time of British decline, acting is one of the few world-beating skills we have left. From high to low, we are masters at raiding the dressing-up box and putting on a show. Pieces on why British actors succeed in Hollywood have become a staple of the entertainment press for good reason. The prosaic answers credit their training in character acting and their relative cheapness. The best look at our love of pretence. We have a monarchy that pretends it is happy and glorious while we pretend to believe it; a House of Lords that pretends to be noble while its seats are on open sale; and adversarial political and legal systems, whose participants pretend to oppose one another, while they privately agree. The British sense of humour tends towards the absurdist and the ironic, styles that reject realism. Above all, as the theatre director Richard Eyre observed, the British make exemplary actors because “role-playing [is] second nature to a nation obsessed with class distinction and inured to the necessity of pretending to be what you aren’t”. Now an actor leads a nation of actors. Boris Johnson has been putting on a show since 1984, when Neil Sherlock, the only man to defeat him in a close election, taught him that he must master the arts of pretence. Sherlock was a state school boy, running to be president of the Oxford Union. Johnson was an Etonian and a Tory, who thought he had a right to the job. Sherlock, who went on to become a special adviser to Nick Clegg, remembers how Johnson’s then girlfriend, the fashionable Allegra Mostyn-Owen, invited Sherlock to her rooms and begged him not to stand in the way of “my Boris”. Sherlock asked what made Johnson think he was fit to run the Oxford Union, or anything else for that matter. Well, Mostyn-Owen replied, he was in charge of Pop when he was at Eton. As he was a lad from Woking, it took Sherlock a while to discover she did not mean Johnson sold lemonade in the school canteen but that he ran a society called Pop for prefects. Unmoved by her pleas, Sherlock fought a fierce campaign that targeted Johnson’s snobbery and entitlement, and won. Defeat changed Johnson. At the next union election, he no longer relied on the old-school network but posed as a friend to the middle classes. His rightwing politics vanished, as he played the part of a centrist. His new persona secured him victory. Ever since then he has played whatever role would persuade editors to hire him or voters to elect him. The result is an empty vessel. There is nothing there. One appealing response to the belated discovery by the Conservative party that its leader is a hollow man with no ideas beyond his own advancement is to burst out laughing and ask, what kept you? “Scratch an actor,” Laurence Olivier said, “and underneath you will find another actor.” If you put your life or your country in the hands of people who make it up, you will find that there is only more makeup beneath the makeup, however hard you scrub. The second is to blame him on a make-believe British culture. If the British do not pretend, our voices betray us. They reveal birthplaces, class backgrounds, sex and race. This is a small country with an extraordinarily large number of dialects: between 30 and 40, depending on who you ask. If you speak with a broad accent, the middle and upper classes dismiss you as stupid. English is also a second language for about a billion people. But migrants find it is not enough to know English. Unless they speak in an English dialect that marks them as middle class, they too will be dismissed. As Johnson was bloviating last week, the Social Mobility Foundation was campaigning against “class polish”. When working-class people enter professional occupations, they find their polished counterparts earn £6,000 more a year. Polish projects self-confidence. Polished voices become “the self-presentational markers of a privileged class background” and are enough to keep pay for their owners high and for their colleagues low. Social mobility allows the possibility of reinvention, which can be liberating. But for many the requirement to mimic middle-class manners feels like an assault. Alex Baratta, a linguist at Manchester University, and his colleagues, reported on working-class teachers, who were told by their superiors that they would never advance in the profession unless they dropped their glottal stops. The knowledge that their careers depended on hiding their roots and identities humiliated them. The need to pretend has led to the revival of Victorian elocution classes. The UK has hundreds of “accent softening” or “accent reduction” voice coaches who train people to modify their dialects as if they were actors preparing for a role. (Tellingly, many accent softeners trained at drama schools.) “Are you a native speaker who wants to sound more polished?” asks one with a nod to the Social Mobility Foundation. We can “help non-native speakers of English as well as native regional speakers, who feel that their accent is holding them back in either their personal or professional life”, explains another. I don’t know whether their existence is a cause for shame. I interviewed an accent softener called Rachel Preece for this piece and she argued that you could no more succeed if your listeners could not understand what you say than if your readers could not understand what you write. But I can tell the difference between the actors at the top and the bottom of British society. Our elite acts out caricatures from deep within the national consciousness: the gentleman amateur, who knows more than the “so-called experts”, the aristocratic swell, who is the ordinary people’s friend, the John Bullish voice of common sense, who cuts through the nonsense. Ever since university, acting has given Johnson and his contemporaries a status they do not deserve. By contrast, the immigrant paying £50 an hour for accent softening or the Liverpudlian trying to disguise scouse vowels are forcing themselves to learn new roles so they can get the rewards they were always entitled to on their merits. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistDemand for Australian-manufactured infant foods is booming overseas, thanks to the country’s reputation for producing high-quality and safe food. Australia’s products have earned such a reputation because they are officially deemed free from harmful chemicals, and bacteria that can lead to food poisoning, but the high-quality label doesn’t take into account the nutritional content of the food. When it comes to the healthfulness of the products, a review by consumer advocate group Choice, published in August, found that more than half of the 78 packaged meals and snacks marketed for toddlers contained harmful sugars. The worst offenders contained more than 60% sugar. That has raised questions that a review of the Food Standards Australia and New Zealand [FSANZ] Act is currently grappling with: under food safety and labelling standards, should “safety” relate only to whether the product is safe to eat and free from bacteria and food-borne disease? Or should the labelling also reflect whether the ingredients are associated with longer-term harms, such as obesity, heart disease and cancer? FSANZ is a statutory authority that is part of the federal Department of Health , but its governance is overseen by “food ministers”, which could be either health or agriculture ministers from the federal government and each state and territory. The CEO of the Public Health Association of Australia, Terry Slevin, says public health groups are concerned that with health ministers preoccupied by Covid-19, food and alcohol industry representatives have been lobbying to shift FSANZ to the agriculture portfolio. “The ethos of agriculture is to promote a food industry, both within Australia and with export objectives,” he says. “And that’s going to mean not having too many regulations in place that will hamstring that industry. A food regulation system that stays within the health system will give greater consideration to the health aspects of the food supply. “So it comes down to what’s important about food? Is it about having the industry be strong and profitable, or is a healthy food supply also one that considers the long-term food-related health issues like obesity?” Alcohol Beverages Australia (ABA) argues that the remit of FSANZ should stay firmly in the former. In his submission to the review, ABA policy officer Jonathan Chew wrote that he would be concerned about any extension of FSANZ’s original mandate beyond ensuring acute food-borne illnesses were prevented. He said FSANZ should not move “to a role in responding to broader health policy such as the pursuit of consumer behavioural change to address multifaceted public health issues such as obesity, non-communicable disease and the consumption of alcohol”. “We believe this is, and should remain, outside the scope of work managed by FSANZ,” Chew wrote. The aims and objectives of the food regulatory system, outlined by the health department, state that “the overriding priority will always be protecting public health and safety”. A senior research fellow in food policy and law with the George Institute for Global Health, Dr Alexandra Jones, says that means issues like obesity and chronic disease are well within the remit of FSANZ. “The majority of Australians do die from what I would call long-term food poisoning, which is sustained, excessive consumption of foods that are high in salt, sugar and fat, and we’re dying of cancers and heart disease because of this,” Jones says. “The FSANZ system has adapted to work on these long-term chronic disease risks. This has started to concern the food industry because when they start to see measures implemented that warn consumers about unhealthy aspects of their food, such as pregnancy warnings on alcohol, that potentially has a tension with profits.” Jones and Slevin are concerned there has also been a lack of transparency around the review. The government has not yet made the 76 submissions from stakeholders public, so it is difficult to respond to issues raised. The meeting of food ministers intended for 4 November was delayed, but no new date has been communicated to them. The review is due to be completed by the end of the year, but updates about its progress are not forthcoming. Jones and Slevin say it also remains unclear what final proposals for any reforms or amendments to the system have been put before the food ministers. “Our concern is that there is a lot of lobbying going on in the background, especially in Covid conditions where you have health ministers very preoccupied by something else,” Jones says. The federal minister responsible for FSANZ, Richard Colbeck, says the next food ministers’ meeting is set for 16 December but that the agenda would not be disclosed before the meeting. He says the government “acknowledges the vital role of FSANZ as a regulatory authority under the auspices of the Department of Health”. Jane Martin, the executive manager of the Obesity Policy Coalition, says she received a letter from Colbeck in October saying an “option” for how the FSANZ Act could be reformed had already been put to the food ministers for endorsement. But two months later, no one in the public health sector has been told what that option entails, she says, including whether it involves shifting FSANZ to the Department of Agriculture. Colbeck did not provide detail to Guardian Australia when asked, saying a full communique would be released after the next meeting. “We have got no transparency,” Martin says. “It’s really disappointing when you’re trying to participate in a process to support the health of Australia at a time when the latest burden-of-disease report shows obesity and poor diet are a serious problem, and yet we are not getting any information from the minister about what proposed reforms our efforts and involvement are leading to.” ABA says the FSANZ decision in 2020 to require a pregnancy warning label on packaged alcoholic beverages sold in Australia and New Zealand is evidence that “some stakeholders seek to use the food regulatory system as a platform to pursue longer-term behavioural change beyond simply assuring the safety and reliability of food products”. “There is clearly no case or justification for FSANZ to expand its remit into either preventative health or farm and food sustainability,” the most recent ABA submission to the review states. The CEO of the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education, Caterina Giorgi, says the alcohol industry fought hard against the pregnancy warning labels and lost, so had shifted focus. “My concern is that they are now trying to dismantle the structures that exist to make these decisions,” she says. “So once alcohol pregnancy health warnings were introduced, almost immediately, they shifted their perspective to this review, and trying to water-down the remit of FSANZ.” A nutritionist and visiting fellow at the school of medical sciences at the University of NSW, Dr Rosemary Stanton, has been working in the area of food-labelling reform for more than 50 years. She is familiar with the lobbying tactics used by the food, alcohol and tobacco industries and is committed to seeing the FSANZ reforms through. “I’ve always said I’ll retire when we get a label saying ‘added sugar’ on products,” she says. “We had to fight for years to get even the ingredients on food labels, and then we had to fight for more years to get the nutrition information panel on there. “You have to fight for everything.”When a group of fellow refugees asked for help navigating the construction industry because they believed they were being exploited, Hedayat Osyun decided to go one step further. He started his own construction company as a social enterprise, now known as CommUnity Construction, that solely hires and trains recently arrived refugees and asylum seekers. It’s the kind of safe haven he would have benefited from as a teenager who escaped the Taliban in 2009 and arrived in Australia. “I decided to provide a safe platform for refugees and migrants so they can flourish, contribute to this country, and where they can work proudly. “I found that hundreds of refugees and asylum seekers were being exploited at their workplace because they didn’t speak English, they don’t have a strong network, and they don’t know how to navigate the system.” Since it was founded in 2017, the company has employed and trained 65 refugees from a variety of backgrounds including Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia. Not only are they paid a living wage, they get support to help settle in Australia. “When they start working with me, I become like a member of their family,” Osyun says. “When they received documents or letters, they contact me. I help them enrol for courses, I help them sponsor their families, get their licences, everything.” They held informal English lessons on lunch breaks, before forging a partnership with Navitas to provide professional lessons for staff. “All the basic stuff we take for granted is a struggle for them, and I try and help them through the whole settlement process.” CommUnity Construction has worked on a range of projects, from commercial buildings and hospitality fit-outs to home renovations. It recently completed cultural installations at Darling Harbour and Parramatta, and renovated a five-star hotel in Manly. Nasrat Najafi, 25, worked at CommUnity Construction for three years before recently establishing his own painting business. “I worked with [Osyun] for years, he trained me, taught me waterproofing, tiling and painting. He helped me get my licences and my paperwork in order, and now I have my own business, with four employees,” Najafi said. “Before I worked with him, I worked as a mechanic, but I was an apprentice so my pay was very low. I worked like that for one year, before Nick [Osyun] told me to come work for him.” Najafi, who arrived in Australia as a 19-year-old in 2012, said he decided to work with Osyun because he offered to mentor him through the settlement process. “He’s a good man. He helped many refugees like me, just making our lives easier. He taught me the trade and how to run a business, and with all the paperwork.” “He was a very good boss and a good teacher.” While his language skills and networks have helped Osyun with the business, being a refugee himself has enabled him to win the trust of his workers. When the Taliban attacked his village in Afghanistan in 2009, Osyun’s mother implored him to leave and find a future elsewhere. On the journey to Australia he thought multiple times that he would die before arriving on Christmas Island, where he was detained for three months. He says he was treated “like a criminal” and that his detention there affected him “physically and emotionally”. “It was like being in jail, it was such a traumatic experience. It’s become a permanent part of my memory. Now, 11 years later, I still feel the trauma.” Newly arrived migrants and refugees have a higher unemployment rate compared with the rest of the country, although it does vary based on skill level, age, English proficiency and how long they have been in Australia. Refugee and migrant agency Ames Australia released an analysis of employment data from the National Skills Commission (NSC) in September 2020 and found the pandemic was exacerbating a gap between the migrant unemployment rate and that of the Australian-born population. “There are twice as many migrants and refugees looking for work as Australian-born jobseekers,” the analysis says. “Traditionally, newly arrived migrants and refugees have a higher unemployment rate than the general population – about 5.9% compared with 4.7% for the Australian-born population, based on 2019 figures.” After he was released from Christmas Island, Osyun worked as a labourer in Sydney – a job he describes as akin to “modern slavery”. He says his experience is not uncommon. “Some of my colleagues from refugee backgrounds told me they worked for a company for three months and were never paid. Some have been asked to do extra hours for free, some are fired without explanation or pay. “And they have no idea what to do about it. Some come from corrupt societies and think it’s the same here. Others are afraid they may impact their settlement process if they complain.” He says he witnessed recently arrived refugees and migrants grow hopeless and disaffected by their experiences in the industry, compounding the trauma they would have already endured trying to get to Australia. “This exploitation, it’s a very deep and fundamental problem. There’s no accountability, they’re just using people. I just thought this is not OK, and I can do something about it.” He is determined to grow the social enterprise. “I think it can go national, even international. If you give refugees and asylum seekers a chance, they can show you how hardworking they are. They just need equal opportunities. “The sky is the limit,” he says. “I’m so proud of it and all the work we do, and I’m very hopeful for the future.”The new Sydney Theatre Company production of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar is a “mad ride”, according to Guardian Australia reviewer Steve Dow – a production fizzing with viral imagery, TikTok rightwing conspiracy theorists, smartphone tech, Instagram wellness gurus and the unpredictable energy of post-Capitol riot politics. We asked the director, Kip Williams, and his cast to let us in on some of the thinking behind this unique staging and reveal some of the backstage secrets of a show that mixes old-school “theatre magic” with cutting-edge technology. Three is the magic number Julius Caesar has around 40 speaking roles though not even Shakespeare himself would have considered a cast anywhere near that size. The Bard was a flinty producer as well as a genius playwright. He made a play that can be realised with a dozen or so actors, doubling roles as required. But this STC production has a cast of only three – Ewen Leslie, Geraldine Hakewill and Zahra Newman. So how does that work? And why three? “My instinct and intuition,” Williams says. “This is a piece that looks at the division between the public and private lives of people with power. It’s a play about masking and unmasking, and with three performers doing the whole thing, you are constantly seeing them mask and unmask themselves.” The unkindest cuts of all No matter how versatile the cast, with only three actors to play with, some notable characters had to go. Deciding who got the chop was one of the hardest problems to solve, says Williams. Final cuts weren’t made until the third public preview of the production. “Cutting Calpurnia and Portia [wives of Caesar and Brutus, respectively] was a big one,” says Williams. “We tried lots of ways of doing those scenes but in the end, we asked ourselves why were we showing women begging on their knees but having no impact on the course of the action? We thought it would be better to have incredible women performing the great speeches of the play as part of our commentary on gender and power.” Bloody murder The murder of Caesar is usually an all-hands-on-deck affair as the conspirators line up to stab the tyrant. This production uses prerecorded green screen trickery (designed by David Bergman) to get around the problem. “We recorded the murder in week two of rehearsal with [fight director] Tim Dashwood choreographing the action to a click track,” says Williams. “We started with a hero take with Ewen as Caesar, Geri as Casca and Zahra as Brutus. Most of it was Ewen pretending to be stabbed by 20 or so other conspirators who would be composited on later. It was like learning a dance – very weird but amazing to watch.” Pretty weird to actually do, says Leslie. “It was click, click, stab, click, stab, click, click, stab … You know how actors say, ‘no one has ever done this before’? Well, I’m pretty sure maybe I’m the only Caesar that has had to do this.” With three actors playing various senators jabbing and poking away at a bewildered Caesar (some more enthusiastically than others), this intricate assassination dance is both gruesome and funny. It’s meant to be that way, Williams says. “Right from the start, thinking about the work, we wanted to find a tone that oscillated between horrific and absurd.” Other prerecorded sequences include spectacular rants from modern-day conspiracy theorists. “They are real, taken verbatim from TikTok and from people like [US rightwing commentator] Alex Jones,” Williams says. “All we’ve done is change the names.” ‘Heavy lies the phone’ The actors use smartphones throughout the production, filming themselves in a tight selfie or turning the camera on each other. The images are then transmitted to the show’s most eye-catching design feature, a huge cube of LED screens dominating the stage. In short, they are shooting a live movie at the same time as acting in it. The smartphones allow for lightning-fast oscillations between public persona and private thought. “It’s also an amazing confessional space for a soliloquy,” says Williams. The power of the phone is one of the themes interrogated in the production, he adds. “A lot of what interests me about the state of democracy today is the impact that technology is having on it. The mobile – and by extension, social media – is central to the way we construct and disseminate political rhetoric today.” Newman confesses to being “the Luddite” of the group. “I don’t love technology and I only ever use a phone to text people,” she says. “Heavy lies the phone!” chortles Leslie. “I really struggle with it,” Newman continues. “And I have the worst phone in the show. Everything goes wrong with it. It turns itself off and the pictures are weird. But I can’t ask for another. I’m scared of change. My phone is a Gremlin.” Julius Caesar is a bloody play and phones are slippery things. Do the actors have nightmares about dropping them? “I had to tone down the blood bag – much to my dismay – because one time, I nearly flooded the phone with fake blood,” Leslie says. Julius Caesar is being staged by the Sydney Theatre Company at Wharf 1 theatre at Walsh Bay, Sydney, until 23 December“The worst thing is just sitting and waiting and hoping something happens and every week and every day nothing happens,” Kathy Raspoort says. She has been stuck, two hours from home, at the New South Wales-Queensland border since July. “It’s five months down the drain,” she says. “We’re victims of stupidity [and] everyone is afraid because the rules are so inconsistent and they change them constantly.” Raspoort and her partner, Dick Appel, have spent 17 weeks living in their caravan in Tweed Heads. Across the Tweed region and the NSW northern rivers, these caravan parks and showgrounds have become scenes reminiscent of wretched migration stories, with thousands of displaced Queenslanders camping out on the border, clutching threads of hope as they wait for permission to return home. “There have been no rules for people like us who haven’t got a house,” Raspoort says. She is angry that Queensland authorities encouraged people to travel last year; now they won’t allow them to home quarantine in the camper. The past few weeks have been the worst. “Every time they change the rules, they implement new rules and then they find out they don’t work with all the other rules and they change again. It’s been from left, right and centre about the rules and regulations. “There’s no compassion.” ‘Confusion and a lack of clarity’ On 19 October, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced a plan to “reunite families” that would progressively lift the state’s strict domestic and international border restrictions as vaccination rates rose. “We have to give certainty,” Palaszczuk said. For those attempting to return home, the plan – which Queensland Health says is only “a guide” and not a formal public health direction – has simply heaped on more confusion. Making plans weeks or even days in advance has been impossible as the daily political narrative has bounced from news about vaccination rates to concern that relaxed border policies come with unreasonable strings attached. The Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, told Guardian Australia this week that inquiries had spiked significantly since the border plan was announced. Last financial year, Covid issues accounted for about 16% of people contacting the commission. In the past few weeks, more than a third of human rights inquiries are about Covid. “We’re very much aware of the confusion and the lack of clarity for people trying to make sense of our border reopening plans,” McDougall said. “Without a published health direction to accompany the government’s announcement … we don’t have the detail about how the requirements will be applied, whether there will be exceptions and how people might seek them out, and what obligations will fall on business. “The lack of detail about how the restrictions might apply doesn’t just confuse people, it also creates a vacuum where misinformation is able to be spread.” McDougall says trust in government would increase if reasons for public health directives – and evidence to support them – were published alongside government announcements. “A more robust human rights analysis of some of these measures would also go a long way to finding more appropriate and responsive ways of applying restrictions. When it comes to things like this, they need to be balanced and proportionate, but they also can’t be applied as a blanket rule, one size fits all.” ‘Locked out of our own state’ Amid the confusion, many of those camped in northern NSW say they have attempted to cross the border, believing they were eligible. They are double-vaccinated and have completed paperwork. When they are turned away, police take photographs of them and escort them back to campsites “like criminals”. Every tale is unique. But the common thread is that each has come up against inflexible policy and an overwhelmed bureaucracy. Beau Lyons just wants to be reunited with his wife. She is in Queensland and he is trying to get an exemption from vaccination in order to cross. In September, Lyons and his wife contracted Covid-19 in Kyogle, northern NSW. They were both hospitalised, his wife in ICU. Now he is living in a tiny teardrop-shaped van, his tinny nearby. “The police don’t seem to know what’s going on,” he said. “I got a permit, a pass to go through, I got a letter from my doctor saying … I cannot be vaccinated for six months, but the police would not let me through. “I’ve been arguing this with Queensland Health for some weeks now and again today. They’ve said I can get an exemption, but where is it? It’s been weeks. I’ve been here three weeks waiting. I’ve kept applying since.” Peter Traunter lives just across the border on the Gold Coast and came into NSW to see his 93-year-old mother for her birthday in October. He believed the border restrictions would be lifted by the time he tried to cross back. He started feeling “lonely and stir crazy” after three weeks in a campground, so his wife came down to keep him company. Neither of them know when they will get back home. “[Palaszczuk] changes her mind every couple of days so it’s very confusing,” he said. Charlie Love and his partner are from Mackay. Their large caravan is adorned with solar panels and a Queensland flag that hangs limp in the humidity. “We went out for work and on our way back up to go home, the borders closed and we’ve been stuck here for nearly three months,” Love said. He could re-enter Queensland as an essential worker , but his partner could not and he’s not prepared to leave her behind. “There is no clarification on what’s going on,” he says. “It’s doing my head in. Mentally, it’s draining because we just don’t know what’s going on. The goalposts have been changed from week to week and that’s the frustrating part about it. “We’re less of a risk going across that bloody border than those people flying in, coming from hotspots. I already spent a night in the hospital here because I thought I was having a heart attack. It’s very stressful. It’s bullshit. We’ve been locked out of our own state basically and I can’t see how they can legally do it.” Contradictions abound This past week, as the Queensland and federal governments have argued about the potential cost of Covid tests required to enter the state, has done little to soothe anger as the border re-opening approaches. The state-federal feud was ultimately caused by confusion about whether Queensland would require detailed personal information with test results. That was never the case, though Queensland government websites had published incorrect information that suggested otherwise. It appears neither government sought to speak to the other to clear up confusion. In the aftermath, Palaszczuk claimed the federal government had wanted “Queenslanders to get Covid for Christmas”. The 70% double-dose milestone allowed people from Covid-affected areas to enter Queensland, but those desperate to enter had to wait until the same day to find out the fine print. Palaszczuk said at the time that she expected most people “are going to wait”, given the requirement that entrants arrive by plane only, and quarantine at home for 14 days. Guardian Australia revealed last week that state’s international border plan would apply different quarantine rules to members of the same family in some cases. Queensland Health has automatically cancelled some exemption applications in some cases where people had waited more than five weeks without a response. They had initially been told to expect to be contacted within three business days. An uptick in vaccination rates in Queensland has provided some good news; it now appears the 80% double-dose target will arrive in early December, allowing vaccinated people across ahead of schedule. Public support The state’s approach has been backed by public polling and other research. A Griffith University survey found 64% of people believed the state’s Covid management had respected human rights. Supporters of Queensland’s hard line – with some significant justification – point to the relative numbers of Covid cases in Queensland, which has not had a significant community outbreak since the first wave in 2020. Of almost 2,000 Covid deaths in Australia, only seven have been in Queensland. People within the state’s borders have been largely unrestricted, compared with the lengthy lockdowns experienced in NSW and Victoria, and the economy has benefitted. Damian and his partner are living in a campervan at the Mullumbimby showgrounds with two rescue dogs. A few months ago, they sold their home in Victoria and have bought a property in Queensland. “We turned up the first time, driving, and [while we were] driving things changed. We weren’t told by email or text so hence we got up there with a pass and [police] just laughed at it and revoked it,” he said. “Look, we were a bit upset. They told us to go back home, which we couldn’t swallow, hence we tried again. “I just find it all crippling. You’re out of hope. You think, ‘there’s a bit of light, I’ll follow that tunnel’ and it ends up slamming shut. “We don’t have a home in Melbourne anymore. I’m getting a bit emotional and I’ve had a few moments. “It’s not good. It’s causing a lot of sadness, a lot of lack of trust and hope.”Lyn Rickman and her family were hoping to travel across the ditch from Australia to visit her daughter Ellie, who lives in New Zealand and is due to graduate in Auckland at the beginning of May. “Now chances are we won’t get there, because the borders will open in a staggered way from 30 April and we’d have to quarantine,” says Rickman. “We can’t plan anything ... we’re just hoping New Zealand changes the rules. I’ll be triple-vaxxed, what more can we do? It’s hard.” Rickman is one of many Australians frustrated by New Zealand’s gradual border reopening timeline, which keeps Australians out until at least 30 April. Under the plan, fully vaccinated New Zealand citizens and residence-class visa holders currently in Australia will be able to return home without quarantine from 17 January. But fully vaccinated non-citizens won’t be able to enter the country until 30 April next year, and they will still need to isolate for a week. The Tourism Export Council of New Zealand chief executive, Lynda Keene, is disappointed with the government’s decisions, in particular the need to have travellers self-isolate on arrival. “The impact on international tourism businesses cannot be understated,” Keene says. “Decisions today will affect the next five years of New Zealand’s international tourism offering. Australia will be the winner. New Zealand will be the loser.” The Australian Federation of Travel Agents chief executive, Dean Long, has described the move as a “body blow” to the travel industry and said many were frustrated at the decision. “It effectively means the largest source market for both [Australia and New Zealand] won’t recover until the end of 2022 and into 23,” he says. Long says it would take up to six months for travel volume to recover properly, as tourists initially remain weary of potential lockdowns or border closures. “This unfortunately means for New Zealand they’re going to be at the bottom of the rung for people wanting to travel for leisure purposes. “I can’t see there being a strong snow season for New Zealand because Australians just won’t have confidence that the New Zealand government won’t close the border and lock them out and cancel flights.” It comes as Australian tourists find themselves with limited options for travelling. As it stands, they can only visit the UK, the US, Canada, Italy, Greece, and Germany without having to quarantine. Justin Tighe-Umbers, the co-chair of the New Zealand Aviation Coalition, says the aviation sector is at a loss as to why the New Zealand government is taking a more conservative approach to reopening its border. “With the latest dates for reopening, we’re months behind Australia and out of step with the rest of the world,” he says. “We can go and visit family and friends in Australia, but there is no certainty they will be able to come see us for another five months and even if they can they’ll still have to isolate for seven days.” “International airlines plan schedules way in advance and New Zealand is falling off the radar,” Tighe-Umbers says. “Every day that goes by without certainty, is a day they choose to put their assets elsewhere.” Liam Nash had his hopes riding on being able to return home to New Zealand in time for Christmas. He hasn’t seen his family in 18 months. But with the border remaining shuttered until 13 January, Nash isn’t sure when he’ll be able to make it. He’s set to start a new job in Victoria the day after it reopens. “Planning a trip back has been a logistical nightmare,” he says. “The lack of surety surrounding the border bubble has made it difficult to plan ahead, and although I’m glad we are able to travel back from January, I’ve missed my window. “It’s a bittersweet pill to swallow.” New Zealand’s Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, announced the new timeline on Wednesday, conceding that it may affect plans for families hoping to be reunited over Christmas. “A phased approach to reconnecting with the world is the safest approach to ensure risk is carefully managed. This reduces any potential impacts on vulnerable communities and the New Zealand health system,” he said. All non-citizen travellers will need to take a Covid test upon arrival, self-isolate for seven days and can only enter the community when they return a negative test. Chris Roberts, the chief of the Tourism Industry Aotearoa, has welcomed the certainty that comes with dates for reopening being announced but criticised the lack of clarity on when non-citizens would be able to enter the country without having to isolate. “The government has failed to recognise the critical importance of visitors to re-establishing our connections with the world,” he says. “This is not just about tourism. If international airlines decide to pull out of New Zealand, it may be years before they return – putting vital trade links for high-value exports and critical imports at risk.” • This article was amended on 3 December 2021. It is not just fully vaccinated New Zealand citizens currently in Australia who will be able to return home without quarantine from 17 January, but also residence-class visa holders. And South Africa has been removed from the list of countries that Australian tourists can visit without having to quarantine.As I write this article, my children are stealing cars and robbing houses, I suppose. I am an Indigenous father – so, doesn’t that tell you everything you need to know about me as a parent, and about my children’s capacity to understand right from wrong? I know you sense the sarcasm in this. Well, a great, great majority of Australians would. But there is a certain type of person I am implicating here. The type who have an ignorance so deeply ingrained, that it is a wonder they haven’t wandered off into the dark recesses of our colonial history and followed each other off the edge of a cliff. Shouldn’t they be extinct? An article celebrating an infamous Bill Leak cartoon – the one which depicts an Indigenous father unable to remember his child’s name – sparked me to respond to those with this mindset. I suggest you don’t bother reading any of these articles – don’t give them the benefit of a click. But I will summarise: A journalist, hiding behind a rotting façade of caring about Indigenous children, argued that the statistics of Indigenous over-representation in prisons are caused by “Indigenous parents [who] routinely abandon their responsibilities and do little to instil in their children respect for our laws and the property of others”. According to this privileged white man, “While [Indigenous parents] march up and down the street waving flags, their children are stealing cars, robbing houses and being hauled off to the watch-house”. The harm that racist comments and cartoons cause is never felt by those who make them. It is not white males, nor their children, who are creepily shadowed by security as they shop. They don’t feel the suspicious glances that a First Nations father feels when he hugs his child, as if he is not a protector of the child, but as if the child needs protection from him. They would never have felt that thick and heavy fear that we feel, when we imagine what may well happen to our children should they step into the path of a cop who has nodded in agreement at a cartoon in a major paper, and believes that all Black kids, thanks to all Black parents, carry a greater criminal intent in our DNA. Racist stereotypes have an awful human cost. The fact that Indigenous people die around eight years younger than other Australians says more about how little regard our political system has for my people, than it does about our genetics. And the fact that Indigenous people are proportionately the most incarcerated people on the planet says more about our powerlessness as a people to hold the nations law and policymakers to account, than it does about my children’s capacity to understand right from wrong. It really is as the Uluru Statement so eloquently and powerfully says: Proportionately, we are the most incarcerated people on the planet. We are not an innately criminal people. Our children are aliened from their families at unprecedented rates. This cannot be because we have no love for them. And our youth languish in detention in obscene numbers. They should be our hope for the future. These dimensions of our crisis tell plainly the structural nature of our problem. This is the torment of our powerlessness. And how can you argue with that, unless you believe we are less than human – unless you are racist? I had to think hard about if I bite back by writing this article. Why give the likes of Leak and others any attention, I wondered. Should I ignore it and focus on the positives rather than the negatives? I concluded there should be a response. The stereotype must be defeated; not so much by changing the ignoramus’ mind, but by changing the country so the ignoramus is forced closer to that cliff. And so it is to the pen, the ink, the keyboard we go, more and more Indigenous writers who are fighting fire with fire. We are the authors of who we are. Not old white men. This is one of the reasons 12 First Nations men wrote a book with me, Dear Son – Letters and reflections from First Nations fathers and sons. We wrote it, partly in response to publications like Bill Leak’s racist cartoon, but also because of the awful legacies of the Northern Territory Intervention, and the crap we were taught about our First Nations forefathers in school – that our forefathers were savages while the white students forefathers were our discoverers and saviours. Dear Son celebrates Indigenous fatherhood through letters and poems. We express love for ourselves and our families in a beautiful act of defiance. The key factor is that contrary to claims of failed responsibility by Indigenous parents, we in fact are calling for greater responsibility. We march the streets and fly our flags, we protest because we love our children. We are calling to change this country for the better – we want a referendum for a constitutionally enshrined Indigenous voice, so we may hold parliament accountable for failing to meet their responsibility – to keep all Australians equally safe. • Thomas Mayor is a Kaurareg Aboriginal and Kalkalgal, Erubamle Torres Strait Islander. He is the Indigenous officer of the Maritime Union of Australia and the author of Dear Son – Letters and reflections from First Nations fathers and sons. He tweets @tommayor11The report was stamped CONFIDENTIAL twice on each page, with the customary warning it should “not be released to any other government except Britain, Canada, NZ and US”. About 40 years ago this week, the spooks at Australia’s intelligence agency, the Office of National Assessments (ONA), delivered the 17-page report to prime minister Malcolm Fraser. The subject? “Fossil Fuels and the Greenhouse Effect”. Michael Cook, the agency’s director general, wrote in an introduction how his team had looked at the implications of rising levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere “with special reference to Australia as a producer and exporter of coal”. Cook wrote: “Scientists now agree that if such emissions continue it will some time in the next century lead to a discernible ‘greenhouse effect’ whereby the Earth’s atmosphere becomes measurably warmer with related climatic changes.” The agency had several warnings for the Fraser government, but central to the concerns was the potential for the country’s coal exports to be affected. Those concerns from high levels of government show that from the beginning, the country was seeing the climate change issue through the prism of its fossil fuels. There were “potentially adverse implications” for the “security of Australia’s export markets for coal beyond the end of the century”. About 16 years after the ONA report, the Howard government signed the Kyoto protocol to limit greenhouse gas emissions. John Howard, who was treasurer when the ONA report was released, later refused to ratify that Kyoto deal, saying it would damage the country’s industries, including coal. ONA was predicting in 1981 that tensions were likely. Sooner or later the “carbon dioxide problem” would “arouse public concerns and so engage the attention of governments”. If there wasn’t cost-effective technology “to reduce the carbon dioxide problem” by the end of that century, then concerns could “culminate in pressure for action to restrict fossil fuel usage”. There was no “anti-fossil fuel lobby” yet that could be compared to “anti-nuclear groups” but some environmental organisations were starting to express concern. Public attention was only going to increase as more scientific results were published “and are sensationalised by the press and others”. But in a concluding sentence that could be commenting on the Morrison government’s current defence of fossil fuels from a distance of four decades, the report says: “Australia could well find its export market particularly vulnerable to international policies aimed at limiting the use of coal.” Dr Robert Glasser, head of the climate and security policy centre at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, said: “It’s the job of intelligence agencies to anticipate these long-term threats and then alert the government. “In that respect, they were doing their job.” The existence of the ONA report – sent to Fraser on 25 November 1981 – is still not widely known. Scientists working on the issue at the time said they had never seen it until the Guardian sent them a copy. Australia’s longest-serving science minister, Barry Jones, who took up his ministerial role in 1983, also said he had no recall of it. Glasser says those who have followed the science over decades might not be surprised that Australia’s intelligence was exercised by climate change 40 years ago. “The science has been clear in terms of a general direction ever since the 1970s – a decade before this report. But we now know the impacts.” But he says despite the country’s intelligence agency first engaging with the issue 40 years ago, Australia is still “way behind” on the security risks being posed by climate change. “We are failing to assess the climate and security risks generally, not just in Australia where we can see these simultaneous record-setting compounding events, but even in the region it’s a major security issue.” One of the first people outside government to see the document was likely Prof Clive Hamilton, who says he was handed it by a “senior public servant” while he was researching his 2007 book Scorcher on the “dirty politics of climate change”. “The document was amazingly prescient and remains accurate in its essentials,” said Hamilton “It was one of those extraordinary things a researcher occasionally stumbles upon. Almost no one seemed aware of the report. It was just gathering dust on a shelf somewhere.” As well as forecasting problems for the country’s coal industry, the ONA report included qualified forecasts of the potential impacts on the climate. The area where cyclones could hit could extend as the tropics expand. Sea levels could rise, plants might grow quicker and the polar regions would warm much faster. There would be global winners and losers, the report said. Canada’s wheat-growing belt could grow, gaining area from the USA as the climate shifted. A loss of permafrost in the USSR and Canada could deliver more agricultural land (permafrost is now melting, with concerns about the release of large amounts of greenhouse gases that could further raise temperatures). If CO2 levels doubled in the atmosphere, then the ONA thought this could cause between 2C and 3C of warming. That estimate – from 40 years ago – is within the range of the UN’s latest assessment. Emerging science But the science and the concerns among Australia’s top scientists had been building well before the ONA report dropped on Fraser’s desk. Some of the data in the report was drawn from the work of Dr Graeme Pearman and colleagues at CSIRO. Pearman is a pioneering climate scientist who started working on the issue in the early 70s and remembers speaking to ONA staff at the time. “I knew they were aware of the issues but I didn’t know how they would play that game,” says Pearman, who is now aged 80 but who saw the report for the first time this week. “The report does reflect pretty well the state of our scientific understanding at that time. Where it perhaps falls down is that there seems to be no real attempt to evaluate the risks associated with what may unfold.” The CSIRO had started measuring CO2 levels in the air using instruments in a wheat field in Rutherglen, Victoria, in 1971. The following year, Pearman and colleagues had put air-sampling equipment on planes – some commercial and some government-owned. More than 3,500 samples were taken. Pearman was curious about CO2 measurements that had been taken continually since 1958 in Hawaii by pioneering climate scientist Charles David Keeling, of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California. To Pearman’s amazement, the amounts of CO2 in the air above the wheat field and from the aircraft instruments were almost identical to Keeling’s findings from Hawaii In 1974, Pearman took the Australian air samples in six steel flasks across the world, visiting Keeling’s laboratory in California as well as other scientists doing CO2 measurements in Sweden, Canada, American Samoa and New Zealand. In 1976, the Australian Academy of Science published a Report of a Committee on Climatic Change that mostly dealt with natural variations in the climate. But that report included a chapter on “man’s impact on climate”. All past climate changes had been due to natural events “on an astronomic or global scale,” the report said. But then came this sentence: “Human activities are now developing in ways that could have an appreciable effect on the climate within decades.” Four years later, and one year before the ONA report, Pearman edited a book – Carbon Dioxide and Climate: Australian Research that summarised the work going on in Australia. How were the levels of CO2 changing? What could this mean for rainfall? How would plants respond? “The potential significance of a CO2-induced climatic change is large,” wrote Pearman, but so too were the uncertainties. A lot more work needed to be done. Pretty ordinary or prescient? “It is fascinating and remarkable to read how this was being viewed [by the intelligence agency] only 10 years after we started our CO2 and climate work at CSIRO,” says Pearman. Australia’s longest-serving science minister from 1983 to 1990, Barry Jones, could not recall ever seeing the ONA report, but he wasn’t particularly impressed. “I think it’s pretty ordinary,” says Jones, whose latest book is called What Is to be Done: Political Engagement and Saving the Planet. “They imposed on themselves a very narrow terms of reference,” he said, and was puzzled why the report mentions other greenhouse gases but ignored methane. Prof Ian Lowe was lecturing students on the future of energy supply at Griffith University in the early 1980s. He also hadn’t seen the ONA report before. “It’s stamped confidential top to bottom. I was surprised how accurate it was though,” he said. “The spy agency thought it was important enough to draw it to the attention of our political leadership largely because of what they saw as the commerce implications for the Australian export markets for coal. “But what’s politically interesting is there was absolutely no response to this warning, even though the expansion of fossil fuels was tragically compromised.” Author and academic Dr Jeremy Walker, of UTS in Sydney, is researching the history of climate science and energy policy. He’s been reviewing the ONA report as part of a wider project. “What’s interesting to me is that this was being considered at the highest levels of government, but the security issue is being interpreted in terms of the profitability of the fossil fuel industry. The fossil fuel industry is central to the government’s response – then and now.”After more than four decades spent living in New Zealand, Ned Cook knew it was time to return to his home country of Tonga. His country was in the grip of a methamphetamine epidemic that was ripping families apart and overrunning the country’s hospitals and jails. Cook, a trained drug and alcohol abuse counsellor, with a history of drug abuse himself, had been preparing for years to return to Tonga to combat it. “He explained it to me like he had a spiritual awakening that not only allowed him to kick the habit but gave him a mission to help others,” said Kalafi Moala, a veteran Tongan journalist, and a friend of Cook’s. “He knew he was needed back in Tonga.” When Ned returned to Tonga in 2017, he was the only qualified drug counsellor in the country and got straight to work – but he wasn’t blind to the risks. “I know this is a dangerous field to work in and it could harm my life and my family’s life,” he told the New Zealand broadcaster 1 News in 2019. Less than a year later, he was murdered outside his home in Tonga’s capital, Nuku’alofa. A 20-year-old man was later convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. “The loss was obviously devastating for everyone who knew him but it’s also just a huge loss for the country,” said Moala. “No one has been able to replace him on his work. He was the only one with experience. There’s no one here now to help the people he was helping.” Moala has been investigating Tonga’s drug trade since the 1990s but said in recent years things have become much worse. “The problem is the drug has changed from cocaine to meth. With cocaine, people couldn’t afford it, it came in just to be shipped out,” he said. “In recent years the drug coming in is meth and now everywhere we look we see the effects. In the last couple of years, it’s become a real crisis.” ‘A problem for all of society’ According to police data, drug related arrests are up from 101 in 2018 to 285 arrests in 2020. Detective Halatoa Taufa, the deputy commissioner of the drug enforcement taskforce in Tonga, told a national symposium on illicit drugs earlier this month that the crisis is now worse than ever and doesn’t show any sign of slowing down. Drug-related prosecutions in Tonga’s supreme court have also risen since 2018, increasing by 206% to 2020. Of 930 criminal prosecutions since 2018, 529 were drug related. The director of public prosecutions, James Lutui, said combatting the increase in drug use was not just a problem for police or prosecutors. “This is a problem for all of society.” The impacts are being felt acutely in Tonga’s psychiatric ward, said head psychiatrist Dr Mapa Puloka. “Between 20% and 70% of all monthly admissions are due to consumption of cannabinoids or methamphetamine or both,” he said. “Drugs has now become a main precipitating factor for the occurrences of mental illnesses and the frequent relapse of persons with chronic psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar.” Puloka said the crisis had become so dire that some psychiatric patients have had to sleep on the hospital floor. Tonga’s commissioner of prisons, Semisi Tapueluelu, earlier this year told the government that they would need two new prisons to cope with the increase in drug related offences. It appears their warnings have been heeded, with Tonga’s king recently taking the rare step of criticising parliament for their lack of attention to the issue. In the absence of government attention, NGOs have stepped into the breach, but they’re under immense pressure. Mele Prescott, who was being trained by Ned Cook before his death, is now the drug and alcohol programme manager for the Salvation Army in Tonga and said that they’ve struggled to chart a path through since Ned’s death. “I find it really hard and challenging to have all of this on my shoulders. I used to work really close with Ned. He led the way, but now I’m just trying to follow in his footsteps,” she said. “But at the same time, the issue has gotten worse. We started out by hosting counselling sessions for drug users during the day, just two days a week but now with so many people being referred from the courts and the psychiatric ward, we’re now running every single day of the week, six hours a day.” Nowhere to turn On the outskirts of Nuku’alofa is a three-bedroom house that looks no different to the others on the street – but it’s Tonga’s only safe house for women and children escaping violence, in which drugs are often involved. ‘Ofa Guttenbeil-Likiliki, the founder and director of the Women and Children Crisis Centre, said the house is equipped to house just six women and up to 12 children but often accommodates more than 20 women and accompanying children. “It’s definitely in the past few years, with the increase of drugs, that we’ve seen more and more women trying to escape from a situation. They’ve been beaten black and blue,” she said. Despite the Tongan government recently increasing the budget for the police department from TOP5m (AU$3m) to TOP50m (AU$30m) to combat drug use, Guttenbeil-Likiliki said they’re still not equipped nor trained to respond appropriately. “A man on drugs tied a woman up during the lockdown and did all sorts of things to her. It was when the landlord went over to collect the rent that he heard the abuse and alerted the police but when the police arrived, the man told them nothing was wrong and so they just left,” she said. “We also don’t have protection at our safe house. We’ve had drug dealers walking in here, screaming at and threatening us. I really don’t think the police are equipped or resourced to deal with people who are involved in drugs.” Guttenbeil-Likiliki said the impact on children has been particularly severe. “We had a case of an attempted suicide, the boy was just 16, and we found out that methamphetamine was actually advertised to him to help him study for his exams but then he became addicted and started doing things that really shocked his family and it almost cost him his life,” she said. After a counselling session hosted by the Salvation Army incentral Nuku’alofa, one drug user said that kids were seen as easy targets for drug dealers, to get them hooked on drugs but also to sell drugs, as they’re less likely to be caught by police and are more likely to share with their friends, getting them addicted as well. “What we really need to do is tackle the problem in the schools, we need to be educating kids at a young age, so that when they are confronted with drugs, they know what they are up against,” he said. He knows this from experience as he too was groomed into taking drugs at the age of 14 while living in San Francisco in the 1970s. His drug use would eventually land him in trouble with the law and in 2015, after 52 years living in the US, he was deported back to Tonga, despite not having lived there since he was a child. Although he had been clean in the years prior to being deported, he said the whole experience left him in a bad place and drugs was a way to escape. He now fears that with the lack of available support, he might deteriorate further. “In the years I was clean, I got my truck drivers licence and really turned my life around. I want that back but it’s really hard. There’s just so little help here.” Prescott said most of the people who attend her counselling sessions feel the same way. “They don’t want to be like this, but they also can’t always do it alone. We have five or six people coming to us every day, seeking help,” she said. “These people want help but currently don’t have anywhere to turn.”A Perth mother fears she will have to quit her job to care for her autistic son after his national disability insurance scheme package was cut by about 70%, in the latest example of what the opposition is labelling “stealth” cuts to the program. The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) insists there is no “directive to reduce funding to NDIS participant plans” and that its so-called Sustainability Action Taskforce – dubbed a razor gang by critics – is “no longer active”. But those affected by funding cuts say they cannot work out why they are losing support. Single mother Sarah O’Sullivan told Guardian Australia a shock $70,000 cut to 11-year-old Jonah’s plan meant she would only be able to afford a support worker once or twice a week. It will also result in a reduction in the number of therapy sessions that Jonah will be able to undertake, just as he enters high school. “I do worry he’s going to be at high school with his peers, and he’s not going to be able to do these things in a few years because he’s not learned how to do them before,” she said. “When his friends want to catch a bus to go do something, that’s going to be a foreign concept for him and create this big gap.” O’Sullivan said Jonah, who is autistic, has ADHD, selective mutism and anxiety disorder, won’t be able to catch the bus home from school alone or care for himself while she is still at work. “I probably will have to leave my job,” O’Sullivan said. “From what I can understand, if I have to go onto a Centrelink payment, I won’t be able to afford my rent… It would probably mean having to move out of the area that his high school is in.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning O’Sullivan is not alone in complaining about recent cuts to an NDIS plan. In the past month, the mother of a terminally ill five-year-old battling a degenerative neurological disease told Nine News her child’s NDIS package had been cut by half, while the parents of a 20-year-old with multiple complex disabilities said their son would not get the 24-hour care he needs after changes to his plan. In another case reported by the ABC, a 21-year-old living with autism and tuberous sclerosis had seen a $112,000 cut to her plan. “The NDIS was designed so participants receive an individualised support package tailored to their needs,” an agency spokesperson said. “Individual plans may go up or down depending on the level of support needed at review which is a normal part of the scheme.” However, advocates like Jean Cotchin, of the NDIS campaign group Every Australian Counts, say that what they are seeing is beyond usual changes to plans. “For example, some people have told us they were offered a two-year plan instead of one year, which is great, but the funding provided [is the] same as their last one-year plan,” said Cotchin. “So they are really, really worried about how they can possibly stretch out their supports over such a long time. It has real impacts – it means people have to have less showers every week. “Or [losing] the ability to communicate or use their bodies for a few days a week. It means people living in group homes miss out on getting out and seeing their friends, or playing sports.” Participants and their carers can appeal a decision by the National Disability Insurance Agency internally, or to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). Jonah’s plan was initially cut by 90%, but the agency reduced this to a 70% cut after O’Sullivan sought an internal review. She now faces the prospect of an appeal to the AAT, which reported a 20% increase in NDIS-related appeals in the past financial year. The opposition’s NDIS spokesman, Bill Shorten, has said this increase reflected the government’s “increasing attempts to cut the scheme by stealth by refusing supports or slashing plans”. Mary Mallett, of the peak body for disability legal advocacy groups, the Disability Advocacy Network Australia, said members were recently being inundated with calls for help. “This year in particular, the number of people coming to them for assistance with internal reviews or appeals with the AAT has just risen exponentially,” she said. Naomi Anderson, of the Victorian-based Villamanta Disability Rights Legal Service, said participants contacting the service were “anything from anxious to terrified”. “We’re seeing significantly increasing numbers of people calling to say that they’ve had their plan reduced, or they don’t have enough funding, and that in some cases things are looking quite dire,” she said. Rachael Thompson, of the Rights Information Advocacy Centre, said her organisation was having a similar experience. “The situation was pretty bad before, but now it’s just gotten worse,” she said. “We’re hearing on the ground that more and more plans are getting reduced for no particular reason.” The government, which is worried the scheme is becoming financially unsustainable, was forced to scrap reforms tipped to rein in spending earlier this year after a backlash. It also set up a secret unit, called the Sustainability Action Taskforce, which was aimed at slowing spending on participants’ funding packages in part through a “targeted review of existing participant plans”, according to documents obtained by Guardian Australia in May. An NDIA spokesperson said “the taskforce is no longer active” and insisted it would be “incorrect to link this to individual plan values”. The spokesperson said there was “no directive to reduce funding to NDIS participant plans, and planning decisions made by the NDIA continue to be made in accordance with the NDIS Act”. The spokesperson said the average NDIS payment per participant continues to grow, from $39,000 in 2018 to $54,400 in 2021. Advocates say this figure also reflects the fact participants are using more of their funding as they have become more comfortable navigating the system. They also claim on-average data can mask the large cuts experienced by families like O’Sullivan’s. An NDIS spokesperson said of Jonah’s plan: “The agency is generally unable to comment on individual cases out of respect for privacy. However, it’s important to note Jonah’s previous plan had a two-year duration – and the current plan is solely for one year. It is important to consider comparable plan durations.” O’Sullivan said in fact Jonah had been issued a 12-month plan for $95,732.50, which was then rolled over for another 12 months at the same value during the pandemic. When his plan was reviewed, the agency indicated Jonah’s next 12-month plan would be for only $7,759.60. On appeal, this was increased to $26,935.52, but still a cut of about $70,000. O’Sullivan said she had been told the funding she had requested for a support worker was “not ‘reasonable and necessary’ and would be parental responsibilities”, referring to the legal test for NDIS-funded supports. “The implication was that any normal parent would have to organise a way for their child to be cared for after school, which would be fair if Jonah was going to be in primary school, there is after-school child care,” she said. “But what happens when that is no longer an option and he outgrows the child care system?”Growing up in Hobart in the 1980s, I traipsed all over the stunning dolerite uplift of the mountain framing our harbour city – Mount Wellington, today dually named kunanyi. We regularly drove up the mountain road to picnic in fern glades at The Springs, near the site of a hotel that burnt down in Tasmania’s catastrophic 1967 bushfires. At high school, our geology class forensically measured the way the crystal size in the rocks changed with the cooling speed of the lava squirt that made the mountain. After I’d left Tasmania to go to university, threads of after-party gossip would reach me from secret summer mountain raves away from the tourist tracks, where people carried in sound equipment with generators. More recently, the Mona Foma festival has drawn next generation revellers. And while Hobartians have been cooped up through Covid-19, this unspoiled nature reserve has become a more popular escape hatch than ever. Partly that’s down to the pull of kunanyi’s ephemeral mountain pool known as the Disappearing Tarn. The tarn’s iridescent, turquoise water appears only after unusually heavy rain and disappears after a few days. It shot to fame as an Instagram destination in the tough Tasmanian winter of 2020. I’d never heard of it; people who aren’t dedicated bushwalkers or Insta followers still haven’t. “That’s at Mount Field?” a Victorian recently asked. She has a thing for Tasmania’s mountain country, as “the only place I have every felt truly at peace, a weird and strange peace”. That resonates in these jangled times. So I dusted off my hiking boots to seek the tarn for myself. Another dump of freezing rain had pounded Hobart through Friday. Tuesday dawned with the clearest skies and warmest November sun. The next day’s forecast was patchy, so I Googled directions and drove up to The Springs. I started my ascent – alone – with everything I thought I needed to loop up and back on a shortish day walk. Hat, sunscreen, swimmers, warm layers, waterproof jacket, scarf, water, sandwiches, mandarins, chocolate, torch and a printed map in case my phone died. I’d also checked in with a friend about my plans, remembering a news story about a local couple who got lost on the mountain after dark while seeking the tarn in September – they were saved from hypothermia by police search and rescue. In their case, the tarn wasn’t even there. It hadn’t rained enough. I didn’t know if it would be there for me until I started meeting walkers coming down the mountain who’d set off at daybreak. First came a bouncy couple in their 30s, wearing baseball caps and gelled sports shoes, who’d run up the mountain as well as down. It was great to hear the tarn lay ahead. Less wonderful to hear I’d reached barely halfway. After a challenging upward slog through sticky, slippery mud, then rock-hopping across a tricky obstacle course of lichen-decorated dolerite, I’d hoped I was nearly there. Onwards and upwards, upwards and upwards. The next human signpost – there are no written pointers on this trail – was a group of women older than me who looked as though they might die of exhaustion. The face of one crumpled when I asked her what came next. She gave careful instructions about locating the tarn when I got closer, “so you don’t overshoot like we did’’. Right-hand side of track; check. Near a pole with an orange marker, and a large, green-limbed Eucalyptus coccifera, a magnificent Tasmanian snow gum whose leaves smell of peppermint; check. That trail kept rising before me, with those endless stones. I kept following it, jumping across rocks like the mountain goat I’ll never be. With each landing, every toe smashed into the front of my boots. I wished I’d packed thicker socks. Onwards and upwards. Surely it was close now? I spotted a pole with an orange marker. Then another, and another, and another. I reached the crest of another stony rise, and the poles kept stretching ahead. Those scented snow gums were all around me now, all magnificent, framing tantalising glimpses of the D’Entrecasteaux Channel and Bruny Island far below, in endless shades of soft sea blue. I pushed on. The midday sun bit down as hard as the rocks underfoot. There was no human sound, only wild birdsong. Reaching an eerily familiar boulder field of stones like giant potatoes, I realised I’d overshot too. Then I fell. Badly bruised but, luckily, nothing was broken. Picking my way gingerly back down the trail, suddenly, by some miracle I found the tarn. It was like tripping into paradise. The water was more clear and cold than any I’ve plunged in across the planet. The air shimmered and a breeze floated across the eucalypts, rippling the skin of the tarn. Giant sparkles moved underwater like fish or spirits, swirling living jewels I couldn’t hold in my hands or catch with my camera. Despite concern I’d find crowds crushing the tarn, just three of us shared that long moment – my companions were two chatty millennials, who’d last been there in the snow. Did I feel at peace? Not so much – I now had to get back down the mountain. Downhill is strangely harder than uphill. Why hadn’t I packed walking poles like the team of champion hikers who’d passed me at the start of the track? The bruises and blisters kicked in slowly but surely, and every waist-down muscle screamed in protest. I fell again on the rocks, much harder this time. Flat on my back staring up at those gumtrees and that bright empty sky, and listening to that birdsong, I wondered if I might meet my maker. Everything hurt. But a big cry always does wonders. And by another miracle I still wasn’t broken. Somehow I clambered back down over all those stones, and through all that mud, into which I tipped over just a couple more times. My face didn’t crumple, not once, when newly ascending climbers asked me expectantly about finding the tarn. One was a university student from China, also walking alone, curious about the place where she’d been caught by Covid-19 border closures. Another was a Hobart teenager playing hooky from school – sullen and shy on the way up, there was no stopping him sharing the wonder of the tarn when he lapped me on the way down. And there was a couple from India doing their faster-tracked visa time in Hobart, who kindly pulled me out of the mud. They wanted my honest take on the trek – “well, mine was pure heaven, and it also was hell!” They asked me to describe this heaven. Then they each smiled, and walked together with fresher purpose up the mountain. • Natasha Cica’s book Pedder Dreaming: Olegas Truchanas and a Lost Tasmanian Wilderness (UQP, 2011) will be reprinted in 2022.There was a sense of calm after the storm on a bitterly cold Saturday on the Kent coast. A morning of fierce rain and high winds eventually gave way to a dry, dark afternoon in which the sun never threatened to penetrate the heavy cloud cover over Dover Marina pier. “We doubt very much that people will try to cross in the storm – hopefully they don’t,” said Kay Marsh, a volunteer with Channel Rescue. The organisation works to support people arriving by carrying out shore-spotting patrols along the Kent coast and documenting Border Force interceptions. Indeed, the only two Border Force vessels in sight, HMC Eagle and HMC Speedwell, were stationed in the marina at Dover western docks, with only each other for company. In effect, Channel Rescue is the antithesis of the self-proclaimed “migrant hunters”, far-right agitators who carry out their own patrols, supposedly in support of the UK Border force but Channel Rescue says these expeditions boil down to “harassment”. The dog walkers and older couples brave enough to venture out towards the choppy seas had to cope with deafening winds. “We obviously have sympathy for those who died,” shouted Mike, 67, above the din. “We can take 2,000, sure, but I personally think this country is not big enough for 26,000… We’ve got British homeless people on the streets. We can’t house them, how are we going to house migrants?” He added that: “the majority are nice people but the minority – maybe 5% – are not nice people … we don’t want them dying but we don’t want them here either.” But few other people appeared to share that view. Dover port worker, Rob Uttley, 51, said that “locally, people have become hardened to the regular crossings – whether we like it or not the UK is a multicultural society now.” Uttley expressed concern that people in the area were still in the dark as to why people were willing to risk their lives attempting to land in the UK. “Perhaps our government makes it more attractive for people to come here than other countries in Europe. But personally I believe it’s more about people coming here because they either have family here or they speak the language. “These are human beings. It’s upsetting to see anyone lose their lives; the British government need to work with the French government to find a solution.” By the marina is Tug Haven, the short term detention facility where arrivals from across the Kent coast are taken for “processing” before being taken by coach to London, and elsewhere. Set back behind high fences, the facility amounts to a number of containers where soaking wet arrivals are often held for hours. Last year, the chief inspector of Prisons, Peter Clarke, said the reception arrangements at Tug Haven were “not fit for even small numbers”. “It’s been traumatic,” says Bridget Chapman of Kent Refugee Action Network. “It’s not illegal to cross the Channel to seek asylum. People in government who should know better keep using the word ‘illegal’ or asking why don’t people just stay in France – most people that arrive in France do stay in France – besides they have every right to seek asylum in the UK.” Chapman added that the adverse weather conditions only increased the urgency of the situation in the Channel and the pressure incumbent on emergency services. “People coming in are going to be suffering from hypothermia. I think people think we can stop these crossings by just being tougher, meaner, nastier, that’s a complete misunderstanding of the situation. The UK is their destination and they are going to make that journey – we either make it more difficult – more deaths – or we find a way to work with and manage the situation.” She added: “Unless we find a better option for these people we will see more deaths.”Less than a week ago, cabinet minister Nadhim Zahawi took to the airwaves to predict that such was the progress of the vaccine programme, Britain would be the first big country to use vaccines to end the pandemic. Hours after he made those comments, scientists 9,000 miles away detected a worrying Covid variant that , just days later, prompted Boris Johnson to announce emergency measures that he had hoped would never be reintroduced. The speed at which Omicron’s initial discovery has led to the detection of cases around the world and the imposition of new restrictions has been startling. It is also a sign of desperation in Downing Street to avoid a lapse back into more severe restrictions, such as those the prime minister was forced to introduce – with great reluctance – last Christmas. Even by Friday, with Whitehall officials scrambling to draw up options for the prime minister and cases emerging in Belgium and Israel, UK scientific advisers had concluded that the new variant was probably already here. “The predictions of the modellers are that, even if we haven’t yet found this virus on our shores, it will be there,” said professor Peter Openshaw of Imperial College London, speaking on Friday evening. Openshaw is a member of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group. Travel restrictions were immediately placed on the countries affected, but scientists were already pushing for swift action elsewhere. “Any border restrictions are only about buying time. So if we slap them on quickly but drag our feet in doing everything else, it really is a waste of time,” said Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science. “In fact, we are particularly vulnerable, given our acceptance of chronically high levels of infection/hospitalisation/death.” Such has been the pace of Omicron’s emergence that it was little surprise when, on Saturday, the first UK cases emerged in Brentwood and Nottingham. Contact tracers were working over the weekend to find those they may have infected. Four more African countries were then added to the government’s red list. Yet Downing Street concluded more was needed. A prime minister who has faced criticism for his grip and style over the past few weeks tried desperately to retain his optimism on Saturday as he announced further restrictions, including compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops, as well as PCR tests and self-isolation for people arriving in the UK. “I’m absolutely confident that this Christmas will be significantly better than last Christmas,” he said. The government has, in fact, decided not to implement some of the Plan B measures in its toolkit – such as working from home and vaccine passports, which are fiercely opposed by many Tory MPs. The change on masks in England actually brought it in line with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, where masks are already mandatory on public transport and many indoor areas. The restrictions will also be reviewed in three weeks – another sign of prime ministerial hopes that restrictions could be eased ahead of Christmas. Equally, however, it leaves space to put further restrictions in place as more is known about the spread of the variant and its effects. As with the Delta variant, the government believes vaccines – and the booster programme in particular – form its main line of defence. While the new variant may be able to evade vaccines in terms of infection, there are hopes jabs can reduce serious illness. It is understood that the government’s advisers on vaccine distribution are meeting over the weekend to agree that the booster programme should be offered to people younger than 40. Professor Danny Altmann, from Imperial College London, was among those who said the move would be necessary. “Looking at the vast array of spike mutations, vaccine protection from neutralising antibodies will need to be as high as possible,” he said. “That means extending eligibility for a third boost across the age range as soon as possible. And of course, for a country where we only have about 75% [double] vaccinated, reaching out to the unvaccinated to get safe.” Some advisers have also been worried about the double whammy effect of Britain having to deal with both the Delta variant, which is still the dominant variant in the UK, and the new Omicron variant should it establish itself quickly here. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, pointed out the high levels of infection already in the UK – though hospitalisations are falling. Last Friday’s Office for National Statistics figures showed that about 1 million people in the UK currently have Covid. Although the new restrictions are a reminder of the fragility of the path out of the pandemic, the battles against Covid since spring 2020 have also provided huge advantages in tackling Omicron. While the new variant was flagged on Tuesday, both Novavax and Moderna – two pharmaceutical firms that produced earlier vaccines – said they were already working on a booster that would target Omicron. Some experts also said they held out hope that, thanks to vaccines, Omicron may not cause more severe disease compared with the Delta variant. As the new measures were announced on Saturday night, Whitty acknowledged that the nation needed to be thankful for the scientific endeavours of the past 18 months: “If I can make one Christmas plea? It would be that when people raise their glasses this Christmas, they do so to the extraordinary scientists who produce the vaccines, the diagnostics, the drugs which will allow this Christmas, if possible, to be in a very different place to what it would have been without them.”Jürgen Klopp identified stability as the key to Liverpool’s prolific form as his title contenders made it 10 goals without reply in a week at Anfield with a 4-0 stroll against Southampton. Liverpool moved to second in the table, one point behind Chelsea, who face Manchester United on Sunday, with a second successive 4-0 Premier League win at home. They have scored 39 goals in 13 league games this season – their highest at this stage of a Premier League campaign – and two or more goals in their past 17 matches. It is the first time an English top-flight club has recorded such a sequence since Sunderland in 1927. Klopp credited the return from injury of several key players, plus a full pre-season for Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané, for the return of Liverpool’s rhythm. “It is not so easy to talk about games when you lose them like we did last season,” he said. “I knew what we were lacking: we were lacking stability because we didn’t have centre-halves for a while and we had to find solutions. “In the early stages we were shocked because we couldn’t play the football we wanted to play. All of a sudden you lose your rhythm and that is what happened to us last season. “This year we had a pre-season which was a proper pre-season, which was incredibly helpful, especially up front with Sadio and Mo who had the longest pre-season they had for ages. We could work on a lot things and found the stability back. Talking about the stability, I was not happy with the chances we conceded today, to be honest. “I have no problem if Ali has to make saves in a game but these saves were spectacular, one-on-one with the goalkeeper twice shouldn’t happen in a game too often. We have to work on that to be as stable, as serious, ruthless defensively as somehow possible so that gives us the platform to play football and then we can score. It won’t be forever we score two goals a game but I’m happy for now.” Diogo Jota scored the opening two goals to take his tally for the season to eight in all competitions. Klopp said: “Diogo is an exceptional player and exceptional boy. He signed for us one and half years ago and he is the perfect signing as he has everything a Liverpool player in this squad needs; he has the technical skills, he has the physical skills and he is very smart so can learn all the tactical stuff quickly. “He can also play the three forward positions and the No 10. He has the speed and desire to finish things off. His goalscoring record is pretty good. “Unfortunately he had a big injury last year and that is never helpful but he is back and he fits really well into this team and I am really happy for him. Today he could have made a better decision to score but he was smart enough to score the second time.”Football at this level is an exceptionally intricate game in which the world’s best coaches plot out their strategies in stunning detail, compute its thousands of moving parts, make contingencies upon contingencies. It feels hopelessly simplistic to boil down the issues with Graham Potter’s complex and delicately balanced Brighton team to “just sign a striker”. But, you know. Sometimes you really do just have to sign a striker. Twenty shots, plenty of ambitious attacking football, their highest expected goals total of the season, and ultimately a familiar refrain. The wind blew in off the English Channel and the Amex howled and roared to keep out the cold, and yet still the ball refused to drop. There were numerous areas of encouragement: the marauding wing-backs Tariq Lamptey and Marc Cucurella, the sharp passing and movement in midfield. Chance after chance was fashioned and ultimately squandered, most off the boot of Neal Maupay, or occasionally the shin or the ankle of Neal Maupay. “He’s a human being and he’ll be disappointed because he thinks he can score those,” said Potter. “We did everything but score. If we maintain that performance level, we’ll get the wins.” But equally Brighton are now without a win in eight, and an autumn of overachievement is threatening to give way to a winter of discontent. Perhaps this feels like a slightly harsh assessment for a team lying eighth in the Premier League table, but the smattering of boos in the ground at full-time belied a fanbase whose expectations have been raised by the champagne football of recent months. Not all of them, you suspect, were there for the Withdean and the Goldstone years. Meanwhile, this was painfully thin stuff from Leeds, who were also deeply wasteful in their own way. The return of Patrick Bamford up front cannot come soon enough, but of greater concern to Marcelo Bielsa will be their profligacy in possession, the weird lack of intensity, the sense of a team puffing and fraying at the edges a little. Naturally Bielsa cycled through his tactical flick-book: switching personnel, making a double substitution at half-time, but the bareness of his squad is plain for all to see. And naturally enough, Bielsa blamed himself afterwards. “Clearly the function of a coach is for each player to play comfortably,” he said. “When it doesn’t work, it’s because I’m not doing it well. But football has secrets that are somehow difficult to solve. That’s what I’m trying to do and evidently I am not achieving it.” For Leeds the return of Raphinha and Rodrigo had promised greater incision for a team who have looked uncharacteristically blunt in recent weeks. But with Kalvin Phillips (a midfielder) at centre-half, Diego Llorente (a centre-half) at right-back and Stuart Dallas (a right-back) in midfield, they looked disjointed and distracted in the early stages. Bielsa has always prized versatility in his players, but it is also a trait he possesses himself. Before long the trio had rotated back to their original, favoured positions. Small wonder. Brighton were running riot. Quick diagonals to Cucurella and Lamptey on the flanks were giving Leeds no end of problems. Lamptey, in particular, was giving Leeds left-back Junior Firpo a harrowing evening: the Dominican booked after five minutes and withdrawn after 45. But Maupay had missed two big chances, and for all Brighton’s dominance it was they who looked the more frustrated side at the break. The two goalkeepers came to the fore in the second half, Illan Meslier making a sharp save from Solly March’s deflected shot, Robert Sánchez returning from suspension for Brighton and saving brilliantly with his legs from Tyler Roberts. In fact, on the balance of chances the second half was probably pretty even. The storm continued to blow at both ends of the pitch, but given the paucity of options on either bench there was a certain inevitability that it would eventually blow out. For these finely-calibrated, process-driven clubs, making a big signing in January – Brighton up front, Leeds potentially in defence and midfield – feels like pretty much the last thing you would expect them to do. But as it turns out, there are also clear limits to working with what you have.The managers will no doubt have their say later, but really, life is way too short. Thankfully for those desirous of more hot Brighton-Leeds content, our man Jonathan Liew was at the Amex, and his verdict has landed. Click below for your edification, and thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm, everyone. Nighty night! The Leeds viewpoint with Adam Forshaw. “It wasn’t our best game, but it’s a clean sheet away from home and another point on the board. We probably went long, a bit more than we do as a team, probably just wanting to get a result. But you’re not going to play well every week. We played well against Tottenham and didn’t get anything from the game, so we’ll take it. We stayed in the game. We’re not far away. We know we’ve got the quality to put a run together. We believe in our ethos and will keep going.” The magnificent Tariq Lamptey was named man of the match on Sky, a decision nobody could take issue with. He talks to them. “We would have liked to win, but were playing against a quality side. We tried to push but the goal didn’t come. On another day it would have. We tried our hardest and gave our all. We’ll keep working. It’s not easy to put the ball in the back of the net. We were unlucky. We’ll just look forward to the next game now.” One point each, in full effect: Brighton leapfrog Manchester United into eighth spot, while Leeds edge a little further clear of the relegation zone. A decent point for Leeds, given the preponderance of chances created by the profligate hosts, and their appalling recent record against Brighton. Same old story for the Seagulls. 90 min +2: Cucurella threatens to burst clear down the left but is well tackled by Struijk. Then another phase of attack, as Trossard crosses deep from the same flank. March wins a header at the far post, but it’s an easy claim for Meslier. 90 min +1: There will be three minutes of added time. During the first, James, shuffling into the box from the right, leans back and shoots well over the bar. 89 min: Sarmiento blazes down the middle of the park, causing much excitement with Leeds light at the back. He feeds March to his right; March clanks out for a goal kick. Frustration now the top note at the Amex. 88 min: March, bustling in from the right, scuffs a shot towards the bottom right. Meslier somehow manages to scramble a save, the ball stopped by a pinball combination of glove and post. 87 min: Brighton have sent 14 shots off target today, equalling Arsenal’s season high/low against Brentford. A stat that goes a long way to explaining this scoreline, given the sheer number of chances they’ve created this evening. 85 min: Shackleton is booked, taking one for the team as Sarmiento threatens to break into space. 83 min: Webster’s poor pass across the face of his own box is pounced on by Rodrigo. The ball ends up at the feet of Roberts, just to the left of the six-yard box. His low drive is blocked brilliantly by Sanchez ... and from the resulting corner, Roberts bundles a shot through a thicket of legs, a deflection taking it towards the bottom left. Sanchez tips away at full stretch, a fine reaction stop! 82 min: Sarmiento makes his Premier League debut for Brighton, coming on in place of Moder. 81 min: Bissouma goes into the book for clipping an in-flight James to the floor. 79 min: ... but this is a little better as Rodrigo and Raphinha combine crisply down the left channel, the latter poking wide left from 12 yards. 78 min: Dallas curls in from the left. Easy pickings for Sanchez. Leeds looking blunt again. 77 min: March is instantly in the thick of it, coming in from the right and shooting from the edge of the D. His effort pings off Struijk and over the bar. The resulting corner is a waste of time. “Just musing on my theory that Brighton and Hove Albion Finishing Coach is one of those dream jobs that require no qualifications, competence or productivity, yet offer presumably high remuneration and seemingly ironclad job security,” riffs Ed Rostron. “There are a few other jobs in this category: Metereologist for the iOS weather app, for example, or Conservative Cabinet Minister. I wonder how one goes about applying.” 76 min: Lamptey has run himself into the ground and is replaced by March. 75 min: Lamptey strips Forshaw and slips the ball inside for Gross, who doesn’t connect properly with his shot. The ball breaks to Locadia, who spins and sends a weak bobbler towards Meslier. 74 min: The game is getting a little stretched, but neither team can keep their composure in the final third. 72 min: Bissouma wins a corner down the right off Struijk. Gross’s delivery is no good. James tries to hit Brighton on the counter, but runs the ball out of play. 70 min: Bissouma strides with purpose down the middle of the park, thinks about shooting, then fails to thread a pass towards Locadia on his right. The crowd were after him taking a pop there. Then a couple of Lamptey crosses from the right come to nothing. Brighton are asking plenty of questions. 68 min: Brighton make their first change, replacing the profligate Maupay with Locadia. 66 min: Llorente is booked for a crude yank at Maupay’s shoulder. 65 min: Shackleton’s blind backpass down the left lets Moder in. Moder scuffs his shot across the face of goal ... then blazes over the bar after the ball is recycled down the right. Brighton are passing up chance after chance. On that subject, here’s Mary Waltz: “Words I would love to see Scott write on this MBM. ‘What a clinical finish.’ By either side. On what I have seen so far, I doubt it.” 63 min: A third Leeds change, as Roberts comes on for Harrison. 61 min: Trossard, all busy bustle, comes in from the left and looks for the far corner. Nowhere near. Goal kick. 60 min: Lamptey feeds Moder down the right. Moder crosses. Meslier gets down to claim, spills, then gathers before anyone in blue and white can take advantage. 59 min: Cucurella threatens to burst into space down the left and has his shirt gently tugged from behind by Struijk. A free kick, and the Leeds man is slightly fortunate not to see yellow for his cynical challenge. 57 min: Harrison drives down the left and cuts back for Rodrigo, who sends a dismal shot miles over the bar ... and yet this is a marked improvement from Leeds, who are finally showing something in attack. 55 min: Dallas, to the left of the Brighton D, sends a rising, swerving effort goalwards. It’s in the general direction of Sanchez, who parries strangely into the air, but gets away with the save. Brighton half clear, but Leeds quickly come back at them, the ball falling to the feet of Raphinha, 12 yards out. Raphinha can’t sort his feet out and Cucurella takes the opportunity to clear. 53 min: Gross loops the free kick into the box. Dunk is penalised for clumsily clattering into the blameless Meslier. A daft challenge with Leeds under pressure. 52 min: Trossard diddles his way down the left and is hauled back by Forshaw, who has the brazen cheek to argue the toss over the award of a foul. He’s fortunate not to get booked. Free kick, just to the right of the Leeds box. 50 min: Maupay and Moder combine well down the middle, the ball breaking left to Trossard, who drives a shot at goal from a tight angle. Meslier parries. The ball drops to Maupay, who leans back and hoicks over the bar, missing an open goal! Another outrageous miss by Maupay, though his blushes are spared when the flag goes up for a non-existent foul on Shackleton earlier in the move. Dear oh dear. Had that gone in, as it should have done, VAR might well have intervened. 48 min: Harrison makes his way down the left and crosses. Cucurella flicks away with his magnificently coiffured noggin. 47 min: Raphinha crosses from the right. Veltman holds his nerve under pressure from James and Rodrigo, chesting down and clearing. Leeds get the second half underway, having made a double change. Firpo has been hooked, while Phillips has reportedly picked up an injury. They’re replaced by Struijk and Shackleton. Half-time entertainment. A wonderful long read on Leeds’ 1991-92 championship side, which starred the much-loved and much-missed Gary Speed. So far, the same old story: Brighton create plenty of chances, but fail to convert any of them. 45 min: Llorente is up again and, by the looks of it, good to continue. The game is restarted and there will be two minutes of extra time before the break. 44 min: Llorente took an accidental whack in the face from Webster. He looks a bit groggy as he rubs his jaw. The trainer gives him his full attention. 42 min: Gross swings it in. Leeds clear. Cucurella tries to return the ball with venom but his shot is weak. Llorente goes down clutching his head and so play is stopped. 41 min: ... but Leeds only half-clear their lines, and Phillips stupidly barges into the back of Moder, just to the right of the box. A free kick in a very dangerous position. 40 min: Moder races down the right and crosses low and hard towards the near post. Cooper falls over and somehow bundles the ball out of play, kicking it against his own arm while doing so. Just a corner, though the hosts want a penalty. They’re not getting one, and the corner is a waste of time as well. 38 min: Trossard’s presence earns a corner on the left. Gross swings it in. Several players fall over in the six-yard box and the whistle goes for a free kick to Leeds. 37 min: Lamptey is the boss of Firpo yet again, racing clear down the right. His low cross is met six yards out by Maupay, and feathered wide left. Another egregious miss by Maupay. Brighton should be well ahead, a story we’ve heard more than once already this season. 35 min: A loose ball down the Brighton inside-left channel. Dallas and Llorente faff about, allowing Moder to race between them and get to it first. He nears the byline before hitting a fierce speculative shot from the tightest of angles. The ball twangs off the outside of the post and away for a goal kick. Absurdly ponderous defending by Leeds, and they’re lucky to get away with it. 33 min: Moder strides down the right touchline and rolls infield for Trossard, who takes a first-time swipe from the edge of the D. He gives the ball a good belt, but it’s straight at Meslier, who takes the sting out of the shot, then gathers without too much fuss. 31 min: Harrison drives into the Brighton box from the left. His low shot is blocked by Veltman. 30 min: That would have been James’s tenth touch of the match. Nobody has made fewer. He’s been toiling up front on his own for the most part. 29 min: The ball bounces along the front of the Brighton box. The hosts fail to clear. James takes a fresh-air swipe. The Brighton defence eventually gets its act together. 27 min: Space for Trossard down the left. He reaches the byline and pulls back for Bissouma, who shifts his feet and tries a curler towards the top right. He gets it all wrong, the ball sailing miles wide right and high. 26 min: Raphinha takes, aiming a curler over the wall and towards the top right. The ball caroms off the wall, and loops hysterically towards the far post. James tries to turn it in from a very tight angle but can’t wrap his boot around it. Goal kick. 25 min: Trossard puts in a striker’s challenge on Dallas, and this is a free kick just to the right of the Brighton box. A dangerous position, this. 24 min: Llorente takes a free kick inside his own half and welts it high into the stand. Leeds can’t get anything going. 22 min: Firpo wrestles with Lamptey and brings him down illegally. He’s really testing the referee’s patience now. Lamptey has him on toast, an absolute nightmare to deal with, and a second yellow for the Leeds defender feels almost inevitable at the moment. 20 min: Space for Trossard, just to the right of the D. He launches a rising shot towards the top left. The heatseeker is heading into the net, but Meslier gets the very tips of his fingers to the ball, deflecting it onto the post and away. A goal kick is incorrectly awarded, which infuriates Brighton, as well it might. 19 min: Lamptey crosses from the right. The ball rears up and hits Cooper on the arm. No penalty for this, either. 17 min: The referee is clearly in a laissez-faire mood, because now he ignores Firpo’s light tug on Lamptey, as the Brighton man tries to dribble down the middle and into the box. It was a free kick at the very least ... and Firpo has already been booked, too. But we are where we are. 16 min: A penalty shout up the other end now, as Maupay thinks he’s been clattered from behind by Cooper. Once again, the referee isn’t interested, though there was contact. You’ve seen those given, too, though it would have been a soft one. 15 min: VAR doesn’t find enough in Trossard’s challenge to overturn the referee’s decision. Trossard was falling backwards when his leg went across Raphinha, so presumably the VAR chappie thinks contact was accidental, but you could make a case for Trossard cleverly making sure he fell in the right place to stop his man. Brighton get the benefit of the doubt there. 14 min: Raphinha dribbles in from the left. He enters the box, then goes over the hanging leg of Trossard. The referee’s not interested in awarding a penalty, but VAR will take a look. 12 min: The Leeds fans sing loud and long in memory of Gary Speed. 11 min: Cucurella robs Dallas with ease and strides into a world of space. He lays off to Maupay on the left; Maupay drifts back infield and curls a weak shot towards the bottom right. It’s easily snaffled by Meslier. 10 min: Trossard romps in from the left and slips the ball infield for Moder, who very nearly releases Maupay down the middle with a crisp instant flick. Not quite, but the home side are playing some lovely, lively stuff during these opening exchanges. 8 min: Lamptey romps past Firpo with absurd ease, reaching the byline and pulling back for Moder, who pokes the ball across the face of the goal for Maupay. All the striker has to do is tap into an open goal - Meslier has been pulled out of position - but he leans back and blazes over the bar! What an absurd miss. 7 min: Leeds look a little ragged here. They’re second to most balls at the moment, and leaving a lot of space for the likes of Trossard, Lamptey and Maupay to run into. 5 min: Firpo is booked for a cynical clip on Lamptey, who was preparing to break into the Leeds half. It could be a long night now for the Leeds left-back. 4 min: Another nice, brisk move as Lamptey finds space down the right and cuts back for Moder, who powerfully sidefoots over the bar from eight yards. A great chance, though it’d have required a very adroit finish. 3 min: Firpo crosses into the Brighton box from the left. Cucurella clears, then executes a long-distance one-two with Trossard. He finds himself near the Leeds box on the left. He crosses, only for Cooper to clear. A nice, brisk move. 2 min: It’s cold and windy in East Sussex. Lamptey bursts into a couple of runs down the right, but both are stopped pretty much the moment they start. Still, a statement of intent from Brighton’s exciting live-wire. Brighton get the ball rolling ... but only after the players take the knee. The gesture is met with warm applause from all four corners of the stadium. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out. Brighton wear their blue and white stripes, while Leeds sport their very natty third-choice purple. Local hero Fatboy Slim blasts out of the Amex PA; we’ll be off, right here, right now in a couple of minutes. It’s ten years to the day since the passing of Leeds legend Gary Speed, one of the stars of that 1991-92 championship side. He’s in everyone’s thoughts today, with players and fans alike wearing t-shirts in his memory. The BBC’s Dan Walker, his friend and colleague on Football Focus, has also made a heartfelt tribute. Graham Potter talks to Sky Sports. “We’re a little frustrated but that’s life in this league, it’s not easy to get wins. We’ve done a lot of things well, but you have to do a little bit extra to get over the line, and that’s what we’ve got to do today. Lots of our game is good but there is always room to improve. The margins sometimes go with you, sometimes they don’t, you just have to keep working.” Love is love. The Premier League does its bit for Stonewall’s Rainbow Laces campaign this week, as clubs link arms to show their support for all LGBT+ people both in the world of football and beyond. Rainbow armbands, pin badges, ball plinths, substitute boards, LED perimeter boards, and of course laces, ahoy! More details of a celebration of solidarity, inclusion and love can be found here. Some pre-match entertainment for Loiners everywhere. A magnificent long read on how Howard Wilkinson’s ten-year plan took a mere four years. Enjoy, enjoy. Three changes for Brighton from the XI that started the 2-0 defeat at Aston Villa. Robert Sanchez is back in goal after serving a one-match suspension for his red card against Newcastle, while Neal Maupay and Joel Veltman are also back. Jason Steele, Adam Lallana and Shane Duffy make way; all three are on the bench. Leeds welcome back Raphinha from injury. He’s one of three changes to the side that went down 2-1 at Spurs. Rodrigo and Junior Firpo are also in; Joe Gelhardt, Mateusz Klich and Pascal Struijk are all benched. Brighton &amp; Hove Albion: Sanchez, Veltman, Dunk, Webster, Lamptey, Gross, Bissouma, Moder, Cucurella, Maupay, Trossard. Subs: Mac Allister, Mwepu, Lallana, March, Steele, Duffy, Locadia, Richards, Sarmiento. Leeds United: Meslier, Dallas, Llorente, Cooper, Firpo, Forshaw, Phillips, Raphinha, Rodrigo, Harrison, James. Subs: Roberts, Klaesson, Struijk, Gelhardt, Cresswell, Klich, McCarron, Shackleton, Jenkins. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire). Brighton and Hove Albion have been the bosses of Leeds United in recent years. Since moving to the Amex, they’ve welcomed Leeds on seven occasions, drawing the first two matches, then winning the subsequent five: 1-0, 2-0, 4-0, 2-0 and 2-0. During that time, Brighton’s record in the seven corresponding fixtures at Elland Road has been arguably even more impressive: five wins and just two losses. Aggregate score: Seagulls 26, Not So Proud Peacocks 12. Leeds could do with bucking this trend tonight. They start the evening in 17th position, just one place above the relegation zone, and have flattered to deceive so far during the Difficult Second Season back in the top flight. But they put on a good show at Tottenham last weekend, while Brighton, comfortable in mid-table right now after a fast start to the season, haven’t won in seven. Tonight therefore represents an opportunity for both teams to get things back on track. The Brian Clough Didn’t Spend Much Time In Charge derby kicks off at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!For Lewis Hamilton the 2021 Formula One title race has been like no other. As it enters the final decisive phase, the world champion is in position to pull off perhaps the greatest achievement of his career. His fight with Max Verstappen has been an unmissable affair, but what has caught the eye is how Hamilton has fought to drag this mighty tussle into an enthralling endgame. Two races remain, with the first 20 yielding no clear advantage for either driver. A season that has ebbed and flowed between them, punctuated by brilliance, bad luck, conflict and drama, has seen the lead change hands five times. With Saudi Arabia next weekend and Abu Dhabi to come seven days later, Verstappen leads by eight points: 52 remain on the table but Hamilton is on a roll and may now have the edge as he strives for a record eighth drivers’ title. Verstappen can wrap it up in Saudi Arabia. He will be champion if he wins and takes fastest lap and Hamilton finishes sixth or lower or if he wins and Hamilton finishes lower than seventh. More realistically, short of a DNF, Hamilton will almost certainly be either in front of Verstappen or close enough to force the contest to the wire. He has not reached this point with ease. The 36-year-old has this season shown the maturity and judgment of a great champion, with the determination of a thoroughbred and a work ethic that is often overlooked. Verstappen’s Red Bull has been, on balance, the better car and that has required the Briton to deliver in every aspect of his craft. The 24-year‑old Dutchman is uncompromising. He will not back off, has the certainty, the conviction of youth and feels he has nothing to lose in this, his first title fight. Early in the season, Hamilton chose to give Verstappen his head. At Imola and Barcelona he backed away from aggressive moves in order to avoid a potentially race-ending crash. His assessment of it was instructive and perhaps a little barbed. “I am not too big or too successful to have to back out to fight another day,” he said last week. “I know that is sometimes the route you have to take. You have to be the smarter one.” Hamilton, though, has adapted as the season progressed. With Verstappen scoring heavily in the first half, the world champion realised he could no longer simply play the percentages. “There has been a need to gain points and you have to get a little bit less willing to give up too much,” he said. Hamilton accepted he must match the unyielding Verstappen and at Silverstone and Monza the pair clashed on the track. Hamilton was adjudged at fault in Britain and Verstappen in Italy. But, crucially, Hamilton had made his point: Verstappen could not expect him to give way. Now Verstappen had to consider the percentages, too, in the knowledge that his opponent was unafraid to back down. There would be no psychological advantage. Much of this opening half of the season also took a physical toll. Hamilton revealed in Hungary, after a monumental race where he came from last place to claim second, that he was still feeling the effects of long Covid. Having contracted the virus toward the end of the 2020 season, he suffered from fatigue and dizziness. It was unheard of for a driver still dedicated to staying in top physical form and Hamilton confirmed he had been battling ill-health all year. “The first half of the season was one of the toughest that I’ve had,” he said, before confirming the underlying symptoms have now passed. “I feel better than I’ve felt in a long time. So somehow I’ve managed to push through it.” In other seasons Hamilton enjoyed such superiority that he could have battled through and shrugged off such an impediment, but this year the margins are so fine it must have played a part. Yet it paled in comparison to the single challenge that has defined the season and its climax. Hamilton believes the new rules were meant to hold back the all-conquering Mercedes. Aerodynamic changes, ostensibly to slow the cars down, affected downforce more on cars with a low rake (the angle from rear to front) such as the Mercedes than on the high-rake Red Bulls. Since testing Mercedes have called their car a “diva”: hard to set up, sometimes presenting a mystery as to why it would perform on certain tracks and not others, its sweet spot often infuriatingly elusive. Hamilton was left having to wrestle a recalcitrant beast. So he went back with the team and they applied themselves to solving the issues with ceaseless dedication. On every tiny detail Hamilton has worked with his engineers to find the solutions. “Those are things that I’ve been applying more energy towards and being a lot harder with the team on,” he said. “Because we need every millisecond we can get, particularly at the places where we have been really quite a bit down. Just going into more detail everywhere.” In Brazil they found it. Finally able to fully exploit the upgrades they had fitted at Silverstone, the car was exactly where Hamilton wanted it and he flew from 10th place – the result of penalties – to the win. A week later in Qatar it was once more on song, vindication of that relentless pursuit of improvement. Admittedly Hamilton has a fresher engine than Verstappen and Red Bull still argue the rear wing Mercedes will probably use in Saudi Arabia is illegal and will protest. It is impossible not to sense that Hamilton has timed his run to perfection. He is in peak form physically, utterly calm at this tensest of times, having brushed off any psychological challenge Verstappen presented, and his car may yet prove to be the diva that provides the final, triumphant bow in this drama. Whichever way it goes, this will be a performance not to be missed.As Manchester United go to Chelsea on Sunday, there may be regrets for roads not travelled. Six months after United appointed Ole Gunnar Solskjær as manager, Chelsea also turned to one of their own. But they were far more ruthless and, despite the affection in which Frank Lampard was held by fans, they sacked him in January. The improvement under Thomas Tuchel was immediate and, 10 months on, Chelsea are European champions and top of the Premier League. Would United be in a similar position had they turned to Tuchel earlier in the year? Probably not. The job Tuchel has done has been remarkable, but he is building on solid foundations: Chelsea are well-run and have recruited sensibly, in part funded by an academy that is now producing first-team players. Perhaps John Murtough, who was appointed United’s first director of football in March, will create a functioning structure at Old Trafford, but for now they are still adrift in the wilderness desperately hoping a messiah will emerge. Skipping from David Moyes to Louis van Gaal to José Mourinho to Solskjær was alarming not only because it suggested a lack of direction and replicated the post-Busby chaos of half a century ago, but because it suggested an extremely old-fashioned view of what a manager should be. That’s why the appointment of Ralf Rangnick, first as interim manager and then as a background consultant, feels so significant, a shift to a more modern vision of the game. Football became a popular cultural phenomenon in England at some point in the early 60s. Crowds had been vast before then but it was the coming of television that took it into a new sphere. Within a few days the great cricket writer Neville Cardus had identified the 1953 FA Cup final – in which a Stanley Matthews-inspired Blackpool beat Bolton 4-3 – as the moment when football replaced cricket as the national sport. The impact of that game was perhaps even greater than he knew: it was the first football match in England to draw a significant live television audience, as many people had bought sets in advance of the coronation. The launch of Match of the Day in 1964 both confirmed and enhanced the popularity of football, with the World Cup win two years later inflating that even further. In that boom a lot of our preconceptions about football were formed. It was an age of idiosyncratic and colourful individuals – Matt Busby, Bill Shankly, Alf Ramsey, Don Revie, Tommy Docherty, Brian Clough – and that shaped the template of a manager. There may be a surface realisation that the job is more complicated than that, but there remains a deep‑rooted sense that a new manager can still come in, deliver a few well-chosen words to the media, kick a few backsides, put an arm round a few shoulders, buy a couple of players and transform a club’s fortunes. Messiahs are easy and exciting. The reality of modern clubs – scouting networks and long‑term planning and minute data analysis of remote transfer targets, brand management and youth development – is slow, complicated and frequently tedious. The idea of a charismatic leader inspiring a revolution is far more appealing and requires far less effort: we believe in him until the point at which we don’t, when he can be sacrificed as we move on to the next messiah. For some clubs the religious tone is overt. “Cruyff built the cathedral,” Pep Guardiola said of Barcelona. “It is up to us to maintain it.” It’s because he was so obviously of the fabric of the club, an academy graduate who became an on-field general for Guardiola just as Guardiola had been for Johan Cruyff, that Xavi seemed such a natural fit for Barcelona. His coaching experience may amount to a couple of years in Qatar but that is more than Guardiola had had when he was given the job in 2008, and his record is better than Frank Rijkaard’s (a disappointing semi-final exit with the Netherlands at a home Euros in 2000 and the first relegation in Sparta Rotterdam’s history) when he was appointed in 2003, and both of them worked out well. The question there is the extent to which Xavi understands the philosophy. Has he assimilated it to the point at which he is able to tweak and develop it dependent on opponents and changes in the game? And is he able to transmit it to others? Or is he just parroting the doctrine, a cargo-cult coach who knows what Cruyff-ism looks like but has no real idea how it works? That is something that will only become apparent with time; it is certainly not something that can really be assessed in the Qatari league. Few other clubs are quite so philosophy-driven as Barcelona – Ajax, certainly, and perhaps, in a more homespun way, Liverpool in the Boot Room era. But most clubs have only a vague sense of “a DNA”, which rarely stands up to scrutiny. And the idea that “knowing the club” is a meaningful reason to appoint anybody is a dangerous one. After the death of Valeriy Lobanovskyi in 2002, Dynamo Kyiv went through six Lobanovskyi acolytes before eventually breaking a cycle of slow decline by appointing Yuri Semin. One of them, Josef Szabo, said that whenever he was faced with a tricky decision he would ask himself: “What would Valeriy Vasylyovych have done?” Second-guessing a dead man may be the basis for a religion, but it is no way to run a football club – particularly when Lobanovskyi’s genius was his capacity to adapt. Much the same can be said of the similarly enduring Alex Ferguson. He did not operate by tactical dogma the way Cruyff did. What was the knowledge of the past into which Solskjær, the hero returning in the hour of need, was supposed to be tapping? The Fergie-era vibe was enough to dispel the toxicity of the late Mourinho period, but was of limited use beyond that. As United consider their next permanent appointment, it’s perhaps worth them bearing in mind that Tuchel had no Chelsea DNA and that none of the three managers under whom they have won the league had any previous connection with the club. Innate “Manchesterunitedness” is not enough. Messiahs are all very well, but in modern football processes are rather more important.This was supposed to be a season of celebration and new acclaim for the French league. Not only would crowds return to stadiums after a year of matches behind closed doors but Lionel Messi’s arrival at Paris Saint-Germain guaranteed unprecedented global interest in Ligue 1. Three months in, France is shocked and embarrassed and the talk among authorities is of an existential crisis. A wave of fan violence since the start of the season led the president of the Ligue de Football Professionnel (LFP), Vincent Labrune, to denounce “a gangrene that could kill us”, while France’s minister of sport, the former swimming champion Roxana Maracineanu, said: “Every time I go to a stadium [to watch a Ligue 1 match] I tell myself it’s a good thing I got my son into rugby rather than football.” Maracineanu was speaking in the aftermath of last Sunday’s match between Lyon and Marseille, which was called off after the Marseille midfielder Dimitri Payet was hit in the head by a bottle thrown by a fan. It was the second time this season Payet has been attacked on the pitch. After the first time, at Nice in August, he hurled the bottle back into the crowd, an instinctive riposte that was interpreted by dozens of fans as an invitation to storm the pitch, leading to an extraordinary scene involving spectators, players and backroom staff. Marseille were also embroiled in the season’s first outbreak of trouble, when Montpellier fans bombarded travelling supporters with missiles on the opening weekend. The following month, a bus carrying Bordeaux fans was ambushed in Montpellier in an attack that left 16 people injured. On the same day, fans of Marseille and Angers fought in the stadium after a 0-0 draw and Metz supporters invaded the pitch after a late winner against their side by Paris Saint-Germain. All of which came a week after an on-field ruckus between fans of Lille and Lens delayed the Derby du Nord by half an hour. Nine Ligue 1 matches have been disrupted or abandoned this season. The questions authorities are struggling to answer are why the rage and what to do about it? One popular explanation is that violence at football is a consequence of the lockdown imposed when the Covid pandemic was at its peak, that people are now releasing pent-up frustrations. “A football stadium is a reflection of the state of our society,” Labrune told L’Equipe this week. “And our society after the health crisis is not doing well: it is anxious, worried, disunited, quarrelsome and – it has to be said – a little crazy.” But similar diagnosis could be made of many other countries that are not suffering fan violence on a similar scale. Why do French stadiums have it so bad? Again, lockdown has been blamed for weakening clubs’ ability to cope with disorder. During a year of matches behind closed doors, stewards had to find other jobs and many of the most experienced ones have not returned, leaving less savvy replacements to deal with more cantankerous people. Some clubs have also been accused of skimping on security measures as they cut costs in the time of Covid. Mostly, though, clubs have been accused of failing to clamp down on misbehaviour by their most ardent fans, or ultras, because of a fear of alienating them. It has been noticeable how reluctant club directors have been to criticise their own supporters after even the most blatant offences and how readily they have tried to shift blame elsewhere or play down trouble. Clubs, the LFP, police and politicians have blamed each other for impeding or ignoring solutions. That it took two hours for the Lyon-Marseille match to be abandoned after the attack on Payet left television viewers confused and exposed the lack of decisiveness and unity among the various authorities. Last Tuesday, the government met football authorities to address this. “We have been asking for such a meeting since August,” said Labrune, who complained that the LFP had become “the system’s punching ball” and needed more powers to do anything other than apply its stock reaction to violence, which is to order matches to be played behind closed doors. Maracineanu certainly did not play down the significance of the meeting, saying in advance: “Everyone must understand that the survival of French football is at stake. It’s a world where millions of euros are at stake. We can’t afford for a broadcaster who has bought rights to have to fill the void like [TV commentators] did last night for an hour when we didn’t know if the game was going to continue. We can’t collectively afford to have it go on like that.” On Friday, Maracineanu deigned to attend another match, Lens’ 2-2 draw with Angers, and said that plans for reducing violence at stadiums revolved around three approaches: improving security, giving referees more power to react to fan trouble and broadening the range of sanctions the league can impose. She also issued a plea to ultras. “We need the leaders of supporter groups to get a grip on their troops. I’m appealing to supporter groups: we need you and we need to act together to bring peace back to the stadiums.”There was Josh McEachran and Ola Aina. There was Dominic Solanke and Gaël Kakuta. There was the season under Maurizio Sarri when he did not give a single debut to an academy player. There was the Chelsea manager who argued in a presentation to the technical director, Michael Emenalo, that the club should scrap or scale down its academy as it was costing too much and producing no tangible benefit to the first team. For all of them, and all of this, Chelsea’s third goal against Juventus on Tuesday night was an ornate kind of closure: Reece James peeling away towards the back post with his customary menace, Ruben Loftus-Cheek twisting and shuffling in the area, Callum Hudson-Odoi applying the finish. A goal made in Chelsea, conceived at Cobham: perhaps the fullest vindication to date of Roman Abramovich’s frequently ridiculed, frequently wasteful vision of a Chelsea first team brimming with academy talent. Besides James, Hudson-Odoi and Loftus-Cheek, Trevoh Chalobah got the first goal, prolonging his spectacular start to the season. Mason Mount and Andreas Christensen gamely warmed the bench. Even if you disregard Romelu Lukaku, who joined Chelsea at 18 before rejoining this summer, Chelsea youth-team products have played 27% of the minutes and scored almost a third of the goals. Nor is this a phenomenon confined to Chelsea. Scan this weekend’s list of Premier League fixtures and all but one conceivably features a Chelsea academy alumnus: Eddie Nketiah at Arsenal, Tino Livramento and Armando Broja at Southampton, Billy Gilmour at Norwich, Marc Guéhi and Conor Gallagher at Crystal Palace, Bertrand Traoré at Aston Villa, Tariq Lamptey at Brighton, Nathan Aké at Manchester City and Declan Rice at West Ham, Ryan Bertrand at Leicester, Jack Cork and Jóhann Berg Gudmundsson at Burnley plus Lewis Bate at Leeds. Chelsea have not just been building a team, they’ve been building everyone else’s. They do not just lead the Premier League: they’re colonising it, turning it a pale-blue shade of Cobham. So what happened? Is this simply an unnaturally gifted generation of Chelsea youngsters with a unique capacity to bridge the gulf from academy football to the elite? Or have they finally been given a little help? “We saw very quickly in training that we have some very good kids here,” the manager, Thomas Tuchel, said this week. “What makes me happiest is how much they care about the shirt and the club, and how much they want to make it here.” And while Tuchel gets a good deal of the credit for being prepared to throw in relatively inexperienced talent such as Chalobah and James, in many ways the groundwork was in place years before he arrived, and not without a few mis-steps along the way. For years Chelsea’s approach to the academy was akin to that of the London property speculator with a vast portfolio of luxury flats he has no intention of ever living in. With their wealth and facilities, Chelsea could sweep up the best young players in Europe, give them a decent wage and watch them accrue value without going anywhere near the first team. Publicly, of course, the focus was still on developing players for Chelsea’s own use. And naturally, the managers would all say the right things. Antonio Conte was quick to hype up the likes of Aina and Nathaniel Chalobah when he first joined the club in 2016 and then essentially won the league with 13 players. When the economics of football made it so profitable to farm players out on loan and then sell them on, and with an owner who never hesitated to open the trap door when results took a turn, what was the point in doing anything else? Perhaps the biggest turning point came when Frank Lampard arrived in 2019 with Chelsea temporarily labouring under a transfer ban. Lampard’s predecessor Sarri had barely bothered to conceal his lack of interest in the academy, failing to attend a single training session or under-23 game in his time in charge. Lampard, on the other hand, gave eight academy debuts in his first season, a club record in the Premier League era. Mount, Fikayo Tomori and Tammy Abraham were among those moved to the front of the queue: playing and occasionally erring but most importantly learning in the hot glare of the biggest games. In a way Lampard’s managerial reputation has been the collateral damage of Tuchel’s stunning success. And ultimately Abramovich’s itchy trigger finger would see to him, too. But where would the likes of Mount and James have been now without those crucial 18 months of development? That, as much as anything he achieved on the pitch, should be Lampard’s legacy as Chelsea manager. Naturally the academy continues to be a pleasant money-spinner. The departures of Abraham, Tomori, Guéhi and others generated more than £90m in the summer. Another 22 players were shipped out on loan, many of them still trapped on the carousel. If Matt Miazga, Dujon Sterling or Ethan Ampadu are ever to achieve anything in the game, it will almost certainly not be at Chelsea. Tomori has discovered a new lease of life under Stefano Pioli at Milan. Abraham has benefited from the personal tutelage of José Mourinho at Roma. But importantly the path to the first team is now also there: beaten, blazed and illuminated. The next talented teenager coming through the Chelsea ranks – say, Jude Soonsup-Bell or Harvey Vale – no longer resigns himself to a treadmill of meaningless pre-season friendlies and loans to Vitesse and Huddersfield. Knuckle down, show your worth and you too could be posing with the Champions League trophy in a sea of ticker tape and sweat. In a sense this is a model that Tuchel himself knows instinctively, having begun his career as a youth coach at Stuttgart under Ralf Rangnick, whose new team he faces on Sunday. Tuchel knows that the very best modern sides have always combined the local with the global: a homegrown core studded with a few superstar signings. He knows that his faith in youth will extend only as far as results and Abramovich’s patience allow. But for now, at least, the two halves of the Chelsea project feel perfectly, cosmically in alignment.As the unflappable Max Malins has been demonstrating all year, rugby can still be a game for languid piano players as well as piano shifters. Of course it matters who hits hardest and contests the most breakdowns but the most prized currency at elite level is time. Players capable of making a frenziedly physical sport look deceptively easy are growing rarer by the year. There was an era – think David Gower in cricket, Matt Le Tissier in football or Stefan Edberg on a tennis court – when such a lightness of touch could be found across the majority of sports. English rugby, though, has often been suspicious of the genre: the richly gifted Alex Goode, Danny Cipriani and James Simpson-Daniel were entrusted with a mere 25 England starts between them. Which made Malins’ glorious contribution off the bench against South Africa last Saturday, not least his game-changing tackle on Kwagga Smith, all the more timely. The 20-year-old Freddie Steward may have taken a firm grip on the full-back jersey but the versatile Malins, when fit, is also fast emerging as too good to leave out. “Max is a very talented rugby player,” said Eddie Jones. “He has got great pace, he has got a good feel for the game and defensively he is improving all the time.” As Jones is not given to gushing public testimonies that is particularly high praise. At Saracens, who host Sale Sharks on Sunday, his director of rugby, Mark McCall, once compared him to Beauden Barrett and it is not hard to see why. The balanced running, the broad palette of skills, the natural ball-player’s knack of being in the right place at the right time? Tick, tick, tick. And should circumstances dictate that he features as a roving wing instead of at full-back or even fly-half where he began his career, so be it. When someone scores seven tries inside eight days for Saracens against Bath and Wasps last month, the number on his back matters little. “I see myself more as a full-back but if playing on the wing means I can start games I’ll happily do it,” he says. “I’m probably not the traditional wing with out-and-out gas but I’ll try and do a job if it means I’m in the team. If you’re in an England shirt I don’t think you can be too disappointed where you are.” What really sets Malins apart, though, is the A-word. No one in the country, with the possible exception of Marcus Smith, has a sharper sense of anticipation for what might be unfolding around him. Nor is it a coincidence that Malins specialises in try-scoring interceptions. Barely has a pass left an unwary opponent’s hand than – whoosh – he is gone. “It’s very much a feel thing: reading the situation and then reacting to it. I guess it’s a bit of instinct whether you go for it or not.” Which is why, in his opinion, the illusion of having more time on the ball is just that. “People look like they have more time because of what they’ve already seen. That’s a big thing for me. Making sure I see the picture so I know what’s coming. And then having an idea in my head of what’s going to pan out once I’ve got the ball.” If his blond hair, relaxed persona and uncommon vision imply an unhurried artist, there is also clearly a calculating mind at play. The son of a financial adviser and a horse-riding teacher, he is studying for an Open University degree in business management and, but for rugby, might well have ended up employed in the City. “Before I started rugby I thought I’d definitely go down the City route but the more I see my older brother stressing I think: ‘Do I really want to go into that?’” His two older brothers are in banking and insurance respectively while his younger sister works for a company looking into the side effects of medicines. While his mother’s passion for horses was also a recurring childhood theme – “We were all forced to ride back in the day but I hung the stirrups up a while back” – it was rugby that fascinated him from his earliest days at Bishop’s Stortford RFC. “I was only six or seven when we won the 2003 World Cup. I played at 10 when I was younger so Jonny Wilkinson putting that drop goal over has always been a massive thing. From that moment you always dream. For it to come true is pretty surreal.” With two years to go until the 2023 World Cup, England’s increasing desire to back flexible-minded, adaptable players is even better news. Malins, personally, has long thought the southern hemisphere does not have a monopoly on attacking players keen to express themselves with ball in hand. “I think that’s the better part of my game … that instinctive nature, playing what’s in front of you. That’s certainly getting coached now, keeping your eyes up and not necessarily sticking to a system. The more I can do that then hopefully the more opportunities I can take.” A productive loan year spent at Bristol Bears also helped, specifically watching and learning from the gifted former All Black Charles Piutau. “Charles just has an incredible step and vision for the game. His ability to beat people one on one is incredible. You can’t imitate that but it’s more about what he sees … how he manipulates defenders to get what he wants, whether it is shaping his body one way and then going the other. I don’t specifically sit down and watch people’s clips but I always keep an eye out for the good players.” So what does faze Malins? Even his parents and siblings, it seems, seldom see him ruffled. “I think that’s a bugbear of my family. When they try and annoy me it doesn’t really work.” Come on, surely something or somebody must scare him? “OK, if you want to frighten me get a snake in there and I’ll be running 100 miles.” When it comes back to rugby, though, Malins has an almost Zen-like mindset. “I just try and stay calm and not think too much about the occasion. If I do that’s what takes away my instinctive nature. I try and keep as free a mind as possible.” Trust in the “Max factor” and rugby instantly appears a more beautiful game.By mid-afternoon on Saturday, a fundraiser for a man who spent 43 years in prison before a judge in Missouri this week overturned his conviction in a triple murder had raised more than $1.4m. The Midwest Innocence Project set up the GoFundMe page as it fought for the release of Kevin Strickland, 62, noting that he would not receive compensation from the state and would need help paying basic living expenses while struggling with extensive health problems. Missouri only allows wrongful imprisonment payments to people exonerated through DNA evidence. James Welsh, a retired Missouri court of appeals judge, ordered Strickland’s release on Tuesday, finding that evidence used to convict him had been recanted or disproven. Strickland has always maintained that he was home watching television and had nothing to do with the killings, which happened in Kansas City in 1978, when he was 18. The key witness, a survivor of the shooting, tried for years to recant her testimony, saying she had been pressured by police. No physical evidence tied Strickland to the crime scene. Prints on the shotgun used were not his. Family members provided alibis, and two men convicted in the killings of Sherrie Black, 22, Larry Ingram, 21, and John Walker, 20, said Strickland was not present. Having been imprisoned for his entire adult life, Strickland has no savings or ability to show work history for social security entitlements. As he left the Western Missouri correctional center in Cameron this week, he said he was “thankful for God walking me through this for 43 years”. “I’m not necessarily angry,” he told reporters. “It’s a lot. I think I’ve created emotions that you all don’t know about just yet. Joy, sorrow, fear. I am trying to figure out how to put them together.” He said he would like to get involved in efforts to “keep this from happening to someone else”. The US criminal justice system “needs to be torn down and redone”, he said. Tricia Rojo Bushnell, Strickland’s attorney and executive director of the Midwest Innocence Project, told the Washington Post that only “a very small minority of people” receive compensation for wrongful conviction in Missouri. “The vast majority of folks who are exonerated are exonerated through non-DNA evidence, and the vast majority of crimes do not involve DNA at all,” Bushnell said. “So what we see in Missouri is [that] folks get home and they are provided nothing.” The Midwest Innocence Project sets up fundraisers when cases lead to exoneration. On the page for Strickland, some donors left statements of encouragement. “I hope the fact that so many care helps you to enjoy each day as it comes,” wrote one, as reported by the Kansas City Star. “Even Mississippi and Alabama, long at the bottom of the list for education, healthcare, etc, have wrongful conviction reimbursement,” wrote another. “Shame on Missouri and any other state that is as backwards.” Another donor wrote that she was “trying to imagine being wrongfully convicted when I was 18 and spending all my life since then in prison for a crime I didn’t commit – and then to get no compensation from the state that imprisoned me? “I wish Mr Strickland all the best for the rest of his life.” A pediatric practice in Kansas City gave one of two donations of $10,000. The practice president, John Billharz, told the Post: “We thought it would be an important way to show that he has support.”Boris Johnson has expressed “absolute confidence” that people will enjoy a better Christmas this year than last, despite reimposing a range of restrictions – including compulsory mask-wearing – to combat the new, highly transmissible Omicron variant of Covid-19. The prime minister attempted to calm fears about the prospects of another imminent lockdown on Saturday, hours after the first two cases of the new variant were reported in the UK, in Nottingham and Essex. At a joint press conference flanked by England’s chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, and chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, Johnson said that people in England would be required to wear face masks again on public transport and in shops. Downing Street later confirmed that masks would become mandatory in shops and on public transport from “next week” but “all hospitality settings will be exempt”. Johnson also said that anyone coming into this country from abroad would have to take a PCR test by the end of the second day after arriving, and to self-isolate until they had secured a negative result. The prime minister said people were not going to be prevented from travelling to, or returning from, overseas. He admitted that the restrictions on travel “sound tough”, but insisted that the entire package was “targeted and appropriate”, adding “that’s the way it’s got to be”. Asked if the government could have moved faster to close borders to protect the country from the new variant, he said action had been taken as soon as news of it had filtered through from southern Africa: “I really don’t know how we could’ve acted faster. We got the news out about it on Thursday and we put quite a lot of southern African countries on the red list yesterday, and some more today.” Four further countries – Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola – were added to a UK list facing flight bans that now includes 10 nations. When asked how worried people should be, and whether they would have to change their Christmas plans, Johnson said there was still much that was not known about the new variant. But he was sure the UK was in a far stronger position than last year because of the successful vaccine and booster programmes. On the prospects for Christmas, he said he would stick to a carefully chosen form of words: “I am pretty confident or absolutely confident that this Christmas is going to be better than last Christmas. I think I will stick with that,” he said. Over the festive period last year, plans to allow three households to mix for five days were cancelled at the last minute. In the end, three households were allowed to mix on Christmas Day itself in most of the country, while in London and the south-east, where cases were higher,households were not allowed to mix indoors at all. Vallance told the press conference that while there were some indications that the Omicron variant might be able to resist Covid vaccines, it was also possible that current vaccines and boosters “may be sufficient to prevent people going on to have severe illnesses”. Johnson said the government would work to speed up the virus booster programme over the next few weeks and that the central message to everyone was to get vaccinated as soon as possible, and then have the booster when eligible. The new requirements to wear mask in shops and on public transport – as well as a new regime of testing for everyone arriving in the UK from abroad – will be reviewed in three weeks. The first two Omicron cases in this country are believed to be connected, and to be linked to travel in southern Africa. The individuals and their households were ordered to self-isolate, and targeted testing was being carried out in areas where they are thought to have been while they were infectious. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the new variant was “a real reminder that this pandemic is far from over”. Javid said anyone who had travelled in the past 10 days to the 10 countries now on the red list, which also includes South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini (formerly Swaziland), Zimbabwe and Namibia, must self-isolate and take PCR tests. The UK is the second European nation to have reported the presence of Omicron after Belgium said that it had identified a single case on Friday. On Saturday night, two cases were confirmed in Germany, one in Italy and another suspected in the Czech Republic. There was also concern in the Netherlands after 61 people tested positive for Covid-19 after arriving on two flights from South Africa on Friday. Further tests were under way to determine if any of them had the Omicron variant. Numerous pharmaceutical firms have said that they are working to adapt their vaccines in light of the emergence of Omicron after the World Health Organization warned that preliminary evidence suggested the variant has an increased risk of reinfection and may spread more rapidly than other strains. On Saturday Professor Sir Andrew Pollard, who helped create the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, expressed optimism that existing vaccines would be effective at protecting against serious disease caused by the new Omicron variant. He also said it was “extremely unlikely” that it would cause a “reboot” of the pandemic. Pollard, who also chairs the government’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, said that a new vaccine could be developed “very rapidly” if required, because scientists now have a “well-oiled” process. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that it would be weeks before the seriousness could be judged more precisely: “At least from a speculative point of view, we have some optimism that the vaccine should still work against a new variant for serious disease but really we need to wait several weeks to have that confirmed.” The arrival of the new variant comes as ministers are preparing a series of announcements this week to clear the backlog of operations in the NHS caused by Covid and to prepare it for the winter. Ministers will an announce an “elective recovery plan” to tackle the huge backlog of NHS care in England as the centrepiece of a “health week” of announcements, which they hope will see them regain control of the narrative about the increasingly fragile state of the health service and social care. It is expected that patients will be told they will be given fewer follow-up appointments after operations, and will instead be encouraged to use apps, telephone and hospital trusts’ websites to seek a consultation with a specialist if they feel they need it. The plan is part of a shift towards what officials are calling “patient-activated healthcare” that will free space to tackle the backlog. Under the plans, patients could also be offered the chance to have their surgery outside their home area, in another part of the country. However, demand is likely to be limited by the availability of surgical capacity and patients’ willingness to travel.Boris Johnson has been accused of ignoring a senior official’s plan to prepare Britain for the emergence of vaccine-resistant Covid variants, the Observer can reveal. With the government announcing on Saturday that the first UK cases of the Omicron variant had been detected, the former head of the government’s vaccine taskforce said he could see no evidence that his blueprint for tackling the most worrying variants – submitted in the spring – had been acted upon. In an interview with the Observer, Clive Dix, a leading figure in drug development who chaired the taskforce until April, said that he believed the UK was no longer “on the front foot” in tackling the pandemic. “I wrote a very specific proposal on what we should put in place right now for the emergence of any new virus that escaped the vaccine,” he said. “That was written and handed into the [vaccine taskforce] at the end of April when I left. I haven’t seen a sign of any of those activities yet. “I sent a note to No 10 [in May] saying I think this is still an emergency and it should be dealt with urgently – and I want it on public record that you’ve got my proposal. But I didn’t even get a response to that. I prodded the government and said, ‘What’s going on, because we need to do this’. I don’t see any of that going on.” He added: “I think it’s time to ask the vaccine taskforce and the government, what is your plan for an escape variant? What is your plan for resilience for the future? Let’s see it because I think the country needs to know.” His criticisms echoed those of Kate Bingham, the first chair of the vaccine taskforce, who warned in a speech last week: “Had we relied on the existing machinery of government, the outcome [of the vaccine programme] could have been very different.” Dominic Cummings, the prime minister’s former chief adviser, has also called on the government to publish its plans for tackling vaccine-resistant Covid variants. Under Dix’s strategy, a coordinating team would seek out new vaccines, give the company involved a “fast track” to a swift trial, access to the data and regulatory approval, in return for early access to new vaccines. He said this system worked at the start of the pandemic and should be repeated. He warned that by simply waiting to buy vaccines once they had been developed, Britain would find itself at the back of the queue because bigger customers would be prioritised. “If we leave it to the industry to do, they’re going to go to the highest bidder, and the UK won’t be at the front of that queue any more, because it’s not a big market. Whereas if you act as a partner, you get things done. It’s not rocket science, and the infrastructure is there.” He said that he had envisaged the French company Valneva as a key part of this process. However, he said the government’s “ridiculous” decision to scrap its existing contract with the company had damaged that approach. While he said that the Omicron variant now detected in the UK was likely to be more resistant to current vaccines, he was hopeful that it would not necessarily lead to increased serious illness and death. “The current variant that’s coming is a beast,” he said. “It’s got a lot of mutations in it and the likelihood is that the antibodies that we’ve already generated from the vaccines will be less effective. They’re less effective against the Delta variant in terms of stopping people getting infected, but they are effective in stopping people getting seriously ill or dying. “I think that will maintain with the South African variant. The reason they stop people getting seriously ill and dying is not the antibody response. It’s the longer-term cellular immune response. And it’s pretty obvious now that that’s what is keeping people out of hospital and keeping people from dying. So I’m pretty sure that response won’t wane.” A government spokesperson said: “This past year we’ve witnessed unprecedented scientific innovations and breakthroughs, made possible by collaboration between medical experts, governments and industry. “Earlier this year, we joined the 100 Days Mission, which will ensure industry is part of a robust collaboration alongside governments, international organisations and academia over the coming months and years to take action towards a common goal: protecting people from future pandemics through developing and deploying safe, targeted and effective diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines at scale.”Joe Biden and Kamala Harris have been briefed on the latest situation regarding the new Omicron coronavirus variant, the White House said on Saturday, as Britain, Germany and Italy reported detecting cases. Biden, who was spending Thanksgiving with family in Nantucket, Massachusetts, told reporters on Friday: “We don’t know a lot about the variant except that it is of great concern [and] seems to spread rapidly.” Omicron was first detected in South Africa, leading countries including the US to impose travel restrictions on that nation and at least seven others in the region. No cases of Omicron have been identified in the US to date, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. The agency expects that it would identify the variant quickly if it emerges in the US. Dr Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious disease specialist and chief White House medical adviser, told NBC on Saturday he “would not be surprised” if the variant were already in the US. “When you have a virus that is showing this degree of transmissibility and you’re already having travel-related cases that they’ve noted in Israel and Belgium and other places, when you have a virus like this, it almost invariably is ultimately going to go essentially all over,” Fauci said. Asked about next moves to deal with the Omicron threat, Harris told reporters the administration would take it “one step at a time”. “For now we’ve done what we think is necessary,” she said. The White House said senior health officials and its Covid response team were monitoring the latest updates on Omicron and were in regular touch with officials around the world. In New York, one of the states hit hardest and earliest by Covid-19, the governor announced steps to limit a new winter wave of infections as transmission rates approach those of April 2020. New York has recorded more than 2.7m cases of Covid-19 and more than 57,000 deaths, the fourth highest state death toll, behind California, Texas and Florida. Late on Friday, Governor Kathy Hochul said: “While the new Omicron variant has yet to be detected in New York state, it’s coming.” The next day, the banner headline on the front page of the New York Post tabloid said simply: “Omi-God, Not Again.” Hochul also issued an executive order postponing elective surgeries, a move designed to protect hospital capacity until at least 15 January, and a disaster emergency declaration. Covid hospital admissions in New York have increased to more than 300 a day. Hospitals with less than 10% staffed bed capacity, or those designated by the state, will be authorized to screen patients and restrict admissions. Hochul said: “We’ve taken extraordinary action to prevent the spread of Covid-19 and combat this pandemic. However, we continue to see warning signs of spikes this upcoming winter.” The governor urged New Yorkers to mask up in indoor public venues, get tested when appropriate and to stay home when ill. Two-thirds of New York state residents are fully vaccinated and close to 80% have received at least one dose, according to the governor’s office. But New York state is divided between intensively vaccinated downstate areas, including New York City, and upstate areas that have lower vaccination rates and higher rates of infection. According to the state health department, Buffalo and western New York has a 9.67% Covid positivity rate. The positivity rate in New York City is 1.65%, less than half the 3.84% state average. Vaccination rates in some regions are as low as 52%. In New York City, 97% of Queens adults and 94% of Manhattan adults have had the jab. Hochul urged New Yorkers to get the vaccination, noting that just under 10% of adults in the state have not. “The vaccine remains one of our greatest weapons in fighting the pandemic and I encourage every New Yorker to get vaccinated and get the booster if you’re fully vaccinated,” she said. As parts of the US experience Covid surges, intensive care units in Michigan are approaching capacity. New York and other eastern states are watching closely. On Friday the mayor-elect of New York City, Eric Adams, said the Omicron variant was “a concerning development that we must watch extremely closely, and be prepared to address as a city, state and country. Our health officials must … have response options available should it prove to be significantly more virulent.” Adams and the outgoing mayor, Bill de Blasio, earlier came together to urge city residents to get the vaccines and booster shots.According to his friends, Harem Pirot was an excellent swimmer. In the summer of 2019 he and a neighbour Anas Muhammad set off from their home in the Iraqi Kurdistan town of Ranya to nearby Lake Dukan, a popular picnic and boating spot. “Harem was a really good person. He could swim well in deep water,” Anas said yesterday. “Our families knew each other well. A great guy. He was 25.” But Pirot’s swimming prowess was not enough to save him last week from an icy and agonising death in the unforgiving English Channel. He was one of 27 people, mostly Iraqi Kurds, who perished last Wednesday in the world’s busiest shipping lane after setting off from the coast of northern France in a flimsy dinghy. Relatives in Ranya say they believe at least 10 of their kin were on the ill-fated boat. They have not been formally notified by authorities in Iraq, or France. But the checks they have made by themselves, with mortuary staff, Kurds in Dunkirk camps and, in some cases with the smugglers who organised the journeys, have left them certain that their family members are dead. Precisely what befell the group in the dinghy is unclear. But relatives who were in contact with their loved ones by mobile phone in their last minutes paint a terrible picture. The craft began taking on water. It may have been struck by a larger vessel or its wake, or it could simply have started deflating. Those on board would have started bailing desperately. Someone in the dinghy tried to alert the French authorities and then the UK coastguard. Relatives said by this point the boat was in British waters. They needed urgent assistance and rescue. But help didn’t come in time. Instead, Pirot and his fellow refugees found themselves in the freezing grey water. Passengers included Pirot’s friend Twana Mamand Muhammed, also from Ranya. There was a family from the Iraqi Kurdish town of Darbandikhan: Khazal Hussein, 45, and her children Hadia, 22, son Mubin, 16 and younger daughter Hasti, seven. As hypothermia and exhaustion set in, those in the water died, one by one. Currents pushed them back towards France. In Ranya, anxious families tried to sleep. Some were reassured by messages sent from the boat as it headed towards England. Tuesday night was calm and still. It was time to brave the channel – the final stage of a precarious journey from the homeland. At first, the signs were promising; the journey had gone well enough to put the passengers in English waters, so the families back home thought. UK authorities would surely take things from there. But dawn broke to silence. The phones that had kept Ranya up to speed with the journey were no longer on. And nor were those of the smugglers in France. Fishermen eventually spotted bodies at 2pm on Wednesday. Two male survivors – an Iraqi and a Somali – were pulled from the waters and taken to hospital in Calais. The death toll was 27 – the biggest known number of fatalities since refugees began making the perilous journey to Britain. Relatives waited for news. By Saturday grief set in. It became clear there was little hope. “My wife and children were unhappy with our life here. They wanted us all to go to the UK,” Khazal’s husband, Rezgar, said. “I told them I couldn’t come because of my job as a policeman. I would lose it. They insisted to go so I agreed I would join them if they made it, and if they didn’t, they could come back. I never knew it was risky.” Rezgar said his last contact with his family was around 10pm on Tuesday. “They said they were about to get on a boat. After that I didn’t hear from them again.” Rezgar said he still didn’t really know what had happened. “I beg you, tell me if you have any news from them,” he said. The brother of one of the victims said the passengers had been communicating with UK authorities for 20 minutes before they were lost. “The waves brought them back to French waters,” said Zana, whose brother Twana was on the boat. “And all this time, no one came to help them. I would be grateful if the British or French brought his body home. I don’t want anything from the Kurdish authorities. They were the reason he left.” Pirot had been trying to reach England to meet his brother Anwar, a Sheffield graduate, now living in Cambridge. The reunion didn’t happen. Instead Anwar made a cruel reverse journey, travelling to Calais. “I tried to identify my brother’s body. But I’ve been told to wait until Monday, when the morgue reopens after the weekend,” he told the Observer. Anwar said DNA tests were being carried out, with the results expected in two weeks. He was tired and exhausted, he said, and reluctant to accept that his brother had died until formal confirmation came through. He had spent hours outside Calais police station trying to get information, without much success, he said. At the makeshift camp near Dunkirk where Pirot had been staying, friends expressed shock and dismay. Anas Muhammad brought up Pirot’s Facebook page and photos from home, including one of him with a bike. “Actually his family was poor. The bike was borrowed,” Anas said. “Like all of us he left because of social and political problems.” Pirot set up his Facebook page using a jokey nom de plume, Harem Almas – Almas is the Kurdish word for diamond. Beneath his profile photo is a post that says simply: “That is all … I will not wait your return. Because soon I will also go.” A final image shows him praying. Pirot left Ranya two months ago. He reached northern France via Turkey and Italy. Like many of those living in the woods near Grande-Synthe, west of Dunkirk, he had compelling family reasons for coming to the UK – but no legal route. Several of those camping in the rain and mud had worked in Britain or had close relatives there. Many more of those on the ill-fated boat had also set off from the Ranya area at the foothills of the Qandil mountains in Iraq’s Kurdish north-east. Sons and daughters of the area had long migrated to Europe. The journey had always been hard, but this one was different. A hastily arranged flight to Belarus, with no screening before usually hard-won visas were issued, seemed too good be true. And it was. “We were pawns,” said Mustafa Akkawi, who made it to the Netherlands in April. “I say ‘we’ as in us Kurds. This time it was cynical by the Belarussians. They were doing what Putin told them to do. They were using our people to pressure Europe.” Anas said he had last seen Pirot on Tuesday. “He said he was leaving by boat and asked me if I wanted to take any of his stuff. I can’t believe he’s gone,” he said. He and his friend Amanj, a 20-year-old Kurdish political activist from Iran, were still intending to go to by boat to Britain, despite two previous failed attempts in the past two weeks. The first time they set off their boat broke down one and a half hours into the journey, after the outboard motor developed a problem, Amanj said. The French coastguard rescued them and brought them back. They were due to travel the same night as Pirot but had to turn back after the van transporting them to the beach blew a tyre. Typically, Amanj said, the smugglers made deals with families at home. Sometimes they turned up at the camp in masks. The crossing costs about £3,000 per person, with cash demanded in full once their loved one had made it to Dover. One of the Iraqi Kurdish smugglers who arranged Pirot’s crossing has since deleted his Facebook page and WhatsApp account, Amanj said. Despite Wednesday’s tragedy, hundreds of people are still camped out, waiting for the right weather conditions. One refugee, Mala Rachman, 24, began crying when the Observer showed him a photo of Khazal – the mother who drowned on Wednesday with her family. “I knew her! She was a lovely lady,” Rachman said. Rachman said they had started chatting outside Auchan, the French supermarket near the camp – the “jungle”, as the refugees call it. The French authorities had organised for her and her children to stay in a hotel and she was waiting for transport. “She saw me on my own and invited me to join their family. But I wasn’t allowed because I’m a single man,” he said.A quarter of people with severely suppressed immunity that leaves them highly vulnerable to Covid have still not had a third vaccination, according to official figures that have caused serious concern among leading cancer charities. The figure emerged just days after NHS England contacted cancer specialists and services across the country asking them to assist in boosting the numbers, with concerns that it means more than 100,000 extremely vulnerable people are yet to have their third jab. A letter from the NHS sent earlier this month said that 30% were still without the third vaccination, which has since fallen to 25%. Blood Cancer UK said its own support line had repeatedly been contacted over the last two months by patients who have struggled to access their third dose, despite the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) listing immunocompromised adults as the top vaccine priority. The NHS and the government has set a deadline of 11 October for all immunosuppressed people to be invited for the jab. “At a time when the infection rate is high, many thousands of vulnerable people do not yet have the protection they need,” said Gemma Peters, the charity’s chief executive. “The failure of the roll-out of the third dose has caused huge anxiety for immunocompromised people with blood cancer, and is likely to have led to some people becoming seriously ill or even dying. We hope the government and the NHS will now act with real urgency in making sure every immunocompromised person is invited for a third dose in the days to come. “We are also expecting an announcement shortly from the JCVI about a fourth vaccine dose for the immunocompromised. It is vital the government and the NHS learn lessons from what has gone wrong in the last couple of months so that they do not repeat the mistakes next time.” NHS officials said that the cohort of people who were severely immunosuppressed changed relatively quickly, meaning the eligibility for a third dose could also change. They said more people were coming forward each day. The NHS has also written directly to around 400,000 potentially eligible patients. “Progress has been made in the roll out of third jabs, with around three quarters of those people who are severely immunosuppressed having had a third vaccination,” said a spokesperson for the NHS. “The decision on when to get a third jab for this group is made between patients and their clinicians, and can be accessed through their hospital consultant or GP, and additionally, those with a letter from their doctor can book online or attend their local walk-in vaccination centre.”Vulnerable women attempting to escape domestic violence are being offered “false hope” by a government program that potentially could be putting them at greater risk, frontline service workers say. The two-year $145m escaping violence payment trial was billed as a one-off payment of up to $5,000 to “help women establish a life free of violence”. It was announced as part of the government’s “landmark $1.1bn women’s safety package” in the May budget. In reality, the program offers eligible people up to $1500 in cash, with the remainder paid in vouchers or direct payments to schools or rental bond agencies. In the month the trial has been running, frontline services are already pleading for clarity over who is eligible and how the payment works. Sally Stevenson, the general manager of the Illawarra Women’s Health Centre, said the “extremely onerous and time consuming program” risked leaving survivors worse off. “If anything, this program offers false hope that practical support is available, but in reality it does nothing to truly support women to escape violence,” Stevenson said. “In some circumstances it may in fact put women and children in danger. If women are under the misapprehension they will be provided adequate support and leave on this basis, and the expected support is not provided, they may well be worse off, or indeed in greater danger – because as we know, leaving is the one of the most dangerous times in a violent relationship, especially when there is little or no support.” More than 120 providers wrote to the women’s safety minister, Anne Ruston, earlier this month to raise serious concerns. They asked for changes to the “inappropriate” eligibility requirements, which include limiting the payments to those who have already left their home, and those who have experienced violence from an intimate partner in the past 12 weeks. Temporary visa holders are excluded and those applying need to show evidence of their experience from either police or a service provider as part of the eight-page application. UnitingCare/Wesley was chosen as the facilitator of the program after a “closed competitive process”. Stevenson said more consultation was needed with those on the frontline to make the program workable. “We know how to support women escaping violence: we know what they need – they need fast, flexible and liquid support,” she said. “As such, the number of barriers within this program mean it’s extremely difficult to access any support. Certainly not enough to make escape a viable option.” Ruston defended the program, but left the door open to changes saying the government was “absolutely committed to getting it right”. “We have openly and constructively engaged with the sector since the program was established last month to make sure the right information is out on the ground as well as considering feedback to inform the rollout,” she said. “We will also conduct an independent evaluation of the program to make sure the settings meet the needs of women and anyone else escaping violent relationships.” Ruston said she had heard positive stories of women who had been helped by the trial. “We are hearing that people who have never accessed government support or other support services are reaching out to UnitingCare Network,” she said. “While this is sobering, it is also positive to know that the program is reaching a cohort of victim-survivors who have not previously found appropriate support and is giving them the confidence to work toward a life free of violence.” Labor senator Jenny McAllister said the government needed to listen to those at the coalface, given the seriousness of the issue at hand. “This program shows the fingerprints of a government that doesn’t understand the experiences of victim-survivors and is more concerned about rushing out a media release than getting it right,” she said. The escaping violence payment trial was part of a flurry of announcements made in the wake of claims the Morrison government was not doing enough to ensure women’s safety after allegations of rape and sexual assault were raised within parliament. Announcements included increased funding for frontline legal centres and domestic and family violence support work, but months after it was promised, frontline workers were still waiting for the funds, with the government forced to “clarify” some of the headline figures it released.The Barbarians have claimed a decision by Public Health England led to their fixture against Samoa at Twickenham being called off 90 minutes before kick-off despite their having enough players who had returned negative tests. A statement released by the Rugby Football Union revealed that four players and two members of staff from the invitational side had tested positive for Covid-19. The scrapping of the game followed last year’s fixture against England being called off after 13 players broke the Covid protocols, leading to widespread condemnation of the players’ behaviour. As a result the women’s game between the Barbarians and Springbok was moved forward from 5.15pm to 2.30pm. The game – shown live on the BBC – was won by the Barbarians 60-5 in front of 29,581 fans, a world record for a women’s match. The RFU’s decision was roundly criticised, with Jonathan Davies saying it was “an utter shambles”. “It’s not good enough. After the shambles of last year too when some of the Barbarians broke the bubble it is unforgivable,” the former Wales fly-half told the Telegraph. However, the Barbarians claimed they had enough players within their selection to play the match but it was the testing oversight committee which said the game could not go ahead as it posed a risk to the health of both sides. The Barbarians said in a statement: “Despite the recent positive Covid tests, we had a fit 23 today who all tested negative this morning. They were ready and keen to take to the pitch against Manu Samoa. The whole squad complied to the letter with the Covid protocols throughout the week, including daily lateral flow tests. “After today’s results, we worked hard with the RFU, Public Health England and the testing oversight committee, to find a way that we could play. Unfortunately, it was concluded on medical grounds that there was a risk to players on both sides should the game go ahead. “All of our players are absolutely devastated they were unable to play today in front of an amazing and passionate crowd.”The fashion charity established by the supermodel Naomi Campbell has come under formal investigation from the charities watchdog over misconduct concerns relating to its management and finances. Campbell created Fashion for Relief in 2005 to raise funds for children living in poverty and adversity around the world, and says it has raised millions over the years for good causes through its annual charity fashion show. The Charity Commission is to examine whether Campbell and her fellow trustees “have properly exercised their legal duties and responsibilities under charity law”, and will investigate payments made by the charity to one of its trustees. It will also look at the charity’s spending and the management of Fashion for Relief by its trustees, including potential misconduct and mismanagement and the failure to file statutory annual accounts on time. Campbell is named as one of three trustees of Fashion for Relief, along with Bianka Hellmich and Veronica Sylvia Wing Wai Au Chou. All are listed as having been trustees of the charity since 2015. Fashion for Relief has for years held glitzy fashion events to raise money for its charity partners. In 2019, it partnered with Sadiq Khan’s Mayor’s Fund for London to support low-income youngsters with skills and training. It held a London fashion week show in September that year at the British Museum featuring a fashion show, gala dinner and art auction. Celebrities attending included Campbell, Naomie Harris, Pierce Brosnan, Skepta, and Alexa Chung. The charity’s website does not appear to say how much money was raised for the Mayor’s Fund, though it displays cuttings from Vogue, Elle and other fashion media with headlines such as Naomi Campbell is Saving the World One Fashion Show at a Time. The charity is yet to publish its 2020 accounts, which are more than 178 days late according to the Charity Commission’s online register. The charity’s last set of published accounts show that in the year to July 2019 it raised £1,722,000, most of it through sponsorships. According to the accounts, £1,606,000 of that was spent putting on a charity event and paying for PRs and other staff. Just £5,515 appears to have been given to good causes. The 2019 accounts also reveal unusually large trustee expenses. Hellmich was paid £77,000 in consultancy fees and £15,942 in travel expenses. The previous year, the charity spent £107,000 on trustees’ fees and £23,000 on expenses. The Charity Commission for England has been in private discussions with Fashion for Relief for more than a year about what it called a “a range of regulatory concerns”, including late filing of accounts, potential conflicts of interests and weaknesses around financial controls. The commission has now escalated what had been a compliance issue into a full inquiry – its most serious level of investigation – suggesting the regulator has been unable to satisfy its concerns. A statement from Fashion for Relief said: “Fashion For Relief (FFR) is fully cooperating with the Charity Commission and will continue to do so throughout the inquiry process. Our hope is to conclude the regulatory engagement with the commission as swiftly as possible. “Sadly, because of the Covid pandemic we were unable to hold any events or undertake any fundraising activity for over two years. As a result we asked for a formal extension to the accounts deadline. Any suggestion of wrongdoing or misconduct on the part of the trustees is untrue and denied. “FFR is not solely a fundraising charity. It uses its resources, the relationships and experience of its trustees and associates, and fundraising events, to encourage donations to other charities and good causes. Each of our events has been held for the benefit of a third party charity. At each event, all donations and pledges are made directly to the third party charity. “Our efforts have resulted in £11.5m of donations to other charities. We have secured extensive global attention and media coverage for causes including Hurricane Katrina, Ebola, women’s mental health, the Haiti earthquake, the Japanese tsunami – plus floods in the UK. “FFR commits to projects in partnership with multiple sponsors, whose funds enable them to take place. This is not unusual, and many other charities also carry out their work in conjunction with sponsors. “FFR remains extremely proud of what we have achieved since starting our foundation in 2005. The trustees dedicate a great deal of time and energy into FFR and will continue to do so in order to improve the lives of those living in adversity.” • This article was updated on 27 November 2021 to include a statement from Fashion for Relief.A charity whose patron is the mayor of London says the fashion charity founded by the supermodel Naomi Campbell owes it tens of thousands of pounds. The Mayor’s Fund for London, whose figurehead is the current mayor, Sadiq Khan, says it is owed £50,000 from a pop-up shop created by Campbell’s Fashion for Relief two years ago to raise money for the mayor’s causes. Fashion for Relief is being investigated by the Charity Commission in connection with potential misconduct and financial mismanagement. Regulators are examining payments the charity made to one of its trustees, the charity’s spending records and a range of other regulatory concerns. Fashion for Relief trustees deny wrongdoing or misconduct. The Mayor’s Fund is furious at its treatment by Fashion for Relief after a series of events held to raise money for it, including an auction of artworks at a glamorous red-carpet fashion show at the British Museum in September 2019. The Mayor’s Fund was eventually paid a donation of £100,000 from this event. Two months later, in November 2019, Fashion for Relief created a pop-up store on behalf of the Mayor’s Fund, selling fashion pieces by the likes of McQueen, Gucci and Vivienne Westwood in the Westfield shopping centre in west London. At the time, Campbell said money raised was “going to help improve the futures of young Londoners”. The Mayor’s Fund said it was promised a £50,000 donation. When it had not received any of the promised cash after a year, it reported a “serious incident” notification to the Charity Commission. Charities are obliged to report to the regulator anything that damages their assets or reputation. The Mayor’s Fund said that while it had initially been excited to work with Fashion for Relief, the relationship had become fraught when the money did not arrive: “Unfortunately, although we were delighted to receive £100k of this funding, we are still waiting for £50k,” Kirsty McHugh, the Mayor’s Fund’s chief executive, said. “We are an independent charity supporting young Londoners from low-income backgrounds, and raise all our own income. Young Londoners have suffered massively through the pandemic and we would very much welcome receiving the remaining amount in order to benefit children and young people across the capital,” she said. Although Khan is the current patron of the Mayor’s Fund and features extensively on the Fashion for Relief website in connection with the 2019 events, his office does not provide funding to the Mayor’s Fund charity. Each year the fund supports 40,000 Londoners aged four-24 with skills and job training. Regulatory concerns involving Fashion for Relief include payments of £77,000 in consultancy fees and £15,942 in travel expenses in 2018-19 to one of its trustees, Bianka Hellmich. The previous year, the charity spent £107,000 on trustees’ fees and £23,000 on expenses. Hellmich is a partner at the law firm QCL Associates, specialising in providing advice to high-net-worth private clients, such as Madonna. The firm’s website describes her as a “devoted philanthropist”, a trustee of Fashion for Relief and a supporter of the “Mayor’s Trust for London”. Hellmich was approached for comment. Fashion for Relief said its partnership with the Mayor’s Fund for London through the Westfield pop-up store was to encourage direct donations to the fund, and to raise awareness of the fund’s work including campaigning for education and employability schemes for young people. It also sought to raise funds for the fund through the sale of fashion items at the Westfield store. It said it had hoped to “donate” £50,000 to the Mayor’s Fund and still hoped to “honour the aspiration’ to do so. It added: “We also organised visits to schools, encouraged volunteers to sign up and secured the involvement of numerous fashion partners. We remain committed to helping the lives of young Londoners and supporting the Fund’s important work.” The commission said its investigation, which may take several months, would examine whether those controlling the charity “have properly exercised their legal duties and responsibilities under charity law”. Fashion for Relief has no full-time staff and appears to be controlled by its two trustees, Hellmich and Campbell. A third trustee, Veronica Sylvia Wing Wai Au Chou, appears to have resigned and is no longer listed on the commission’s website. The commission has the power to close down a charity in the event of wrongdoing, and can ban individuals from holding trustee positions. • This article was updated on 27 November 2021 to include a statement from Fashion for Relief.The union representing Border Force staff has announced it is taking part in a legal challenge against a plan by Priti Patel to push back small boats in the Channel. The news that the home secretary’s own staff are participating in a legal challenge against the high-profile policy will be a significant blow to Patel as she faces criticism from fellow Conservatives for failing to get a grip on the crisis. On Wednesday, 27 people drowned after their dinghy sank in the Channel – the largest loss of life recorded since the small boat crisis began. The number of refugees crossing to seek sanctuary in the UK has reached record levels, with more than 23,000 attempting the journey so far this year. The poor weather conditions and plummeting temperatures have not deterred refugees from trying to cross the Channel. The Public and Commercial Services union (PCS) has joined Care4Calais and one other charity in their legal fight to prevent the pushback plans from going ahead. PCS says it has not ruled out taking steps to disrupt the policy if the home secretary insists on proceeding with it. The loss of dozens of lives in the Channel this week has increased pressure on the government to drop its plans to make Border Force staff prevent boats from reaching the UK by physically pushing the boats back. PCS and the two charities it is bringing the legal challenge with are demanding Patel publish the details of the policy and the legal basis for it. The government is required to respond by this Monday. If it refuses to abandon the policy, PCS and the charities could launch judicial review proceedings imminently. Other organisations, including Channel Rescue and the charity Freedom from Torture, have launched separate legal challenges against the pushback plans. Late on Saturday, Patel warned that failing to increase cooperation with Europe could cause “even worse scenes” in the Channel this winter than the capsizing that killed 27 people. She vowed to “continue to push” for improvement next week, despite being disinvited by the French from a meeting of European colleagues to tackle the migration crisis. Interior ministers from France, the Netherlands, Belgium and the European Commission are to meet in Calais on Sunday to discuss small boat crossings. Patel’s invitation was withdrawn after Boris Johnson angered Emmanuel Macron by publicly sharing a letter he had written to the French president on how to deal with the issue. The Guardian revealed last Sunday that the PCS union was considering legal action and that the Home Office had received advice that the odds of successfully defending a legal challenge against the pushback plans were less than 30%. The PCS general secretary, Mark Serwotka, said: “The pushback policy being pursued by the home secretary is unlawful, unworkable and above all morally reprehensible. “Our Border Force members are aghast at the thought they will be forced to implement such a cruel and inhumane policy. Migrants who are trying to reach this country should be allowed to do so via safe routes so that their claims can be assessed here. If the government does not abandon this appalling approach, we will pursue all legal avenues including a judicial review. “PCS will not rule out all forms of industrial action, including disrupting the implementation of the pushback policy if the home secretary insists on going ahead.” Clare Moseley, founder of Care4Calais, said: “We are incredibly proud to be joined in this action by PCS. Not only will this challenge represent the interest of desperate people forced to risk their lives, it will also represent those who may well be forced to implement it.” The PCS union and Care4Calais are being represented by the public law department at Duncan Lewis solicitors, which has brought many human rights challenges against Home Office policies. The Home Office said:“We are seeing an unacceptable rise in dangerous Channel crossings and as part of our ongoing operational response, we continue our work to safely prevent such illegal crossings. The health, safety and wellbeing of our officers is paramount when undertaking their operational duties, which is why we provide extensive training and ensure all operational procedures comply and are delivered in accordance with domestic and international law. “Last summer we held a formal consultation on new maritime tactics with the unions – we continue to work closely with all the trade unions and welcome their ongoing feedback.”“It was a moment to shake things up but not in a crazy way,” Thomas Tuchel says, looking back on the fallout from Chelsea’s 1-0 Champions League defeat at Juventus on 29 September. And yet it was certainly in a forensic way, heavy on soul-searching and argument. So perhaps a little crazy? “It’s not about being super angry or blaming somebody but it was the moment to turn every stone and this is what we did for the next days in the coaching office,” the manager adds. “To find the mix between being honest and critical but also supportive, to show a way out of this in which we believe and which suits us. With the help of the team, with the openness of the team and the mentality, we did it.” Chelsea had travelled to Turin on the back of the 1-0 home loss to Manchester City in the Premier League and the Juventus performance was marked by a lack of sharpness and confidence. Too often it was safe and sideways and just too slow, with precious little penetration. Look at Chelsea now, especially what they did to Juventus last Tuesday night in the Group H return. The 4-0 dismantling of the Serie A giants was all about high-tempo front-foot football, intelligent angles of attack and suffocating pressing. When Juventus’s torment was over, Chelsea’s could savour a ninth win in 10 matches (including the Carabao Cup penalty shootout victory over Southampton). The other game was the 1-1 home draw with Burnley. Chelsea are flying going into Sunday’s visit of Manchester United, the bit firmly between their teeth in terms of a title challenge and as they begin a run of nine league matches in 36 days – taking them up to the home fixture with Liverpool on 2 January. “It’s never easy, it hurts always … it hurts me every single time, make no mistake,” Tuchel says of defeat and what bothered him after Turin was the fear that opposing teams had worked Chelsea out. They were lining up in defensive formations and seeking to make life as difficult as possible for them. Tuchel also noted that Romelu Lukaku was being closed down and pushed “into spaces where he does not feel so comfortable”. The centre-forward would be injured three games later against Malmö in the Champions League; he could return as a substitute against United. Were Chelsea getting a bit complacent before Turin, a little too comfortable in their ability to find the answers even when not at their best? Tuchel had prepared them meticulously for the game and was dismayed at how it panned out. Yet he knows how to engineer title-winning seasons, having done so at Paris Saint-Germain; how to get through to his players, with arguably his greatest gift being how he packages his messages to them in a clear and simple way. Fans can see the passion and emotion in Tuchel during matches but it is his rational and analytical side that is most pronounced at the training ground. It underpins a key element of any champion manager – the capacity to respond quickly and effectively to setbacks. In Turin, Chelsea had tried to play patiently, to pass, pass and pass, and it was not them. Since then, they have upped the pace and intensity, seeking to be more fluid within their 3-4-2-1 system, and the high point was the remorselessness that they showed in the second game against Juventus. There was a period early in the second half when the visitors could not catch their breath. Chelsea made it 2-0 then 3-0 and Tuchel seemed to mainline the energy of the Stamford Bridge crowd. “We changed the approach a bit towards the team [after Turin], a bit in training, a bit in our style of playing,” he says. “It was to find maybe new solutions and to install more of a mix of structure but also freedom in our game and the players did excellently.” It is interesting to hear Tuchel describe the internal workings of his technical staff. When he joined the club in January, he brought with him the coaches, Arno Michels and Zsolt Low, and the analyst, Benjamin Weber, while he inherited the assistants, Anthony Barry and Joe Edwards, and the goalkeeper coaches, Henrique Hilário and James Russell. “I am super protected by my staff – they know me, I know them,” Tuchel says. “And then we have new input here with our two assistant coaches and the goalkeeper coaches. So in one office we are also like one team and we are brutally honest with each other. “Sometimes I confront with my doubts and somebody else has doubts. We have different opinions and then we start digging and we start asking ourselves: ‘What is here on us, how did we not see it? Could we have seen it? What can we do better? What could we have done better? What can we change?’ Everything is on the table. You need to have this trust and openness.” The Juventus defeat has come to feel like an increasingly distant memory but not for Tuchel. “These moments are super-hard but sometimes they are necessary to refocus and resharpen,” he says. Chelsea are ready for a defining period.The statue of Manchester United’s Holy Trinity is a feature of the Old Trafford landscape. For a club increasingly burdened by unflattering comparisons to their past, while invariably generating more, the spectre of an unholy trilogy looms larger. Forget Best, Law and Charlton, this threatens to be an autumn to rank among their worst. Sunday brings a third meeting with title contenders, their supposed peers, and the first two amounted to humiliations. United kick off at Stamford Bridge 12 points behind Chelsea and after conceding more than five times as many goals. Liverpool scored five of them, Manchester City a mere two, but neither bothered to add to their tally in the final 40 minutes as they seemed to declare against vanquished opponents. As Michael Carrick conceded, a gulf has opened up. If there is a divide between the best and the rest, United are found on the wrong side of it. “There’s no denying where the league is and so I’ve got to be realistic,” said the caretaker manager. “It’s pretty obvious from the run of games. Where we are and the results we’ve had, it’s frustrating and disappointing.” Carrick used to bring a measured approach to the midfield. It was entirely in character that he looked to add perspective. “It wasn’t that long ago we finished second and were on a really good curve of improvement and I don’t think that can be forgotten,” he said. “It’s very different having a poor run of results to being a poor team.” If the evidence of Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s fraught final few weeks is United meeting that description, a squad overflowing with ability offers scope for improvement under Ralf Rangnick, when he assumes interim charge. His inheritance is decidedly mixed but there are rewards for managers able to reimagine and rejuvenate an underperforming group and for players galvanised by the uncertainty of change. “Whenever anyone has a new boss in any walk of life, there is feeling of: ‘What’s next?’” said Carrick, who played for four United managers and one caretaker. “You can’t hide from that. But people react in different ways: sometimes that gives them a freshness and a spark to go and be at their best and perform even better.” Combine a sense of untapped potential with the precedent of parachuting in a German pressing evangelist mid-season and it may bode well. Frank Lampard’s reign started with a 4-0 defeat at Old Trafford and ended with Solskjær’s United top and his Chelsea ninth. Thomas Tuchel began by going 14 matches unbeaten; within a few months, Chelsea were champions of Europe. Rangnick, a mentor to Tuchel, may hope to emulate one of his followers. Chelsea’s road to glory was paved with the clean sheets a previously porous defence kept. Carrick oversaw United’s third shutout in 26 games on his managerial bow against Villarreal. He certainly is not willing to write off this campaign. “There’s so much left in the season,” he said. “Sometimes you have really bad spells in a season and you can almost have another season within a season when things change.” Alex Ferguson won 13 league titles at United by sustaining excellence over a long period and Carrick said: “Striving for consistency is always the balance that you want. That’s the gold standard.” That season-long consistency eluded Solskjær, but his United could veer from famine to feast, sometimes without warning. They won 14 of his first 17 games as a caretaker, went unbeaten in 19 when galvanised by Bruno Fernandes’s arrival and then lost once in a period of 28 league matches last season. “Who’s to say that this group of players can’t go on a run again?” Carrick asked. “They’ve proved over the last two or three years that they’re more than capable. You need to take it step by step, start winning games, getting on a run and build momentum. Anything can happen after that.” As Chelsea can testify.Belenenses’s Primeira Liga game with Benfica was abandoned early in the second half after a Covid outbreak had forced them to start the match with just nine men – two of them goalkeepers. Instead of postponing the game when news emerged that 14 players and three staff members had tested positive, Portuguese league authorities sanctioned it going ahead due to both clubs still being able to field the minimum required seven players. The nine men went behind in the first minute to an own goal, and were 7-0 down at the break. After an extended half-time, just seven Belenenses players returned to start the second half. A minute later the referee was forced to call the game off when João Monteiro, a goalkeeper playing in midfield, dropped to the pitch claiming injury. The Belenenses players had released a joint statement before kick-off, saying: “Football only has heart if it is competitive. Football only has heart if it is sporting. Football only has heart when it is an example of public health. Today, football has lost its heart.” The club’s president, Rui Pedro Soares, said that despite the rash of positive tests he had not requested a postponement due to fears over fixture congestion. “The calendar has not been planned well – and the consequences are clear to see.”