Britain’s manufacturers are facing a “perfect storm” crisis of rapidly rising costs and towering debts that many fear could push them over the brink, according to a new survey. The leading industry trade body on Monday urged the government to introduce payment holidays on loans, warning that thousands of firms faced a “tipping point” that could make their business models unviable. Make UK said the UK’s manufacturing sector was facing “an unprecedented combination of a post-Covid credit, cash and costs crunch”. It said the UK’s factories were struggling with the burden of repaying debts racked up to get them through the pandemic as well as grappling with a raft of other challenges from supply chain disruption to shortages of HGV drivers and energy costs. James Brougham, the organisation’s senior economist, said: “Industry is facing the perfect storm … Given the inflationary spiral shows every sign of continuing to climb, many companies fear a tipping point that could make their business models unviable.” The trade body and accountancy firm RSM said their survey of more than 200 company finance directors found almost half (48%) had had trouble fulfilling orders as the supply chain crisis intensifies. Britain’s supply chain meltdown, much of which relates to Brexit, is leading to gaps on retailers’ shelves and price rises, and has prompted warnings of potential shortages of everything from Christmas trees to festive alcohol. Shoppers have already had to deal with shortages of a range of items. Supermarkets have been using cardboard cutouts of fruit, vegetables and other groceries to fill gaps on shelves, while big brands such as crisps firm Walkers and outlets such as McDonald’s and Nando’s have also been affected. Meanwhile, a global shortage of computer chips has caused problems for a number of industries. Britain’s manufacturing industry has endured its worst downturn for more than 30 years, with many companies taking on huge levels of debt in order to stay afloat. The closely watched survey found that two-thirds of companies (65%) said a lack of cash had hampered their growth plans. Many manufacturing companies made use of the various government support schemes including the coronavirus business interruption loan scheme, the bounce-back loan scheme and the Covid corporate financing facility, though those have all now closed. Another government programme, the Recovery Loan Scheme, is currently open to businesses of any size, but will be scaled back in eligibility and generosity from January. The new survey indicated manufacturing was facing a “sharp inflationary spiral” which threatened to reach a level that would be disastrous for some firms. At the same time, many companies are also facing a liquidity squeeze as customers and suppliers cling on to cash or change their payment terms. In response to the challenging trading conditions and increased levels of risk, almost four in 10 companies (38%) said they had used, or intended to use, restructuring, turnaround or insolvency professionals. Make UK urged ministers to consider introducing payment holidays for the loans companies took out as a precautionary measure to provide them with vital breathing space. Mike Thornton, head of manufacturing at RSM, said: “Manufacturers are facing a variety of headwinds, from staff shortages, supply chain disruption, soaring energy prices and an increased debt burden post-Covid.” Rapidly implementing plans to address these issues will be crucial to ensuring firms emerge post-pandemic in a strong viable position, he added. A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting business as they grow and recover from the pandemic – our Recovery Loan Scheme is available to those looking to secure further finance and maintains the generous 80% government guarantee to ensure lenders continue to have the confidence to lend. This is in addition to Pay as you Grow, which gives businesses up to 10 years to pay back Covid loans as they recover, and the introduction of the super-deduction – the biggest two-year business tax cut in modern British history.”This year’s property market is poised to become the busiest for 14 years, with one in 16 privately owned homes on course to change hands by the end of December, according to new data. The property website Zoopla also said the annual rate of UK house price growth was running at 6.9% – up from 3.5% in the same month last year – and that the average cost of a home had risen by £15,500 over the past 12 months. Zoopla said it was forecasting that 2021 would be the UK’s busiest year for the property market since 2007 in terms of property transactions as the pandemic prompted many households to re-evaluate their priorities and the government’s stamp duty holiday encouraged sales. The website’s UK data for October comes days after official figures showed that house sales tumbled by more than half in the weeks immediately after the end of the stamp duty holiday in England and Northern Ireland. HM Revenue and Customs last week reported that transactions across the UK slumped by 52% in the space of a month to reach 76,900 in October after thousands of homebuyers rushed to complete their purchases the previous month and beat the government’s end-of-September stamp duty holiday deadline. The record surge in activity earlier in the year had also been driven by government guarantees for mortgages and a “race for space” prompted by the pandemic that has made many homebuyers prioritise properties with bigger gardens and more room for working from home. Zoopla said: “2021’s property market will be defined by the pandemic-led re-evaluation of the home, with many households compelled to make a move.” It said that while the annual price growth figure of 6.9% recorded in October marked a slight easing back from the above 7% growth recorded in August and September this year, the average rate of growth over the last three months was higher than at any time since 2014, underlining the strength of the market. The most recent house price surveys from the UK’s biggest mortgage lenders depict a property market that is continuing to defy many expert’s expectations. Halifax said earlier this month that UK house prices rose for a fourth month running in October, adding 0.9% to the average cost of a home. The rival lender Nationwide said property values increased by 0.7% in October. However, interest rate rises – the first is expected next month – and rising inflation could put a brake on the market.The emergence of Omicron has prompted widespread speculation that it may be more resistant to Covid-19 vaccines than existing variants, including Delta. But what does that mean for the average double-vaccinated person? All the vaccines currently available in the UK work by training the immune system against the coronavirus spike protein – the key it uses to infect cells by binding to the ACE2 receptor. Omicron possesses more than 30 mutations in this protein, including 10 in the so-called “receptor-binding domain” (RBD) – the specific part that latches on to this receptor. Delta has two RBD mutations. However, even with all these changes, there will still be areas (epitopes) to which antibodies and T cells – which grow in response to previous infection or vaccination – will be able to respond. “If you scribble the mutations on to a picture of the spike protein’s crystal structure, and relate that to all of the main antibody activities that we know about, it looks kind of terrifying – like, most of your key, neutralising antibody targets will be shot to pieces, so what’s going to be left of your immune protection?” said Danny Altmann, professor of immunology at Imperial College London. “And yet, the soundings we’re getting from South Africa seem to be saying that it doesn’t look severe, and the people who are going to hospital are the unvaccinated, rather than the vaccinated, as if vaccination was still buying [them] some cover.” Then there are T cells – immune cells that recognise and attack virus-infected cells, and educate antibody-producing B cells about the viral risk they are facing. “We all think that the T cells can see the differences [between variants], and that the T cell repertoire is much more impervious to it, so that might also buy you some protection,” Altmann said. The question is, how much protection? We know that people who have been double-jabbed can, and do, get infected with the Delta variant – although the chances of this happening are approximately three times lower than if they hadn’t been vaccinated. More importantly, vaccinated individuals are roughly nine times less likely to die if they do become infected. Although it looks as though infection with Omicron is even more likely, Prof Paul Morgan, an immunologist at Cardiff University, said: “I think a blunting rather than a complete loss [of immunity] is the most likely outcome. “The virus can’t possibly lose every single epitope on its surface, because if it did that spike protein couldn’t work any more. So, while some of the antibodies and T cell clones made against earlier versions of the virus, or against the vaccines may not be effective, there will be others, which will remain effective.” Further boosting that protection, by broadening access to third doses of Covid-19 vaccines, is therefore a good idea. Morgan said: “If half, or two-thirds, or whatever it is, of the immune response is not going to be effective, and you’re left with the residual half, then the more boosted that is the better.” For individuals who have been double-jabbed and infected with Delta, the picture is better still. “If you’ve been double-jabbed and then infected with Delta and recovered, then you have got a very broad, very effective immune response, that probably covers pretty much any variant that you can think of,” said David Matthews, professor of virology at the University of Bristol. This is because such individuals have been exposed to the virus (through infection with Delta) and the spike protein from the original Wuhan strain (through vaccination). “It means you’ve got an antibody response that covers both classic and modern strains and a very broad T cell response, not just against the spike protein, but against all the other proteins that Sars-CoV-2 makes – and that’s incredibly helpful,” Matthews said. The biggest worry is for those who remain unvaccinated. “If they are right that this virus is even better at transmitting than Delta, and it looks like they are, what will happen is that it will speed up the rate at which this virus finds the unvaccinated and puts them in hospitals, and that will therefore increase the pressure on the NHS,” said Matthews. “That is what will trigger a lockdown, if hospitalisation rates go above a certain threshold, whatever that is.” There are some reasons to be optimistic, however. The first is that we don’t yet know how the Omicron variant will behave in a highly vaccinated population, such as the UK’s. “It is quite possible that people who have had two or, better still, three doses of existing vaccines will be well protected against it,” said Dr Peter English, a retired consultant in communicable disease control. “But it is also possible that we will have much less protection from existing vaccines against this new variant. We do not yet have enough information to know.” Another is the existence of antiviral drugs, such as molnupiravir, to which Omicron should still be responsive. Nearly half a million doses of this twice-daily pill were due to be delivered this month, and will be given as a priority to elderly Covid patients and those with particular vulnerabilities, such as weakened immune systems, through a national study being run by the NHS. Because the drug is most effective when given in the early stages of infection, the MHRA recommends it is used as soon as possible after a positive test for Covid and within five days of symptoms appearing. Existing therapies, such as the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone, are also likely to work against Omicron, because it targets the body’s response to the virus, rather than the virus itself. Finally, there is the possibility of modifying the existing vaccines to match the Omicron variant, if it really does evade vaccine-induced immune responses to a significant degree – something we won’t know for a number of weeks. English said: “The mRNA and vector platforms allow very rapid changes to be made to the precise antigens used. This means that it would be possible, relatively quickly (within a matter of months), to produce a vaccine with antigens tailored to a new variant.” Omicron is undoubtedly a bump in the road leading us out of this pandemic, and quite possibly a major pothole, but based on what we know so far, it seems unlikely to send us back to where we were a year ago. However, the more people who are fully jabbed, and have access to those third doses, the more certain of this we are likely to be.The religious discrimination bill inquiry should not consider exemptions that allow schools to discriminate against teachers and students for their sexuality, the chair, Anne Webster, has said. The Nationals MP said the inquiry is “specifically about religious discrimination” and that discrimination on other grounds should be dealt with separately, even if stakeholders use the inquiry to raise concerns about LGBT teachers and students. The comments, made to Guardian Australia on Monday, rebuff an attempt by Liberal moderate MPs and Labor to use the inquiry to consider religious exemptions to the Sex Discrimination Act. Scott Morrison and Michaelia Cash have referred those exemptions to the Australian Law Reform Commission and refuse to consider amendments alongside the religious discrimination bill, despite Morrison telling reporters on Thursday he opposes schools sacking gay teachers or expelling gay students. Equality advocates have warned that the positive right for educational institutions to discriminate on the basis of religious ethos contained in the bill will exacerbate existing exemptions that allow them to discriminate against staff and students. At the final sitting week of the year, it is still unclear whether the bill will come to a vote in the lower house. Liberal MP Warren Entsch has warned he will vote against until an inquiry has reported, and Labor’s position is still unclear. On Friday Morrison and Cash moved to neutralise calls for a joint select committee to consider the bill by referring it instead to the joint human rights committee to report back by 4 February. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Liberal senator, Andrew Bragg, told the Guardian the inquiry would show that “we can fix it in one go” by dealing with religious exemptions alongside the bill. The joint human rights committee chair, Nationals MP Anne Webster, said “I’m sure people will raise that but we’re not looking at that until after the religious discrimination bill”. “Once we have completed our processes, the other [discrimination acts] can be looked at,” she said. “What the prime minister and attorney general have said is correct – the religious discrimination bill is a shield not a weapon. “My advice is that the bill needs to be considered on its merit: not the Sex Discrimination Act, not the Disability Discrimination Act, the inquiry is specifically about religious discrimination.” “I’m sure that it will be a challenge to keep the subject [religious discrimination] the subject [of the inquiry].” Webster said that the religious exemptions to other discrimination laws and their use could be reviewed in more appropriate forums, including court cases about alleged discrimination. The comments set up a stoush with Labor, which agrees with Liberal moderates that the inquiry should consider both issues together and is still negotiating behind closed doors for a better forum to inquire into the bill, such as a joint select committee. The deputy chair, Labor MP Graham Perrett, told Guardian Australia “of course” the issue of discrimination against gay teachers and students should be considered by the inquiry. “It should consider all of the implications that might flow from Mr Morrison’s legislation.” At the start of the final sitting week of the year it is still unclear whether the religious discrimination bill will be voted on in the lower house. Although some interpreted reference to the joint human rights committee as an indication MPs would not be expected to vote on it until after the February reporting date, the government could yet push for it to go through the lower house with Labor support. Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, told reporters in Canberra it would be an act of “bad faith” by the government to seek a vote before the committee reported back and called on parties to allow proper scrutiny of the bill by opposing such a move. On Sunday the Liberal MP, Warren Entsch, told The Australian he would not vote for the bill until after the inquiry reported. “We need to look at it closely. We have only had a very short opportunity to look at it and I want it to go through the process,” Entsch reportedly told The Australian. “When you introduce legislation and try to push it through five minutes before midnight and say ‘everything is OK, trust me’, I have been around the place long enough to know that that is a recipe for all sorts of problems.”The Australian Human Rights Commission has agreed to brief the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins before it hands over the much-anticipated review into whether parliament house has a toxic workplace culture to the Morrison government. Guardian Australia understands the commission initially flagged Higgins would not be briefed until the final report was made public by tabling in parliament. This is despite the former Coalition adviser being the catalyst for the investigation. But that position has shifted in recent days. The briefing is imminent, because the report is due to be handed to the Morrison government on 30 November. The sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins was engaged by the government back in March to consider what about parliamentary culture might increase risk factors for political staff and other participants. Jenkins was asked to examine any legislative, cultural, structural or other barriers to reporting alleged incidents in parliamentary workplaces, and also consider the current response and reporting mechanisms in parliamentary workplaces. The review will consider the current Members of parliament Staff Act – the legislation under which political staffers are employed – and “assess the extent to which current legislation, policies, processes and practices promote or impede safe and respectful workplaces”. The sex discrimination commissioner’s review process was triggered when Higgins alleged she was raped in a ministerial office in March 2019. The man accused of raping Higgins will stand trial in June. Bruce Lehrmann is pleading not guilty to the charge and denies that any form of sexual activity took place. The Australian Capital Territory supreme court earlier this month extended Lehrmann’s bail until a criminal case conference in February, and set a tentative date of 6 June for a trial expected to last three to four weeks. Lehrmann is facing one charge of sexual intercourse without consent in relation to the alleged assault in the Parliament House office of the former defence industry minister Linda Reynolds in the early hours of 23 March 2019. Higgins’ allegation has triggered multiple investigatory processes, including an inquiry by the prime minister’s chief of staff John Kunkel into whether or not the media office engaged in negative backgrounding after the assault allegation was first revealed by news.com.au The Kunkel investigation was triggered by a formal complaint by Higgins. He ultimately declined to make a finding that the prime minister’s office briefed negatively against Higgins’ partner, citing a lack of first-hand evidence and the seriousness of the allegation. Higgins was distressed when the government made that report public without briefing her first on the findings as a courtesy. Guardian Australia asked the AHRC whether it intended to brief Higgins ahead of the report being made public. A spokesperson for the commission did not directly answer the question, but said: “Throughout the review process, the wellbeing of participants and stakeholders has been our highest priority”. “We will continue to follow trauma-informed practices in all our communications and processes as we prepare to deliver the final report. Until the final report is tabled and made public, we won’t be commenting publicly on any of those processes”. The final report is much anticipated among staffers who have made complaints. In a progress report on the review made public in July, the commission said it had conducted 222 interviews across the country, with further 125 people registering for an interview, “including 12 current or former commonwealth parliamentarians”. As at 14 July 2021, the commission had received 124 submissions. The ARHC said it had engaged Roy Morgan Research to administer an online survey to investigate the current prevalence and nature of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces, and conduct targeted focus groups from late July 2021. The focus groups were face-to-face sessions scheduled to reach people disinclined to make a formal submission. * Disclosure: Katharine Murphy was interviewed during the AHRC inquiry.The cumulative effect of natural disasters and the Covid-19 pandemic has increased fatigue and stress among volunteers in regional Australia, making it harder for them to provide essential support within the community, a study has found. The Foundation for Rural &amp; Regional Renewal (FRRR) says the resulting burnout among community groups could lead to greater isolation and a loss of critical services in regional areas, if more flexible funding options and better support are not offered. Natalie Egleton, chief executive of the FRRR, says these groups are “the backbone and the fabric of these communities” and are responsible for everything from recreation and arts institutions to emergency services, as well as support for homeless people and those experiencing domestic violence. “You walk into any regional, rural or remote town, pretty much everything you look at from the art, the maintenance of halls and buildings, any event you go to, the local community groups are behind it,” Egleton said. The report showed the social and cultural role played by community organisations is vital, despite the limitations on their resources. More than half of the almost 640 responding community organisations employ no paid staff, are run by volunteers and have a turnover of less than $50,000. In their first study of the rural not-for-profit sector, the FRRR engaged an independent survey expert who ran an open and anonymous survey targeting members, volunteers and employees of grassroots not-for-profit organisations, screening out any from major cities. More than half the groups provided activities to help improve the mental health and wellbeing of their communities, either directly (59%) or indirectly by combatting social isolation (57%), while a little under half (46%) also provided activities to help maintain the physical health of their communities. The report found these organisations were struggling to remain operational because of the impact of constant disruptions over a long period of time, including droughts, fires, floods, a mouse plague and the pandemic, which acted as the “final straw” for many. As a result of Covid-19 restrictions, about a third of community organisations have either reduced volunteer hours, lost volunteers altogether to illness, isolation, relocation or caring responsibilities, or lost them due to a lack of need. The report found that at the same time over a fifth of respondents said that their volunteers are working more to deal with greater demand. Egleton said that as “the number of volunteers is dropping off, a smaller number of people are left holding a larger amount of work and often they’re not getting paid for it”. Sara Jenkins, a coordinator at Corryong Neighbourhood Centre in Victoria’s north-east, said the centre has been “absolutely hammered” since the pandemic, which came after the community was devastated by the black summer bushfires. “They used to come in and say, ‘Someone told me you could help with x or y’. Now they just come in and say, ‘I need help’,” Jenkins said. Before the bushfires the centre was focused on more traditional neighbourhood housing activities centred around social inclusion, education and welfare support. But now it has to concentrate on providing the community with essential services related to unemployment, bushfire recovery projects and disaster payments, digital literacy and an “enormous” number of mental health issues, Jenkins said. Funding and internet concerns The centre is one of many community groups which the FRRR’s research found had increased demand for their services during the pandemic, at the same time as Covid-19 had stymied their normal fundraising revenues. Before the bushfires, the Corryong Neighbourhood Centre was experiencing 15-20% annual growth through its social enterprise bakery, which was able to provide 85% of its turnover. But the revenue from the bakery and workshop has “fallen off a cliff” without tourists and with lockdowns in the area, Jenkins said. The research found community organisations were frustrated that they can only access funding that is project specific, while there is never any assistance to meet the base operating costs. “There’s a clear call to action from this report for the organisations themselves to be funded, not just the project,” Egleton said. One of the basic operating costs that became more urgent amid the pandemic was basic digital connectivity, with approximately a third of all respondents reporting either no internet access or unreliable coverage. Prior to the pandemic, groups could meet and talk face-to-face, but Covid restrictions and unreliable internet coverage has meant many country community groups have been unable to continue their operations. “An organisation or facility in town might have OK internet access but their volunteer base or community members are likely to not have that access,” Egleton said. Penny Judge, a volunteer at Craigie Community Hall and Delegate School of Arts in New South Wales, also believes addressing structural problems is crucial. “Community groups are being called upon increasingly to plug the holes left by government but just don’t have the resources to do it,” Judge said. “Finding a deep commitment to the community is increasingly difficult when the family unit is constantly under pressure due to lack of basic services, job insecurity, stagnant wages, ageing populations and a drift to the cities by the young.” The FRRR study recommended that funding bodies allow the communities greater flexibility in how and when funding can be used. It also recommended that the grant process was streamlined and simplified, and that assurance of long-term funding are provided. Community groups also want access to training and greater external support to help them operate. “The study is telling us that if organisations are better resourced with equipment and personnel training, the organisations will do a lot more, and a lot more effectively,” Egleton said. The Narromine Aviation Museum in NSW, which is run entirely by volunteers, is the shire’s top tourist attraction, according to museum chairman Peter Kierath, who is trying to encourage volunteers to join after numbers declined during the lockdown in western NSW. The museum brings strong economic benefits to the town, Kierath said. “People coming to Narromine specifically to see the museum will go down to the local cafe for coffee and a meal. They might also stay the night.” The FRRR research said that without community groups, “in some cases, the community would simply not exist”. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe federal government has confirmed that a controversial nuclear waste facility will be built near Kimba, in South Australia – but the traditional owners are expected to mount a legal challenge. The resources minister, Keith Pitt, announced two months ago that a 211-hectare site at Napandee, 24km out of Kimba, had been chosen from three potential sites to store Australia’s radioactive waste. After 60 days of further consultation, he confirmed that decision on Monday morning. An Australian Electoral Commission ballot found more than 60% of local residents supported the facility. However, the traditional owners, the Barngarla people, say many of them missed out on the vote because they were not living in the Kimba council area. When surveyed separately, the Barngarla voters unanimously rejected the proposal. At the time, Barngarla Determination Aboriginal Corporation chair Jason Bilney said he planned to launch a judicial review, challenging in the supreme court the selection of Kimba over other sites. Guardian Australia has contacted the corporation for comment. Pitt said the government would now acquire the land to build a new facility that would store low- and medium-level medical waste that is scattered across more than 100 locations in Australia. It would create 45 jobs, he said, and fulfil the obligation to securely store the waste. “Nuclear medicine is used in the diagnosis of a variety of heart, lung and musculoskeletal conditions, as well as the treatment of specific cancers, and a byproduct of its production is low-level radioactive waste,” Pitt said. “Along with the benefits comes a responsibility to manage the byproducts. Without a facility like this, we can’t enjoy the benefits from vital nuclear medicines on an ongoing basis.” The new facility will house low-level waste permanently, and medium-level waste temporarily, until a permanent solution is found for that. Conservationists have told a parliamentary inquiry into the future of the Lucas Heights nuclear facility that the Sydney site should be expanded to take the nation’s waste until that long-term decision is made, rather than having a new facility built. A spokesperson for Australia’s Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, which runs Lucas Heights, welcomed Pitt’s confirmation on Monday and said the Napandee facility would be “critical infrastructure”. “Delivery of a national facility will allow Ansto to focus on our core business of medicine production and science and innovation,” they said.Over the weekend, men, women, boys and girls gathered in various parts of the nation to play for their clubs. It is the raw manifestation of Cricket Australia’s core business: people playing, and enjoying, cricket. Culture is never built in one place, but lots of it is built here. For the men, power and status are commensurately apportioned to those who deliver runs, wickets, and stories for the team and club. So, if you’re a “good stick and a good schooner”, you tend to make the rules. Stories abound in the stretching circles. Traditional machismo rules the day. Upon winning, it’s not unheard of for clubs to sing songs referencing binge drinking and sexual promiscuity. If it’s not being bellowed in song, it’s being side mouthed in conversation. There are many good people in Australian cricket, and some of those songs and conversations are changing, but in the technical sense they are an authentic representation of values, right or wrong. Yes, there are “culture sessions”. Butchers paper. Markers. Words. They’re typically the object of derision. As Cricket Australia is often wont to say, all Australian internationals started with club cricket. The last fortnight demonstrated yet again that there is a gaping chasm between the corporate fantasy and grittier reality of who cricketers are. The public knows it, the players feel it too. As Cricket Australia managed to wedge itself on the Tim Paine farrago – an episode still barely decipherable against the swirl of opaque interests, timelines and detail – the organisation at least made clear that his crime wasn’t damaging behaviour, but damaging the brand. An internal investigation in 2018 cleared Paine of any wrongdoing over the explicit texts he sent to a female Cricket Australia staff member, and the exchange was found to have been “consensual”. In the three years between then and Paine’s presser, the only tangible change seemed to be the risk of public knowledge. Evidently, that was Paine’s punishable transgression. To that end, one might imagine that CA’s most difficult conversations weren’t with a baying media or a disgruntled public, but with the leads of its major sponsors. Paine had been written and cast as the turnaround leader, the post-sandpaper culture carrier. From the way he gloved the ball to his skincare regime, literally everything Paine did appeared clean and neat. A lot of it was, to his credit. While it took a special kind of cognitive dissonance to think this would go away, ultimately the moment Paine was no longer able to carry brands to help sell energy deals or mortgage packages was the moment he was abandoned. Cricket in this country courts an uneasy connection to both aggression and puritanism. Much like the captain who instructs their players to “play your shots but don’t take risks”, there is a contradiction at its heart. While everyone curates their image in one way or another, the mythology and symbolism afforded Australian cricketers and accoutrements like the Baggy Green run deeper than Boddington – which is a gold mine, too. “Get ready for a broken fucken arm”. How many Weetbix do you eat? “I would have given him the hogpile…squeeze his guts out of his ass”. Sign up with Alinta today. Players, current and former, are false gods. In England – a nation whose own experience gives them a trained radar for fault – this stuff is the source of great mirth. They see the contradiction. Over the weekend Mark Wood noted “this ‘baggy green’ thing they keep talking about,” before confecting England’s own “Baggy Blue” to underscore the superficiality of it all. Before that, the sandpaper was their Shangri La, the pairing of reckless chicanery with national moral panic. Australian cricketing exceptionalism is a powerful mover of product, but when humanity rears its head, the inverse becomes true, too. All of which serves as another cautionary tale for both Cricket Australia and Pat Cummins. In announcing his ascension on the official CA website, the first sentence couched it as “Australia’s 47th Test captain”, invoking the chronological convention preferred for US presidents. He is being positioned as a flawless character, a man of gravitas, telegenic, amiable, “squeaky clean”. Perfect for the brand. There is nothing to suggest Cummins is not all of those things. But he is the best person to captain the side not because he can sell Weetbix (though he can), but because, on balance, he’s the best leader for his team. It’s an excellent appointment, but it’s one brick laid, with many more required. Cummins knows this, and was wise to dampen those saintly expectations in his first media foray, just as CA will be wise to tread a truer path in reconciling corporate expectation and human reality. Failure to do so will result in the continued cycle of boom-and-bust scandal, and no amount of empty corporate curation will help.G7 health ministers will hold an emergency meeting on Monday about the new Omicron Covid-19 variant spreading across the world and forcing border closures, as experts race to determine the level of threat posed by the new strain. The meeting was called by G7 chair Britain, which is among a steadily growing number of countries that have detected cases of the heavily mutated new variant. On Monday, Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said he was barring all foreign arrivals over the new variant, after saying: “We are taking measures with a strong sense of crisis.” The ban comes into effect on Tuesday. Kishida said Japan, where more than 76% of the population is fully vaccinated, would go ahead with plans to administer booster shots from next month, beginning with older people and health workers. The move by Japan, which is reporting consistently low Covid-19 case numbers, comes a day after it tightened restrictions on travellers from South Africa and eight other countries, only weeks after it relaxed restrictions on some travellers from overseas. Omicron was first discovered in South Africa and in an effort to stop transmission, countries have moved swiftly to re-impose travel restrictions. Japan’s move followed Israel, which has barred entry to all foreign nationals. The US, Britain, Brazil and Canada were among many other countries to introduce travel curbs. The strain has so far been detected in more than a dozen countries across Europe, Africa and Asia. It has also been confirmed in North America, with cases detected in Canada. The border closures have been criticised by South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, who called on nations to lift the travel bans “before any further damage is done to our economies”. The head of the World Health Organization in Africa also urged countries to follow the science rather than impose flight bans in a bid to contain the new Covid strain. “With the Omicron variant now detected in several regions of the world, putting in place travel bans that target Africa attacks global solidarity,” said WHO regional director Matshidiso Moeti. As countries rushed to close their borders, scientists raced to try to understand whether the new variant was more alarming than other versions of the virus. It is not yet clear what level of protection exisiting vaccines provide or how quickly Omicron spreads. The top US infectious disease official, Dr Anthony Fauci, told President Joe Biden on Sunday it would take about two weeks to have definitive information on Omicron. Fauci said he believed existing vaccines were likely to provide “a degree of protection against severe cases of Covid”, and officials reiterated their recommendation for vaccinated Americans to get booster shots. Biden was due to update the public on the new variant and the US response on Monday, the White House said. European Commission chief Ursula von der Leyen said vaccine manufacturers needed two to three weeks “to get a full picture of the quality of the mutations”. “We know we are now in a race against time,” she said. To combat the spread of the Omicron variant, the UK could expand its booster vaccination scheme as early as Monday. Australia is also reviewing its booster shot time frames. The new strain has thrown a spotlight on huge disparities in vaccination rates around the globe. Even as many developed countries are giving third-dose boosters, less than 7% of people in poorer countries have received their first Covid-19 shot, according to medical and human rights groups. In Britain, health secretary Sajid Javid said new Covid rules will be enforced from Tuesday, including mandatory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport in England, and tighter restrictions on passengers arriving from abroad.It was a summer day in 2017 when Sylwia Gregorczyk-Abram, a 34-year-old lawyer, heard a crazy idea. She had been messaged by a legal acquaintance, Michał Wawrykiewicz, who like her was worried about changes that Poland’s nationalist government was introducing to the judicial system. He wondered how they could convince people that the independence of the judiciary was not some abstract nicety but the firm ground underpinning democracy. “He had this crazy idea,” she recalled. “How to convince people, citizens, why independence of the judiciary is so important. Ask famous people, celebrities, actors to do it for us.” Gregorczyk-Abram was the right person for the job. Working at the Warsaw office of an international law firm since 2006, she had co-founded Constitution Week in Poland, an initiative where lawyers give talks in schools to inform teenagers about law. She called her friend Maria Ejchart-Dubois, a human rights expert and co-founder of Constitution Week, who in turn contacted Paulina Kieszkowska-Knapik, a high-flying specialist in pharmaceutical law. The four met at one of Poland’s largest demonstrations in years. “People were protesting all over Poland at every street where the court is. They realised instinctively that something is taken away,” said Wawrykiewicz. And that was the spark to create Wolne Sądy, the Free Courts Foundation. Instead of drafting legal papers and perusing legal tomes, the lawyers found themselves acting, scripting and directing short films intended to make the rule of law real. “Imagine you had a car accident and the other driver was somehow connected with a politician,” said Ejchart-Dubois. “Is the court going to be fair? Or you are a victim of domestic violence and the abuser is a member of a political party.” Both such cases subsequently materialised, said Kieszkowska-Knapik. There were “hundreds of examples”, she said. The early films featured actors, entertainers and writers, from the host of The Voice of Poland, Barbara Kurdej-Szatan, to the Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk. Some of the biggest hits starred the Wolne Sądy lawyers themselves: putting a legal twist on a scene from the Richard Curtis romcom Love Actually; playing children being given a nightmarish Christmas present; rapping about the constitution in a tribute to the Beastie Boys’ video parody of 1970s US cop shows, Sabotage. “It was a new concept for us, to communicate through movies, not to write articles, not to write books,” said Gregorczyk-Abram, speaking with her fellow lawyers in Brussels where they were collecting an award from the European parliament. Anna Wójcik, a researcher at the Polish Academy of Science, said: “They were very innovative because they started communicating in a very attractive format to the general public. Of course you can say it’s attractive to people with certain tastes, living in urban areas … But they provided some accessible information about what is happening.” The videos were only the start of a legal odyssey that would take them to the grand chambers of Europe’s highest courts and the European Commission headquarters in Brussels. The Wolne Sądy lawyers believe they were instrumental in persuading EU authorities to launch legal action against the Polish government over the forced retirement of supreme court judges, an attempt by the ruling Law and Justice party (PiS) to control Poland’s top court. The group has filed dozens of cases at the EU’s top court in Luxembourg and the European court of human rights in Strasbourg. In one landmark victory, this month the ECHR found Poland’s government to be “in blatant defiance of the rule of law”. In 13 rulings from Europe’s top courts, the Polish government has lost 13 times, according to Wolne Sądy’s tally. The group has also represented judges in Poland forced out of their jobs, including Małgorzata Gersdorf, the head of the supreme court, whom the government attempted unsuccessfully to force out via early retirement. “And yet the government never follows the verdicts,” Kieszkowska-Knapik said. “It is astonishing. So after every case … we need another case.” Part of Wolne Sądy’s work is documenting every change PiS has made to the legal system since coming to power in 2015, summed up in the report 2,000 Days of Lawlessness. It wants to give a future government a roadmap to return to the rule of law. “Every single idea we have in our plan is covered by the judgments of one of the European courts, so it’s not our opinions,” said Ejchart-Dubois. “So that is why we started all those proceedings in the court of justice, in the court of human rights, just to have proof, the coverage of the judgments.” They are trying to convince opposition parties to unite behind this roadmap, to avoid internecine haggling over the rule of law. As PiS enters its seventh winter in power, all this pro bono work on top of their day jobs is taking a toll. “We are extremely tired,” said Ejchart-Dubois. “But we are like guys with a rope: when one falls, the rest [step up],” added Kieszkowska-Knapik. All four began their legal careers in more optimistic days, as Poland headed towards EU membership. “We observed from 1989 Poland developing, going in the right direction, going to western civilisation, we didn’t want to lose it,” Wawrykiewicz said. Poland’s government is likely to keep them in business. The ruling party controlled by Jarosław Kaczyński is planning another overhaul of the supreme court. According to leaked documents seen by Polish media, the blueprint would mean any supreme court judge wishing to continue in post would have to be approved by the government-controlled national council of the judiciary. “It’s quite devilish,” said Anna Wójcik, who observed that the proposals would make it easier to launch disciplinary proceedings against judges. “Who has disciplinary proceedings launched against them today in Poland? People who are critical of the government.” The Wolne Sądy lawyers will be there to contest any such plan, on screen and in court. “Without this social resistance we would be like Belarus,” Kieszkowska-Knapik said.The first time, he stumbled on it by accident, after following a dirt track through fields of sugar cane that came to a clearing. There was a sign, Hakeem Ward remembers, beneath which someone had left an offering. “The sign said it was a slave burial ground,” he says. “We went and Googled it, and then I realised it was actually one of the biggest slave burial grounds in the western hemisphere.” Ward, 24, lives nearby, within sight of the turquoise waters that lap at Barbados’ south coast, but had never learned until then of the Newton Slave Burial Ground, where the remains of an estimated 570 enslaved people were found interred in unmarked graves. At school he says they brushed lightly over the history of the slave trade on the island. “We learned a lot of stuff about Christopher Columbus and how he discovered and colonised the world.” But the past still agitates, making itself known. Dogs occasionally vanish into the bushland, returning with skulls and other remains, Ward says. He and his friends try to avoid hanging out near the site. “With the spiritual energy, we don’t want to see anything,” he says. “Because we see things, and we want to avoid that as much as possible.” Late on Monday night, local time, Barbados will declare itself a republic, becoming the first nation to remove Queen Elizabeth II as its head of state in nearly three decades. The transition, flagged last year in the thick of activism inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement, is being executed amicably, in the presence of Prince Charles, and circumspectly, more than 20 years since it was recommended by a government commission. But, unmistakably, it is a repudiation of the British monarchy, part of a wider campaign that includes strengthening ties with the African nations from which most Barbadians claim heritage and renewing demands for the UK government to make reparations for its historical crimes. Aimed at authoring a liberated future, many hope it will also soothe the restless ghosts of the past. ‘Barbados was a hellhole’ As its peak tourism season approaches, Barbados is bearing the brunt of its worst Covid-19 wave. Masks are ubiquitous and many supermarkets and government buildings have installed imposing machines to check temperatures. Still, visitors are coming, drawn by the island’s famously pristine beaches, lush hinterland and gentle weather. It was these same natural blessings that made the easternmost island in the Caribbean an exquisite laboratory for the development of a new form of capitalism in the 17th century. Sugar, backbreaking to produce and for centuries reserved for Europe’s ultra-wealthy, flourished in Barbados’ rich soil. The island’s even topography offered vast space for plantations. But it was a third innovation, the perfection of a model using enslaved Africans to work the fields, which set off a “sugar revolution” that made England extraordinarily wealthy and created a template that soon spread across the Americas. “It was in Barbados that the slavery plantation production model was invented – right here,” says David Comissiong, the country’s ambassador to Caricom, a Caribbean regional integration body. Reclassified under British law as property, the men, women and children who worked the cane fields of Barbados were subject to unimaginable brutality. The first systematic study of the health of those buried at the Newton Slave Burial Ground found the average life expectancy of those examined was 18 years old, with the lives of women thought to be especially appalling: until then, no lower mean age of death had been documented among enslaved females anywhere in the world. “Barbados was a hellhole,” Comissiong says. “For black people, Barbados was a brutal, hellish society.” It is easy to be among the more than 1 million people who visited Barbados each year before the pandemic and never encounter this history. There is a single statue commemorating emancipation, at the centre of a busy roundabout, depicting a man who has come to be identified with Bussa, the leader of a failed 19th-century revolt, whose broken chains dangle from arms raised skyward. For centuries after slavery ceased, over the island’s shameful history, “there was almost a kind of indifference, a kind of silence”, recalls Esther Phillips, Barbados’ poet laureate, that she believes stems in part from guilt and shame among those who were freed. “Who wants to revisit the pain of trauma, once you get out of it, or appear to get out?” That muffling was passed down through generations, and reinforced in the colonial education of her youth, which some argue has not sufficiently been reformed to this day. “I never knew there was anything called West Indian history or Caribbean history,” Phillips says. “I knew all about the English queens and kings.” The decades since Barbados became independent 55 years ago have seen gradual efforts to face the past, and confront its implications for the future, but always cautiously. A government commission in the 1970s examined the question of becoming a republic and advised against it, conscious that similar experiments in Caribbean states such as Suriname and Guyana had led to authoritarianism and instability. Even the Barbadian leaders who wanted to break away from the monarchy recognised they still lived in the world colonialism made, and had an economy critically dependent on attracting a pipeline of sun-starved British tourists. “The fear, I think reasonably, was that it would not be received well, and that there would be a narrative, for example, of telling tourists in the UK: ‘Maybe you should wait about going to Barbados, because you should make sure the political situation is stable,’” says Melanie Newton, a professor of history at the University of Toronto. Part of this conservatism, too, was pragmatic: Barbados was building a society that was, by any measure, a tremendous success, with some of the best human-development indicators in the formerly colonised world, an enormous leap from the desperate conditions that prevailed in the last decades of British rule. “Barbados has a very strong public service system, amazing education, good healthcare,” Newton says. “And a lot of that is paid for by tourism and international business and investment banking.” ‘In Barbados, what are we doing?’ Over the past week, workers have been busy erecting and painting a dais in central Bridgetown’s national heroes’ square, formerly called Trafalgar, where the handover ceremony will take place at 11pm on Monday, and the surrounding colonial buildings – including the country’s Gothic parliament, the third oldest in the world – are decked in the national colours, ultramarine and gold. At the head of the square stands a grand pedestal – with nothing on it. The year 2020 produced seismic changes everywhere. In Barbados,too, it was a watershed, opening the way for government to finally propose a republic that had been promised for decades but always postponed. Alexander Downes was supposed to be studying in Australia, but was trapped at home in Barbados early in the year when borders suddenly closed. He would pass national heroes’ square, glancing at the statue of the English admiral Horatio Nelson that had stood there since 1813, three years earlier than its twin in London. At 32, Downes was part of the first generation without memory of Barbados’ colonial-era nor its hangover in the early years of independence. He and his friends were more inclined to question the things their parents took for granted, he says. “Sometimes I would talk to my father, as we drove through certain areas, and he would be like, ‘Oh, when I was a kid, I couldn’t come to this area.’ And I’d be, like, why not?” Those things included the pride of place given to the defender of British slavery Nelson, whose bronze statue had first stirred small protests decades earlier, to which the government had responded in 1990 by rotating it to face away from town. “The compromise wasn’t, let’s get rid of it,” says Downes. “It was, literally, just turn it.” In the middle of the year, Black Lives Matter protests were spreading across the world, including to Barbados, and Downes sensed that in his careful society, something was shifting. After consulting with friends, he posted a petition calling for Nelson to come down. “I said to myself, in Barbados, what are we doing?” he says. “We have a colonial past, we have a past steeped in racism … [The statue] is just brick and mortar. If we can start with this, then we can get the ball rolling to start addressing some bigger issues.” It caught fire, attracting more than 10,000 signatures and culminated in meetings with government officials and, months after, confirmation that Nelson would be removed in November 2020 and relocated to a museum. Some objected, including among the more than 90% of the population with African heritage, urging him to not to meddle with the past, Downes says. “They were saying, ‘Why do you want to move this thing that has been there from before you were even born? Have some respect for your history.’ I’m, like, 10 years from now, what I do today is going to be our history as well,” he says. At the ceremony to mark the removal of the statue, Barbados’ prime minister, Mia Mottley, called the tribute to the hero of Trafalgar, “an assertion of power, of dominance”. She held her phone to the crowd, telling them her screensaver was the reggae artist Bob Marley, “to remind me always that the mission of our generation is the mental emancipation of our people”. In the ruptures of the year, Mottley appeared to sense an opportunity. The same day the statue was dislodged, her government announced that, in a year’s time, Barbados would remove the queen as head of state and elect its own president. Monarchists have worried for years that the end of the reign of Elizabeth Windsor may trigger a new wave of former colonies to seek native heads of state. Barbados suggests that threat, at least in the Caribbean, may have arrived in her diamond jubilee years instead, as a conviction stirring in the minds of some of her youngest generation of subjects. Asked what the crown means to him, Downes is clear. “It signifies a time when people who looked like me … were almost considered just a part in the process of generating wealth,” he says. “Humanity was not considered. Civil rights were not considered.” At sundown, before the cars on the nearby highway switch on their lights, the view from the top of the slope of the Newton Slave Burial Ground appears much as it may have three hundred years ago. The stone chimney of the plantation’s boiling house still stands. There is still the sea on the horizon and bristling pastures of sugar cane in every direction. The burial site, too, is still an open field, but for the park benches recently installed at its edges, and rows of bougainvillaea and crotons lining the perimeter. They are freshly planted, some still seedlings, and dwarfed by the surrounding cane fields, but growing. • The map in this article was amended on 30 November 2021 to add detail about the dispute over the British Indian Ocean Territory/Chagos Islands.The Bosnian Serb leader accused of risking war by pursuing the breakup of Bosnia-Herzegovina has dismissed the threat of western sanctions and hinted at an imminent summit with Vladimir Putin, saying: “I was not elected to be a coward”. In an interview with the Guardian, Milorad Dodik, the Serb member of the tripartite leadership of Bosnia-Herzegovina, said he would not be deterred by the outcry from London, Washington, Berlin and Brussels. Dodik, 62, a key figure in Bosnian politics for 30 years, who was once a favourite of the west, insisted his plans need not lead to the end of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Sanctions and cuts to EU funding would only force him to take up offers of investment from China, Dodik said, and he expected to see Russia’s leader “pretty soon”. “And I even think that I like that”, Dodik said. “When I go to Putin there are no requests. He just says, ‘what is it I can help with?’. Whatever I discussed with him, I’ve never been cheated on it. I don’t know what else to base trust upon, if not that. With [China’s leader] Xi Jinping, he also says, ‘if there is anything I can help with I am there’.” Dodik has been widely condemned in recent weeks over his stated intention to withdraw the Serbian part of Bosnia-Herzegovina from state-level institutions, such as the tax administration, judiciary, intelligence agency and even the national army, in order to create a Serb force. The proposal has been described in a report to the UN as tantamount to “secession”, and a dangerous risk to the 1995 Dayton peace accord, which ended the civil war that cost about 100,000 lives after the breakup of Yugoslavia. That peace deal established a state, Bosnia-Herzegovina, made up of two entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, consisting predominantly of Bosniak Muslims and Croats, and the Serbian Republika Srpska. Bosnia’s three-member presidency is held by representatives of those three main ethnic groups. Under the so-called Bonn powers of 1997, substantial powers of law-making were also granted to the office of the high representative (OHR) in charge of implementing the deal. Those powers were used extensively by the former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown, during his time as high representative, to centralise the administration of the country. Most recently, Valentin Inzko, who left the post this summer, used the office to outlaw the denial of genocide, in response to attempts by some people to play down the scope of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre. This led Dodik in July to pull Republika Srpska representatives out of central institutions, and in October to propose taking back powers and transferring land owned by the central state. Dodik, who has long agitated against alleged changes in the balance of power in Bosnia, said he continued to believe in Dayton but that it had been usurped by “an unelected foreigner” imposing 140 or so laws through the position of the high representative, without a democratic mandate. “All the shit here was made by four unelected foreigners,” he said. “The high representatives and three judges [appointed by the European court of human rights], foreigners, in the constitutional court. They do act as a coordinated criminal enterprise against the constitutional arrangement.” Since 2017 Dodik has been banned from travelling to the US, or accessing to assets under its jurisdiction, after he defied Bosnia’s constitutional court by staging a referendum on celebrating Republika Srpska Day, marking the date in 1992 when Bosnian Serbs declared their own state in Bosnia. He recently told Gabriel Escobar, the US deputy assistant secretary, that he “didn’t give a shit” about his threat of further action. Suggestions from Germany of financial sanctions would not deter him either, Dodik said. “Of course, I am not indifferent but I was not elected to be a coward,” he said, speaking in his offices in the Republika Srpska’s administrative centre, Banja Luka. Plans for taking back powers will be on the agenda at a session of the parliament of the Republika Srpska on 10 December, with Dodik emphasising his determination to see them through after another six-month period of talks. He described his vision of the new arrangement as being no more unwieldy than Belgium’s federal state. However, he finessed his public position on the most contentious suggestion – of a new Serb army – by proposing other options. The first, he said, would be reducing the current national army by half. “If you don’t want that then we will have no other choice but to adopt, in line with the constitution of Bosnia-Herzegovina, the formation of the army of the Republic of Srpska, or declare the Republic of Srpska a demilitarised republic,” he said. “So there are three options.” Dodik dismissed as a misfiring joke his recent suggestion that he would surround the national army barracks with Serb forces to push them out, and that unnamed “friends” would rally to his aid should Nato forces intervene. Once described by the then US secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, as a “breath of fresh air” for his backing of Dayton, Dodik said he had been wrongly portrayed as wanting conflict. He did not want Bosnia-Herzegovina to fail, but the “delicate balance” of the agreement had been upset, he said, describing Ashdown as being “the worst” offender. “No I don’t want it to collapse. I only want it to exist on the basis of its constitution. If it can’t function that way, then why should it function at all?” Dodik tapdanced around whether genocide was committed in Srebrenica, where 8,000 Bosniak Muslim men and boys were murdered in July 1995. He said he would not dispute court verdicts on individuals. “No one denies that there was crime there,” he said. “But it’s also true that the story that was told is not the whole truth. An almost identical number of Bosniak Muslims and Serbs were killed. There is no decision there that says genocide was committed by the Serbian people.” Dodik says he still wants to join the EU, despite consistent rejection from countries such as France and the Netherlands. He met Olivér Várhelyi, the EU’s commissioner for enlargement, three times this week, and was warned of a potential loss of funds. “We are supposed to act like we think that there will be enlargement even though we know there won’t be”, Dodik said. “In the meantime, they do offer some programmes and we do appreciate it – we are grateful. But if you wants to bring us closer, then they should quit putting these conditions on me.” “I don’t think I’m a bad guy,” Dodik said of the recent furore prompted by the current high representative, Christian Schmidt, warning of an existential threat to Bosnia-Herzegovina. “I think I’m very realistic.”A new Aboriginal heritage alliance will advise the Morrison government on possible law reform, a month on from a parliamentary report which found “countless instances where cultural heritage has been the victim of the drive for development and commercial gain”. The new group held its first roundtable meeting with environment minister Sussan Ley and the minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, on Monday. It will look at ways to reform legislation, and at how to set standards for states and territories to follow, according to the chairman of the National Native Title Council and co-chair of the First Nations Heritage Protection Alliance, Kado Muir. “This gives us Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples around Australia a brief pause for hope that, together with the federal government, we can come up with a set of legislative reforms that protects sacred sites to a national standard,” Muir said. He said he was hopeful the group would look at ways to put an end to “black tape” – the process whereby Aboriginal heritage has legal status when companies wanting to do business on Aboriginal land seek permission to destroy sites as part of development applications. Muir said he wanted to uncouple Aboriginal heritage from development so sites could be protected and valued as places of cultural and religious significance. “And then hopefully, through this process … we can identify a legislative reform package that takes Aboriginal heritage away from the development approvals framework and really looks at it from the enjoyment and benefit of cultural heritage that we as Aboriginal peoples inherit from our ancestors, that we share not only with other Australians, but other people around the world,” he said. “For me as an Aboriginal person who engages with my heritage and culture as a part of my spiritual awareness and my religion, I will be looking at aligning more with the new religious protections that the federal government is introducing at the moment.” Announcing the partnership, Ley said Indigenous heritage protection was an “all-too-complex interaction of state, territory and commonwealth law and it needs to be addressed through a national conversation”. Wyatt said respect for Indigenous heritage involved respect for the views Indigenous Australians. “Indigenous Australians should have the right to determine the heritage that is important to them, the ability to access applicable policies and laws to safeguard that heritage, and the choice of how they generate revenue on their land,” Wyatt said. Rio Tinto’s destruction of a 46,000-year-old archaeological and cultural site at Juukan Gorge in 2020 triggered global condemnation and led to a parliamentary inquiry which released its final report, A Way Forward, in October. The report found there were “serious deficiencies” at every level of government and urgent legislative change was needed to stop the destruction of Aboriginal heritage. It recommended the federal government set a minimum standard for heritage protection that states and territories could follow. “The destruction of the caves was a disaster beyond reckoning for the Puutu Kunti Kurrama people and Pinikura people, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural heritage as a whole,” inquiry chair Warren Entsch said in October. Since the blast, the West Australian government has developed a new Aboriginal heritage bill, which is before parliament. Rio Tinto had obtained ministerial consent to destroy Juukan Gorge under the old Aboriginal Heritage Act. WA Aboriginal affairs minister Stephen Dawson has said the bill would give Aboriginal people the right to make decisions on matters affecting their cultural heritage and it was the result of “extensive consultation”. But traditional owners have raised concerns, including that the minister retains the final say over heritage disputes, and that they would have limited rights of judicial appeal. They would only be able to go to the state administrative tribunal in six specific circumstances. The Kimberley Land Council has warned of a “cultural catastrophe”. Muir said the WA government should halt the bill. “The West Australian government, if you pardon the pun, are bulldozing ahead with this legislation,’’ Muir said. “It’s essentially an abuse of its majority and it’s an abuse of Aboriginal people. “We took this matter to the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination at the UN, because this legislation is discriminatory and it fails to set up protections to stop another Juukan from happening. “It should step back and halt the bill, come back and enter into a partnership similar to what the federal government is doing.’’Roll up, roll up ladies and gentlemen, for the greatest travelling roadshow the A-League Men has to offer. Touring until 15 January, your favourite team from Western Australia, Perth Glory, will be bringing their purple-powered wares to a ground near you. Don’t miss out on a chance to see Bruno Fornaroli, Brandon O’Neill and special marquee attraction Daniel Sturridge across nine different dates. Yes, coach Richard Garcia’s Glory will assume the role of ALM travelling circus in the week’s ahead; WA’s stringent border restrictions sending them out onto the road early in the season in the fleeting hope that, come the back end of the campaign, conditions will have changed enough to allow them to stage a series of home games. Though not the fault of anyone involved at Glory or the A-Leagues’ head office, it s clearly a far-from-ideal situation. In theory, three points earned during a homestand in the season’s closing weeks count for just as much as those earned at its start but, in reality, a slump in the opening months – unless you are Adelaide United in 2015-16 – generally condemns your campaign in its entirety. In such circumstances, where night after night in hotel rooms away from family and friends increasingly fray the nerves, the margins within which Garcia is operating, in both an on- and off-field context, become razor-thin. Any erring in selection, misstep in tactical approach or coarse word between teammates, could provide the straw that breaks the camel’s back and sends the team into a hole from which they may never pull themselves out. In 2020-21, Western United entered an end-of-season road trip looking all but certain to play finals football; by the end of it were ninth, out of the play-offs, and coachless. Thus, under such a state of affairs, the last thing a club needs is for external factors to make their lives needlessly more difficult. Perhaps unsurprisingly, that is just what happened to the Glory in the opening ALM game of their tour against Western United on Friday evening. After 78 minutes of uninspiring football which can, perhaps most charitably, be described as simply having happened, the hosts finally made a breakthrough when Dylan Wenzel-Halls tapped home a Connor Pain cross-cum-shot on the goal line. to give his side a 1-0 lead they would not relinquish. Whether the Glory deserved more from the 90 minutes is a debatable topic, but replays of the Wenzel-Halls goal clearly showed that it should not have stood – Pain was unable to keep the ball in before he laced his shot across the face of Brad Jones’s goal. “I’ve seen the still and I’ve seen that the ball is out,” Garcia bemoaned. “Honestly. What do I say to this? Do we have the resources to use it? Are we using it properly?” Inevitably, of course, the other major talking point to emerge was that, on the opening night of Glory’s ALM tour, the role of leading man Daniel Sturridge was played by Daniel Stynes. After a 10-minute cameo in round one’s 1-1 draw with Adelaide, the former Liverpool striker was completely absent from the squad that lost to United; his pre-game amble across the pitch alongside Glory chief executive Tony Pignata the extent of his contributions at AAMI Park. While this did deny promotors their latest sugar hit, it was, in hindsight, hardly a surprise. Not exactly renowned for his durability, Sturridge only exited hotel quarantine days before the season opener and, prior to that, had not played a competitive football match for almost two years. After Friday’s game Garcia conceded that, had Glory not been playing in front of a sold-out home crowd eager to get a glimpse of ALM’s latest shiny new toy, he likely would not have played against the Reds. Reasonable enough, although that Sturridge saw the field for non-footballing reasons could emerge as a concern if such logic continues to affect selection policy in the weeks and months ahead. Garcia’s authority, however, was undermined slightly the next day by the revelation from Glory owner Tony Sage that the decision for Sturridge not to figure against United had been made not by the gaffer, but by the striker himself. Chief executive Tony Pignata then took to Twitter on Monday to “put the record straight”, claiming Sturridge had indeed wanted to play, but was told he could not as he builds his fitness for the long season ahead. That a player would rule themselves out of contention, in and of itself, is not remarkable. But that this information would be made public by a club owner a day after the coach opted not to do so, which in turn required the intervention of another club official to clarify the situation, is enough to raise an eyebrow. Indeed, Sturridge’s presence – or absence – will only add to the fishbowl effect Glory face in the short to medium term, and that is before the possibility of further border closures – WA has already restricted entry from South Australia – because of the Omicron variant of Covid-19.The Roman fort of Brocolitia, once a busy garrison of 500 soldiers, is visible only as turf-covered earthworks close to Hadrian’s Wall. We walk round the perimeter of its playing-card shape, the rain clearing to leave letterbox flares of light along the horizon. There’s the harsh “yark” of a solitary crow. A farmer on a quad bike gathers sheep with his dog, the flock rippling over the slope of a far field. Beyond the fort is the Mithraeum, an excavated temple dedicated to Mithras, the Roman god of light, which is preserved in a fenced-off enclosure. Nothing, though, marks Coventina’s Well, the spring of a water goddess important enough for the high-status title of Augusta, yet unknown before the well’s discovery in 1876. An excavation was led by the antiquarian and landowner John Clayton of nearby Chesters after dressed stones were uncovered in marshy ground. The source of a spring was found, encased in a large stone basin within further walls of a temple. Over two metres deep, it had been packed with objects: votive offerings deposited over time and added to by a hurried filling of the well around 388, perhaps due to anti-pagan edicts by the Christian emperor Theodosius I. Gifts to the goddess included a brooch of a running deer, glass beads, rings of gold, silver and jet, a bronze mask and 13,487 coins. There were altars inscribed with her name, drinking vessels, a glass bottle, two thuribles – clay incense burners – and, puzzlingly, half a skull and a bronze age axe hammer. A stele carved with an image of Coventina is in Chesters Museum. She lies on a water-lapped riverbank, bare-breasted, her hair flowing, one arm on a pitcher from which flows life-giving water, the other holding up a frond. It was dedicated to her by a prefect of the first cohort of Batavians, Germanic people from the Rhineland. Coventina’s Well lies underwater now. A small stream flows out of the surrounding bog. In its clear water, brooklime trails blue flowers in summer. The Romans left offerings of coins and jewellery; I place something more fleeting – a marigold from my garden. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryConservative voters in the north of England view Boris Johnson’s changes to social care funding as toxic and say his broken pledge on not selling homes to pay for care is a betrayal, according to research seen by the Guardian. The polling and focus group, undertaken for the Labour party, said the changes to social care funding this week found it was “the most powerful broken promise we have tested”, the report found. Over two-thirds of the public oppose the plans and leave voters (71%) were as likely to oppose them as remain voters (74%), and it was more likely to be unpopular in the north, Midlands and among older voters, the report found. The document was prepared to inform Labour’s response to changes in social care funding which would penalise poorer voters with lower house prices, meaning means-tested care would not count towards a new £86,000 cap on social care costs. The change will mean those with £1m homes would be likely to keep more than 90% of their assets, but voters with less valuable homes, many in the north of England, are likely to be forced to sell family homes to pay for care costs once a relative has died. Labour’s research found the change, which prompted a significant Tory rebellion in the House of Commons, “provokes genuine disgust from voters” though cautioned many did not yet understand the changes. More worryingly for the Conservatives, it found leave voters in the north and the Midlands were some of the biggest opponents of the plan. One Tory voter in Redcar, when played Starmer’s line at PMQs that those living in expensive homes would be able to pass them to their children versus those with a less valuable home, said it was “disgusting … they are robbing your kids really”. Labour will hope to exploit the findings as it found visceral opposition to the plans once publicised – but little widespread understanding of them so far. “There is real grievance about the importance of ‘people working hard all of their life to have a house to pass on to their children’, and that these plans could make that impossible,” the report says. It quotes another female Conservative voter saying: “I class myself as working class. We’ve got a lovely four-bedroom house but it’s closer to the £100,000 mark than the £1m, that leaves your children with almost nothing, you’re working all your life to give something to your children and then you need to give it to the government.” At PMQs on Wednesday, Keir Starmer called the changes a “working-class dementia tax”, accusing the prime minister of breaking the Conservatives’ manifesto promise that no one would have to sell their home to pay care costs. The line was tested across the groups in the report, with a majority calling it a fair criticism. One male Conservative voter in Redcar said: “Totally agree. People who get put in a home are penalised. It only related to the working class. People who are on handouts, it wouldn’t affect them, the rich, it won’t affect them.” The report found there was some early evidence of the dementia tax phrase being revived, a critique that proved toxic for Theresa May in 2017, though her plan was based on a significantly different social care model. Most concerning of all for Johnson is the regional opposition to the plans. More than 80% of voters in the north-east, the region where Johnson won a significant number of Labour heartland seats, said they opposed the plans, as did 74% in the north-west and 79% in Yorkshire and the Humber. In contrast, those in the south of England where the changes will have a lesser effect were more sanguine, but the change was still opposed by more than half of voters in London and the south-east. “Most working-class people, the only thing they have worth taxing is their home and if they’re going to sell that for care, they won’t have anything left,” one male Conservative voter told the report. “I don’t think Boris should have gone back on his pledge. I know we’ve had Covid but this should be a priority. People shouldn’t have to sell their property. They want to leave something to their children,” another female Tory voter said. Tory MPs have demanded to see an impact assessment for the change which takes in regional disparities. The bill is expected to be amended in the House of Lords, leaving Johnson vulnerable when it returns to the Commons next spring. More than 60 MPs abstained on the social care change, with several telling the Guardian the prime minister should make changes or risk more voting against it.Boris Johnson’s popularity dip may be such that Tory voters in Old Bexley and Sidcup brand the prime minister a “blithering idiot” and question his qualities as a leader, but Labour still faces an uphill battle to win the seat in Thursday’s byelection. The message Labour’s challenger, Daniel Francis, was selling to waverers who backed the Conservatives in 2019 was that the result was “not going to change the government, but it is a chance to send a message”. He admitted it would be an “enormous challenge” to overturn the 19,000 majority earned by James Brokenshire, who died from cancer at the age of 53 last month. “That takes a lot of different dynamics to happen – of Tories staying at home, Tories switching, movement between lots of other parties,” Francis said. “We’re in it to try and do that.” He stressed that some people who deserted Labour under Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership were “looking at the party again”, but confessed there was “still work to do” to persuade them to vote for it. The contest comes at a tricky time for Johnson, following criticism of his handling of sleaze scandals, a fall for the Conservatives in the national polls and pressure from Tory MPs who are desperately urging him to tighten up his act. With less than a week until the first in a series of three – possibly four – byelections, voters in the south London suburban seat are considering what kind of message they should send. Sue Buckley, a retired Sidcup resident, said she would “love Boris to sort himself out” and “might vote Labour”. However her criticisms extended to wider frustrations with the government. “Someone needs a kick up the butt,” she said. “I don’t believe them any more. They backtrack a lot.” A few roads over, a man who did not want to give his name said he normally voted Conservative. However he had been struck by the prime minister’s rambling speech to the Confederation of British Industry earlier in the week, and called him a “blithering idiot”. Francis claimed the issue of sleaze and Johnson’s handling of it had grown recently. “The campaign’s changed as we’ve gone on,” he said, recounting a conversation with a Tory-voting nurse who complained to him about MPs with second jobs not having enough time to resolve NHS staffing shortages. He also recalled a pensioner who said she had never voted for Labour, but who was “so concerned about the prime minister’s behaviour that she’s already voted for me – with her postal vote”. Francis even said fellow parents at the school gates who usually voted Conservative had a part in persuading him to stand. Labour supporters who spoke to the Guardian after being canvassed by Francis spoke highly of their former MP. Two, Alison and Ben Page, called Brokenshire “well-liked”, but voiced hopes Labour would perform better against a different Tory candidate. “He might have a chance this time, because people were voting for [Brokenshire],” they said. But to get over the line, Francis also needs to sweep up support from other leftwing parties. Several people who said they voted Green suggested they would not switch their vote. Francis was buoyant in his belief that the animosity some voters had against Labour at the last election was dissipating under Keir Starmer’s leadership, even if this did not mean a win for him. “I hope that the result shows that Labour is moving back in the right direction,” he added. Francis has been supported with visits from around half a dozen of the shadow cabinet, while Louie French, the Conservatives’ candidate, has been joined for flyering and door-knocking sessions by senior cabinet ministers including Johnson, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab. French’s team did not respond to requests for an interview. There are 11 candidates in total standing in the byelection on 2 December.Social care services across England are “rapidly deteriorating”, with waiting lists soaring and councils struggling with care home closures, social services chiefs have warned. Long-term waiting lists have almost quadrupled and 1.5m hours of necessary home care were not delivered in the three months to November, amid a deepening staffing crisis going into winter. “Red lights are flashing right across our dashboard,” said Stephen Chandler, president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (Adass), which ran a survey of 85 councils. “Older and disabled people are suffering.” Half of councils have had to respond to a care home closure or bankruptcy in the last six months. The bleak assessment comes ahead of the government’s social care white paper, scheduled for Tuesday, which is expected to propose a new strategy for pay and career development for care staff amid an exodus of workers, who currently earn on average just over £9 an hour, to higher-paying employers including Amazon. Downing Street is under growing pressure to deliver on Boris Johnson’s promise in 2019 that he would “fix the crisis in social care once and for all”. Last week details of a plan to cap care costs at £86,000 sparked a Tory backbench rebellion when it emerged that England’s least wealthy people would still face the sale of their homes to pay for care, while richer people would get to keep a greater share of their wealth. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, promised council leaders last week the imminent reforms would mean everyone had the choice and control to live independent lives, everyone could access outstanding personal care, and that adult care and support would be there for everyone who needed it. But the government has so far only pledged £1.8bn a year in additional money for social care after the Covid pandemic exposed its fragility. MPs and care experts believes the sector needs an extra £10bn a year. Adass’s snapshot survey covering the period from August to October suggests close to 400,000 people are now waiting for an assessment for their needs. The number waiting for six months or more has surged from 11,000 reported in September to over 40,000 now. “This survey confirms our worst fears,” said Chandler. “The government must now acknowledge the scale of the crisis and step in with emergency funding and measures to ensure we can get through the winter ahead.” It is calling for urgent £1,000 bonus payments to retain exhausted care workers. £500 payments have already been made the devolved health and care authorities in Scotland and Wales. There are well over 100,000 vacancies in England’s social care workforce, and tens of thousands of staff who declined to be double-vaccinated can no longer work under legislation making jabs a condition of employment. Not-for-profit care home chain MHA, which lost 150 staff to the vaccine mandate, is among operators to close some of its homes to new admissions because of staff shortages, which in turn blocks up the NHS discharge system. A survey of care workers by the trade union Unison also found that staff shortages meant people were “dying without dignity” and in some cases there were not enough staff to sit with people in their final hours. A third of those surveyed said staffing levels were “dangerously low”. Javid told council leaders last week that when the social care white paper is published, “people will see how serious we are about the workforce”, and he said “as the NHS was born out of the second world war”, the government wants to “make a change that lasts for generations”. He said he had been concerned to see a young care worker on a BBC TV documentary, fronted by Ed Balls, say he was planning to become a paramedic or nurse because of the lack of career paths in care. A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to delivering world-leading social care. That’s why we are investing an additional £5.4bn over three years, which will allow us to build our comprehensive adult social care reform programme. Care homes and home care providers are already benefiting from the new £162.5m workforce retention and recruitment fund to assist local authorities and care providers in working together to ease workforce pressures in a variety of ways.”Michael Flynn, Donald Trump’s first national security adviser, appears to have called QAnon “total nonsense” and a “disinformation campaign” created by the CIA and the political left – despite his own extensive links to the conspiracy theory and seeming eagerness to serve as its hero. Flynn’s apparent statement was revealed by Lin Wood, a pro-Trump attorney and QAnon supporter once allied with the disgraced former general. QAnon followers believe in the existence of a secret cabal of pederastic cannibal Satanists, dominated by Democrats, against whom Trump is fighting. Followers also believe John F Kennedy Jr is not dead and will soon return to lead them. Many recently congregated in Dallas, waiting for that to happen. The FBI considers QAnon a potential source of extremist violence. Trump has refused to disavow QAnon believers. Tucker Carlson, of Fox News, called them “gentle patriots”. Late on Saturday, Wood released a recording of what appeared to be a call between him and Flynn on Telegram, a social media and messaging app favored by far-right extremists. During the conversation, a voice that appears to be Wood is heard to complain that QAnon followers are coming after him online. In answer, the Daily Beast reported, a voice that appears to be Flynn says: “I think it’s a disinformation campaign. I think it’s a disinformation campaign that the CIA created. That’s what I believe. Now, I don’t know that for a fact, but that’s what I think it is. I think it’s a disinformation campaign.’” “I find it total nonsense,” the voice adds. “And I think it’s a disinformation campaign created by the left.” The Guardian could not verify the authenticity of the recording. Contact information for Flynn was not immediately available. Wood could not be reached for comment. Flynn was fired from a top intelligence role by Barack Obama before becoming a close aide to Trump. He was installed as national security adviser but resigned after less than a month, for lying to the FBI about interactions with Russians. Under the special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation of Russian election interference, Flynn pleaded guilty to one criminal charge. He tried to withdraw that plea, then received a pardon from Trump. Flynn has attracted condemnation for his links to QAnon and the far right, for calling for the establishment of “one religion” in the US, and for seeming to advocate armed insurrection. The recording released by Wood comes amid acrimony among leading pro-Trump figures who have worked to overturn the 2020 election. According to the Daily Beast, the feud appears to have sprung from Wood’s brief representation of Kyle Rittenhouse, the 18-year-old recently acquitted after killing two people and wounding one at a protest in Wisconsin last year. According to the Beast, Rittenhouse alleged that Wood intentionally let him languish in jail so he could earn money off the case. Wood reportedly became angry that Flynn and Sidney Powell, another pro-Trump attorney, didn’t speak up for him. Powell could not be reached for comment on Sunday. The recording apparently featuring Flynn disowning QAnon raised echoes of remarks about a related conspiracy theory by Steve Bannon, Trump’s former campaign chair and White House strategist. Bannon was pardoned on fraud charges by Trump but now faces a charge of contempt of Congress over the 6 January Capitol attack, to which he has pleaded not guilty. He has repeatedly promoted the “deep state” conspiracy theory, which holds that a permanent government of bureaucrats and intelligence agents exists to thwart Trump’s agenda. However, Bannon has also said the “deep state conspiracy theory is for nut cases”.Nursing unions in 28 countries have filed a formal appeal with the United Nations over the refusal of the UK, EU and others to temporarily waive patents for Covid vaccines, saying this has cost huge numbers of lives in developing nations. The letter, sent on Monday on behalf of unions representing more than 2.5 million healthcare workers, said staff have witnessed at first hand the “staggering numbers of deaths and the immense suffering caused by political inaction”. The refusal of some countries to budge on rules about intellectual property rights for vaccines had contributed to a “vaccine apartheid” in which richer nations had secured at least 7bn doses, while lower-income nations had about 300m, it argued. Such a distribution was not only “grossly unjust”, the letter said, but the rampant transmission of Covid in developing nations also increased the risk of new variants emerging, such as Omicron, first identified this week in South Africa and which has prompted the UK and other nations to tighten travel restrictions and other rules. South Africa, along with India, has been pressing the World Trade Organization (WTO) to help improve access to vaccines by waiving the multinational Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) agreement. A temporary waiver on Trips provisions for Covid vaccines would, supporters say, allow them to be manufactured more widely, improving global distribution. On Friday, the US president, Joe Biden, called for WTO members to take this step following the emergence of the Omicron variant. However, other countries have resisted. The letter to the UN – coordinated by the healthcare umbrella organisation Global Nurses United, and Progressive International, a collection of leftwing parties, movements and unions – cited what it called an “immediate threat to people’s right to health” from the EU, UK, Norway, Switzerland and Singapore. It said that at least 115,000 medical and healthcare staff around the world have died as a result of Covid, and that while 40% on average have been fully vaccinated, in Africa and the western Pacific the figure is lower than one in 10. “As frontline workers, we are well placed to testify against the violation of the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health because of the impact of a delayed Covid-19 Trips waiver,” the letter warned. It was sent to Tlaleng Mofokeng, a South African doctor and health campaigner who is the UN’s special rapporteur on physical and mental health, and has the power to launch an investigation under the UN’s human rights council. Mofokeng said the demand for a patent waiver “is one I share”. The role that health workers have played during the pandemic “provides them with moral authority” over the issue, she added. In addition to South Africa and India, the call comes from unions representing nurses and healthcare staff in the US, Ireland, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Curacao, the Dominican Republic, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Malawi, New Zealand, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Uganda and Uruguay. Deborah Burger, co-president of the National Nurses United union in the US, said the unequal distribution of vaccines and the resultant likelihood of new Covid variants “poses a dire risk to all people around the world”. Shirley Marshal Díaz Morales, the vice-president of Brazil’s Federação Nacional dos Enfermeiros union, said: “It is way past time for the governments of the world to prioritise the health of the people over the profits of multinational corporations by approving the vaccine waiver.”Vintage Wagner throw Want to snuggle up with Wagner? It’s not the usual response to the man whose name is synonymous with epic, monumental and (for many) impenetrable grand opera, but if tickets to Bayreuth are beyond your budget, this throw adorned with the German composer’s austere figure means that the Wagner-obsessive in your life can wear their heart on their sleeve, or at least their fanaticism on their futon. £50.21, redbubble.com Sopranos cookbook Become the capo of your kitchen and celebrate the rich culinary history of mobster cuisine with The Sopranos Family Cookbook: As Compiled by Artie Bucco. “What, no fucking ziti?” Wrong. There’s plenty of ziti (even Janice has chipped in with a vegetarian recipe). First published in 2002 but rediscovered over lockdown as people binged on the series again – Carmela’s sausage rigatoni is a particular triumph. £14.95, infusions4chefs.co.uk Squid Game marbles Netflix’s South Korean smash saw 456 downtrodden and desperate people compete in violent approximations of children’s games for a cash prize. So far, so festive. Our hero Gi-hun also had his morals tested during a game of marbles, lovingly recreated here alongside that menacing business card, for at-home contests without the gore. £4.45, etsy.com Shakespeare socks To buy or not to buy: that is the question when it comes to giving boring old socks. But this natty collection from the London Sock Exchange and Shakespeare’s Globe features characters from the Bard’s yarns in striking designs and colours: Caesar in imperial purple, a blood-red Romeo and Juliet, and forest green for the Bottom in your life. £12, shop.shakespearesglobe.com Postmodern architecture merch For the Pomo-partial pal in your life, what could be better than cosying up with an MI6 building cushion while sipping tea from a No 1 Poultry mug? Designer Adam Nathaniel Furman has produced a dazzling range of affordable bags, T-shirts, cushions, mugs and prints emblazoned with all your favourite postmodern architectural icons. Cushion £32; mug £16, adamnathanielfurman.com Virgin of the Rocks deckchair The National Gallery has an irresistible gift for Leonardo fans to sunbathe on, decorated with the most beautiful figure from its altarpiece by him. Rest your bum on an angel, or adapt it into a flying machine. £140, nationalgallery.co.uk Grayson’s Art Club jigsaw Reignite all your favourite lockdown hobbies with Grayson Perry’s Art Club jigsaw. The patron saint of amateur artists, Perry unites the familiar slogans of “stay alert” and “stay at home” with cosy scenes of wine-drinking, bread-making and bulk-buying toilet roll. This 750-piece challenge is sure to get all the family reminiscing over a mince pie or two. £15, shop.manchesterartgallery.org John Cage New Ideas T-shirt His silence changed the world, but when he opened his mouth he also had plenty of interesting stuff to say. Any Gen Z-er would surely be delighted to reference one of the 20th century’s greatest thinkers while endorsing his refusal to accept the status quo. £16.38, redbubble.com Back to the Future/Theatre face mask Stop the spread of coronavirus and handily prevent your neighbour from hearing you belt out Johnny B Goode with these triumphant face masks designed for the Back to the Future stage musical and celebrating the reopening of the UK’s beleaguered theatres. A pretty (Mc)fly present. £12, backtothefuturemusical.tmstor.es Ennui-sur-Blasé baseball cap What screams France more than a baseball cap emblazoned with the name of a made-up town that sounds like a Gallic shrug followed by an exhaled cloud of Gitane smoke? Well, a beret obviously. But you’re missing the point. Ennui-sur-Blasé was the ville where Wes Anderson’s unremittingly jolly 2021 masterpiece The French Dispatch was set, so this is the perfect gift to replace a loved one’s now worn out Fantastic Mr Fox bandit hat. Accessorise with un poisson mort and l’air d’un vieux grognon. £20.36, redbubble.com Jeff Koons hoodie Pay homage to the king of pop art kitsch with a range of clothes made in collaboration with Uniqlo, all of which are a hell of a lot more affordable than his works. This balloon animal hoodie is the pick of the bunch. £24.90, uniqlo.com Lil Nas X prayer candle Between appearing on tabloid talkshow Maury to find out whether his ex was married (a parody, though some viewers failed to realise) and giving Satan a lapdance in the Montero video, there hasn’t been a dull moment for Lil Nas X this year. Say a little prayer to pop’s leading provocateur with this fetching candle. $50, lilnasxstore.com/store Måneskin tie They’re the swaggering rock band who made Eurovision cool again, and added another trophy to Italy’s 2021 bounty (see also: the Euros, Bake Off). Channel your inner Måneskin with this skinny necktie, best paired with leather, glitter – and as low a neckline as is acceptable at your dinner table on 25 December. €20, merch.maneskin.it Camus T-shirt Do you see what they did there? They culturally appropriated a cigarette ad to make a philosophical point. Camus instead of Camel. An existentialist death warning rather than a government health warning. And right in the middle, the hunky philosopher of the absurd himself, inhaling death with every breath. $13, teepublic.com Bo Burnham’s White Woman’s Instagram mug Bo Burnham’s musical bulletin from the underbelly of lockdown, Inside, is a Covid-era comedy masterpiece. Should you wish to be reminded of it every breakfast-time, this White Woman’s Instagram mug, celebrating one of the show’s less twisted lyrics, is a must-buy. £12.76, etsy.com No Time to Die Scalextric You like Bond movies, right? And you love Scalextric, I bet, like the Alan Partridge-esque manchild you are? Well, the marketing machine that is 007 has pulled off yet another masterpiece of multiple cross-branding: a No Time to Die Scalextric set featuring two super-classy Bond cars, the Aston Martin DB5 (the low-slung sporty one) and Jaguar XF (bigger and chunkier). Let battle commence … £59.99, uk.scalextric.com Diana T-shirt From Diana: The Musical to The Crown and Kristen Stewart biopic Spencer, the pop cultural potency of Diana, Princess of Wales is stronger than ever. Celebrate Lady Di with this Y2K-inspired T-shirt, which pays homage to her royal poise … and her much-documented love of cycling shorts. £17.50, thefreshstuff.co.uk Valerie Solanas beach towel Want to rage at the patriarchy and enjoy a day at the seaside? Now you can do both at once with this towel created by multimedia artist Seth Bogart. It commemorates the SCUM manifesto for eradicating the male species by the woman who shot Andy Warhol. $59.99, wackywacko.com Record your own single Jack White, of White Stripes and analogue fetishism fame, has opened a London outpost of his label and record store Third Man Records. It’s a great day trip present for a music lover, especially if you use the in-house recording booth to cut a performance of your favourite song direct to vinyl. £15, thirdmanrecords.com Taylor Swift’s scarf (allegedly) stolen by Jake Gyllenhaal The epic All Too Well memorialises how Jake Gyllenhaal not only broke Swift’s heart, but also stole her scarf. Alongside a victorious new re-recording of the song (restored to its full 10-minute glory) comes a replica of the most potent artefact in Swiftian lore that’s so long and cosy, you can see why he hung on to it. £35, storeuk.taylorswift.com Harry Styles nail polish Harry Styles was the 8,025th celebrity to release a beauty brand this year, with Halsey, Naomi Osaka and, er, Ellen DeGeneres among the famous names flogging everything from eyeshadow to face wash. Pleasing is a cut above the rest, a delicate yet flamboyant collection which includes these glossy, eye-catching nail colours and decorative decals. £50, pleasing.com Pablo Bronstein tea towels Christmas sherry glasses are begging to be polished by a tea towel printed with Pablo Bronstein’s Patisseries and Confections, a characteristically witty work in his current exhibition at Sir John Soane’s Museum in London. Towers of cakes and pastries are set against a background of equally elaborate tower-block architecture. Delicious and slightly sinister, like Christmas itself. £12, shop.soane.org Postpunk ruler With their infographics, maps and other taxonomic paraphernalia, graphic design company Dorothy makes great gifts that prod the pleasure centres of music nerds. Their 12-inch ruler measures out the 12 years between punk and grunge in a series of classic albums, etched so it feels like a vinyl record. £18, wearedorothy.com Women for Peace: banners from Greenham Common Forty years since women marched from Cardiff to protest against US nuclear missiles being stored at the Berkshire airbase, a book collects the amazing banners they and others like them made in order to prevent the world from being blown to smithereens. £14, donlonbooks.com Sun Ra and his Arkestra diorama Free jazzing space alien Sun Ra, as you know, was born on Saturn (not, as Wikipedia absurdly claims, Birmingham, Alabama). There is literally no better way to celebrate his mind-expanding afrofuturistic, post-bop, black prog oeuvre than this playset featuring Mr Ra with his longtime collaborators, duded up in outfits that mashup ancient Egyptian and space age coutures. Some assembly required. £12.50, etsy.com It’s a Sin T-shirt Russell T Davies’s drama about the effects of the 80s HIV/Aids epidemic on a bright-eyed group of friends was a harrowing yet hopeful TV must-see. It also inspired a glut of brands to create T-shirts, artwork and more in support of the Terrence Higgins Trust. £25, philipnormal.shop Keith Haring kids’ chair Encourage your budding artist to follow Haring’s example of defying convention, fighting injustice and questioning authority – while also encouraging them to sit down and be quiet for a while. £85, flexxlex.co.uk Derek Jarman’s cottage model kit Set on the windswept shore of Dungeness, Derek Jarman’s Prospect Cottage has attracted thousands of visitors since the film-maker’s death in 1994. If you don’t fancy braving the chilly Kent coast, this flatpack kit contains wood, card and instructions on how to build a model one at home. £17, foundland.comHow much are you worth? I don’t mean what is the sum of your financial assets. I mean, as a human, if you had to come up with some formula to determine what your value is, how would you go about it? If that is too difficult, let me rephrase the question to make it more specific. Who values you? Who knows, loves and cares for you? Who seeks your company, who would miss it, whose lives would be poorer for your absence? The answer is probably everyone whose relationship to you is not transactional, whose affection for you is unconditional, for whom you are unique and irreplaceable. All other roles we have, as employees, consumers, taxpayers, are impersonal. We don’t think of ourselves as units whose value is derived from making a measurable contribution to the economy. We do not wake up in the morning and congratulate ourselves for contributing to our country’s GDP. Similarly, if we fall on hard times, we do not personally berate ourselves for being a net drag on the economy. Our sense of self is shaped not by calculations of what we put in and what we take out from some common pot of goods and services, but by other people, and the rich and enriching relationships we form with them. Our entire immigration system and approach towards outsiders is based on reversing this definition of worth. People who are trying to enter the UK are not valued for this sort of humanity, like us, but instead regarded as dud units of economic drag. Their entry to this country becomes a matter of what they will take out and consume, what resources they will take away from the rest of us and even how their cultural influences will dilute and compromise our own. When they drown trying to make it to our shores, we don’t blame their deaths on the fact that we have not set up safe routes, forcing them to carry their children in toy inflatables across the Channel. We instead enforce the cruel logic of borders and entitlement. There has to be a system, you see. Those who are coming here merely to exercise needs, no matter how urgent those needs are, rather than contribute something, should be kept out. A place in the UK and the high value of life apportioned within this country has to be earned, rather than given away like alms to whoever asks. Here I ask you another question. Have you earned that place? Did you, at any point, have to go through a series of obstacles, near-death experiences, homelessness and loyalty tests to win your place at the top of the human food chain? Did you, when you conducted that exercise to figure out your worth in the market of lives, believe that you have worked hard to win the affection and dedication of those to whom you are important, or that you are simply owed it because that’s what people do – love and take care of each other? The truth is nobody wins their place in the UK; for most people it is the result of luck and circumstance, and they have no more right to ownership of it than the people risking their lives to get here. If anything, those people are working hard for that place, rather than simply being born into it. Borders aren’t accidents – but being born within them is an accident. Your entire life is an accident, a random luck of the draw. You do not deserve to be here, any more than anyone else deserves not to be here. These are obvious, almost banal observations. But many will resist them. Even if they acknowledge their truth, many will feel an urge to argue against them. That is because two large political constructions have dominated our way of thinking for so long, presented as facts and not choices – these accidental borders must be enforced as strictly as possible, and we, as individuals in free-market societies, are the sole architects of our own prosperity. These two lies allow wealth to accrue in private hands and ensure that as little of it is shared as possible, whether through higher taxes, more open borders or increased public spending. If you become convinced that you have won your place on this earth through hard graft, then you are more likely to support policies and economic ideologies that facilitate the hoarding of resources. It is harder to part with what you have when you believe that those who are in need of it had the same shot as you but simply didn’t pull their weight. In the UK, we have perfected a framing whereby the helpless are portrayed as feckless. Britain has made a national sport of condemning immigrants, single mothers, people on benefits – an entire cast of characters who dared to be born in need. They support a national delusion of perfect meritocracy, of deserves and deserve-nots, which in turn sustains our closed borders, purses and hearts. This is why people shrug and move on when others die in the cold waters of the Channel. This is why nothing changes. This is why we fail to understand how our entire history as a species has been shaped by the inevitability and necessity of the movement of people. The only thing that is not an accident is that if you go far back enough, everyone is born where they are because someone in their lineage, at some point, deliberately moved to find a safer place for their progeny. They gave their descendants better odds. The only decent thing to do is spread those winnings around. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistThis week presents a good chance to see one of the more obscure autumn constellations: Cetus, the sea monster. Sometimes referred to as a whale, Cetus is part of the myth of Perseus, which includes the other constellations Pegasus, Cassiopeia, Andromeda, and Cepheus. In the story, Perseus rescues Andromeda from Cetus, after she is chained to the rocks for the monster to devour in the gods’ punishment for Andromeda’s boasts of her beauty. The chart shows the view looking south from London this evening at 9pm (2100 GMT). Alpha Ceti, also known as Menkar, is the nose of the sea creature; Diphda (Beta Ceti) is also known as Deneb Kaitos, meaning whale’s tail. To find the dim constellation, start by identifying Taurus and Orion. Extending an imaginary line drawn from Aldebaran down through the body of Taurus, to another line extended through Betelgeuse and Bellatrix, should allow you to converge on Menkar. From there, star-hop around the rest of the constellation. Cetus is prominent in the southern skies too. From Sydney, Australia, look to the north-west. Cetus is in a part of the sky referred to colloquially as the celestial waters because it contains other water-based constellations such as Pisces, the fish, Aquarius, the water-bearer, and Eridanus, the river.When Marilyn Bersey, 74, stands on stage and removes her last piece of clothing to reveal her nipple tassels, she triggers the pyrotechnics. From the audience there is “the admiration, the affirmation, the claps, the whoops, the cheers”. Well, she explains: “When I retired, I promised myself I wouldn’t be one of those pensioners who sit and knit.” Becoming a burlesque performer may seem an extreme form of resistance to this stereotype, but Bersey, who lives in warden-assisted accommodation in Ventnor on the Isle of Wight, had finally stabilised a huge weight loss. At the same time, she was adjusting to life without her second husband, whom she had cared for through Parkinson’s disease. She was searching for a form of exercise and self-expression that would fit the new shape of her life. Bersey was 70 when she saw the advert for a local burlesque group. “I thought: ‘That sounds a bit risque. I wonder if I could do it?’” She phoned the instructor, who said: “It’s for any age, any body size.” Bersey “just loved it from the word go. Routines, getting your leg over the back of chairs. I thought: ‘What’s this feeling I’ve got?’ I felt really glamorous and I felt really sexy.” Bersey has always loved to perform, but burlesque felt different. In her amateur dramatic group and then in four years at a Manchester drama school, she had never auditioned for a leading role. “It was common knowledge that Marilyn would be the comedy part. That’s what I did. I was always the fool. I think the accolade I got from an audience was the love that I never got at home … But I always wanted to be the leading lady. I’ve always felt inside there was a glamorous person.” Even if others didn’t see her that way. “Picture a fat kid with glasses,” she says of herself as a child. Her weight rose with her age – 15st at 15, 18st at 18. One day at school in Radcliffe, Lancashire, she was bullied by a girl who poured salt from her crisps into Bersey’s hair. Bersey’s mother took her to the doctor, who prescribed slimming tablets. Her weight crashed by 5st. But after a withdrawal period, it rose again, and she yo-yoed all the way through her first marriage, two children, into her early 40s. “My childhood was not a good time. I’d hide behind comedy. I’d make a fool of myself so it didn’t hurt as much when people bullied me,” she realises now. Bersey’s late mother had yearned for a son. But after Bersey was born, she needed a hysterectomy. The sense of loss heavily tinged Bersey’s childhood. “She always said: ‘Oh, you’ll never amount to much. If you’d have been a boy you’d have done this. If you’d have been a boy, you’d have loved me more …’ Chip, chip, chip.” Having previously worked as a cook and swimming instructor, Bersey later trained in therapeutic arts and psychodrama, perhaps hoping to understand her mother. “Now I can see where it’s come from.” In her mid-40s, shortly before she met her second husband, something changed for Bersey. She lost weight gradually through Slimming World until, in 2013, at the age of 66, her loss reached 6st 7lb and she “called target”. But when her second husband died the following year after a long illness, Bersey realised: “I had lost myself. I was no longer anyone’s mother – I was, but not needed. I was nobody’s wife. I was nobody’s daughter. Who’s Marilyn?” Burlesque has given her an answer. “I know exactly who Marilyn is now,” she says. “She’s Foxy La Mer.” Bersey’s bedroom “looks like a boudoir”: wigs, feather boa, Hollywood mirror. She doesn’t stop to wonder what her mother would think. But her son, an electrician, does her pyrotechnics; her daughter has seen her perform. Her “burlesque granny” and Ghostbuster-themed routines rely on comedy. Is she still hiding behind those tassels? “Probably,” she says, before deciding: “I don’t think I feel I am hiding.” Regardless, she feels sexier than she has ever felt. “And I’ve got the confidence to accept that’s how I’m feeling … Who’s there to tell me that I can’t feel like that in old age?” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?20 The Weeknd – Take My Breath After Blinding Lights, the partnership between the Weeknd and producer Max Martin continues down a rainswept neon highway, where synthwave reminiscent of a Terminator or RoboCop movie prowls around tales of nocturnal depravity. Not even Skynet could have created something so perfectly engineered for dancefloor satisfaction; the final chorus, with its drums tap-dancing across disco strings, is arguably the most beautiful moment in his catalogue so far. BBT 19 Silk Sonic – Leave the Door Open In a loving homage to the baby-making “quiet storm” R&amp;B of the 1970s and 80s, Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak are alive to the slight absurdity of those songs’ carnality, and lean into it. .Paak is “sipping wine, in a robe / I look too good to be alone”; Mars sings the chorus like a man hurling roses up to a balcony. They sell it so enthusiastically, and with such stunning songcraft, that what could have been a Dick in a Box-type spoof becomes an unironic masterpiece. BBT 18 Abba – Don’t Shut Me Down By now it’s cliche to observe how beautifully Abba essay loss. Perhaps in full knowledge of that expectation, Don’t Shut Me Down seems to start as a woman’s twilight years set in: she’s alone in a park as night falls and the sound of children’s laughter fades; the softest, floatiest strings seem to buoy her reflections heavenwards. But this moment turns out to be one of quiet confidence before she heads up to an ex’s apartment to rekindle their relationship, certain, now, of what she wants and needs from their reunion. Her conviction is girded by – what else? – a fabulous left-turn into disco, as choppy, almost ska-tinged guitar powers her up the (presumably illuminated) staircase to his door. LS 17 Pearl Charles – Only for Tonight Much like Silk Sonic, the LA singer isn’t merely nostalgic. She recreates the white disco-influenced MOR pop of the 1970s with a cosplayer’s level of exactitude and finesse, right down to the unthreatening mid-tempo pace, warped harpsichords and backing vocals that swoon as if into a wicker armchair. She obviated the return of Abba until Abba’s aforementioned return. BBT 16 Wolf Alice – How Can I Make It OK? Although written pre-pandemic, How Can I Make It OK? resonated eerily with these strange, transitional times. “A moment to change it all / Had life before been so slow?” Ellie Rowsell sings almost operatically, cautiously savouring the potential for change. Whatever may come next, happiness is paramount. “How can I make it OK?” the band sing in tender, nervous staccato, before the song cracks open to bolster their reassurances with volcanic swagger – showing this special band’s dynamic at its best. LS 15 Parris – Skater’s World ft Eden Samara As with Anz – see No 10, below – the dance tracks that have resonated most this year are the joyous ones that grab your arm and haul you on to the floor with a sambuca, shaking the torpor of the year away. Here, the snap and thrum of Miami bass pairs with a ghetto house breakbeat that keeps dancing away from a steady tempo; Samara’s vocal line is the sort of skipping-game chant that would pair perfectly with a burst hydrant in the summer. BBT 14 Cassandra Jenkins – Hard Drive Cassandra Jenkins has one of those speaking voices, like Laurie Anderson’s or Catherine Keener’s, that feels like its own calm wellspring of wisdom. On Hard Drive, she narrates a shakier spell in her life when she appeared like a cellophane wrapper on a pack of cigarettes – so transparent that friends could look right through her and spot the broken parts. Warm guitar and horns build around her, the effect as sensual and protective as being held. LS 13 Lil Nas X – Montero (Call Me By Your Name) After the furore that sluiced around Cardi B’s WAP eventually evaporated, conservative America was primed for something else to get performatively shocked by. Sliding down a stripper pole on to Satan’s lap in the music video came Lil Nas X, with a sadistically catchy bit of Latin-leaning pop. He is radically frank, open and available to his lover – “I want to sell what you’re buying” is a brilliant inversion – and his lascivious tone of voice lets you know how much he enjoys it. Power bottoms had their theme song. BBT 12 Japanese Breakfast – Be Sweet By hooking a classically brooding New Order bass line to a piercing demand for faithfulness that you could easily imagine at home on Madonna’s debut album, Michelle Zauner contrives the perfect mid-80s dancefloor moment. But the enigmatic lyrics are distinctively Japanese Breakfast: “Fantasise you’ve left me behind and I’m turned back running for you,” Zauner sings – an unorthodox way of shocking a relationship back to life. LS 11 BTS – Butter Just when you thought they couldn’t get any cheesier, the K-pop superstars doubled down on the dairy. It’s so joyous to hear them go to places you sense that western boybands – not that they even exist right now – would find too naff: saying “break it down!”; doing a middle-eight rap; adding shiny “ping!” noises. This is pop at its most honest and eager, connecting cleanly with the genre’s essence. BBT 10 Anz – You Could Be ft George Riley If you see the Manchester-based DJ and producer Anz on a nightclub flyer, you know you’re in for the opposite of chinstroking: her sets always have you flinging your hands away from your face and around your head. Now she’s lighting up daytime radio with this uptempo update of 80s boogie. Coupled with George Riley audibly batting her eyelashes as butterflies flutter below, there’s little better for dancefloor flirtation. BBT 9 Little Simz – Introvert She begins with the kind of fanfare that blares at the start of battle: horns and martial drums announcing a truly intimidating foe. It’s the kind of thing rappers have often reached for to telegraph their might, so there’s a wry humour in Simz using it for a track about her introversion. The conflict also turns inward as she considers ego, privacy and how much to embrace each – important considerations as her talent propels her to greater fame. BBT 8 The Weather Station – Tried to Tell You People’s tendency towards self-destruction is regarded with dignity and such profound kindness by Tamara Lindeman, as she recalls how she attempted to make someone realise they loved someone else (even, perhaps, instead of herself). The past tense suggests she failed, and the malaise is perhaps bigger than love anyway: “Some days there might be nothing you encounter / To stand behind the fragile idea that anything matters.” BBT 7 Billie Eilish – Your Power Eilish’s comeback single told a familiar tale of a man in the entertainment industry taking advantage of an underage girl. It’s the disappointment in her voice that elevates this everyday story of abuse; the sense of yet another teenage girl being forced to confront this unbearably tenacious power dynamic. Where her macabre debut album revelled in spooky sound effects, this real-life horror story required nothing but limpid acoustic guitar and ghostly chill. LS 6 Olivia Rodrigo – Good 4 U Having essayed one end of heartbreak with the piano lament Drivers License, Rodrigo’s mood swung like a wrecking ball towards this equally massive hit (between them, they spent 14 weeks at UK No 1). From its sarcastic title downwards, Good 4 U’s recrimination has the kind of bitterness that softens with age and only a teenage palate can truly appreciate, as Rodrigo rages against her blithely happy ex. The ways the chords shift through different shades of hurt is riveting, as is Rodrigo’s delivery, as if writing in a journal with the nib piercing the paper. BBT 5 Muna – Silk Chiffon ft Phoebe Bridgers Earlier this year, pop trio Muna signed to Phoebe Bridgers’ Saddest Factory Records, a meeting of minds between two of LA’s most anxious and emotionally annihilating acts. It was a delightful surprise, then, that their first collaboration revelled in nothing but the purest good feeling of a fully reciprocated crush. Delving into the crisp, crunchy textures of early 00s pop, maybe their depiction of this perfect girl queerly subverts millennial boy rockers’ simplistic fantasies – or maybe it’s not that deep. The piercing, oxygenated chorus hits like cannonballing into cool water from a high ledge. LS 4 Caroline Polachek – Bunny Is a Rider With those liquid, reactive vocals, Caroline Polachek is so sublime at selling a line that whatever Bunny Is a Rider turns out to mean, you know you’re on board from the lyric’s first flinching, suggestive rendition. Her latest collaboration with Danny L Harle concerns the taming of this elusive, wounded creature, learning to trust again – “heart is unbreaking but don’t drop my name” – amid a febrile bassline, a tail-shake of glassy percussion and a whistled refrain to lure you into giving chase. LS 3 Sharon Van Etten and Angel Olsen – Like I Used To Like I Used To feels fantastically lived in, as if these two generational songwriting talents were wandering the hallways of their lives, weighing up their regrets amid the ruined grandeur and deciding: fuck it – all you can do is keep living as wholeheartedly as humanly possible. All burly, stinging guitar and gilded vocal harmonies, it swaggers and sparkles like Stevie or Springsteen, and extends a hand for any time you need to dust yourself off and stride forth. LS 2 Wet Leg – Chaise Longue This song prompted the kind of instantaneous band buzz that is rather rare these days: with no other songs out in the world, the Isle of Wight duo suddenly found themselves in front of heaving festival crowds. Chaise Longue is the stuff of instant indie disco adoration: simple bassline, fist-pumping tempo, and a chorus you can chant along to as your pint spills freely around your twisting heels. BBT 1 Self Esteem – I Do This All the Time There has been no shortage of bands talking at us this year; the beauty of I Do This All the Time is how Rebecca Taylor embodies that nagging internal voice, the ever-present bully who is there to remind you of every embarrassing moment and cruel word aimed in your direction. Narrated in a rueful mutter over a backdrop of drizzle and a downcast beat, her moments of self-sabotage, as it turns out, aren’t that big a deal – sending overlong texts, forgetting an ex’s birthday – but it’s her ear for those small, grubby humiliations, the kind that spread like mould, that captures how it feels to be trapped by an inescapable sense of yourself. As Taylor touches on the cold exes and smug married mates and demeaning comments that have made her feel unworthy, she subtly outlines the pervasive expectations that have made her so fretful and prone to second-guessing, and I Do This All The Time becomes as much a reference to bad habits as to that relentless conditioning. And so she earns her massive, Lisa Stansfield-worthy chorus of women encouraging her to stand tall and hold steady, the crowning moment of this strange, wonderful, deeply moving song that alerted a nation to Taylor’s actually very considerable virtues. LSRita Moreno pops up on my computer screen in a bright red hat, huge pendant necklace and tortoiseshell glasses. “Well, here I am in my full glory,” she says from her home in Berkeley, California. And glorious she sure is. Moreno is a couple of weeks short of her 90th birthday, but look at her and you would knock off 20 years. Listen to her and you would knock off another 50. Can I wish you an advance happy birthday, I ask. “Yes, you can. Isn’t it exciting?” Moreno is one of the acting greats. But she could have been so much greater. She is one of only six women to have bagged the Egot (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony awards), alongside Helen Hayes, Audrey Hepburn, Barbra Streisand, Whoopi Goldberg and Liza Minnelli. Yet she has spent much of her career battling typecasting or simply not being cast at all. Still, her 80s have been golden years. She has been working regularly in TV – notably as the fabulously flirtatious grandmother in the Netflix sitcom One Day at a Time. Meanwhile, December marks two huge events (apart from the big day). Rita Moreno: Just a Girl Who Decided to Go for It, a brilliant warts-and-all documentary about her, is released in the UK on 6 December. It is a testament to her remarkable life and arresting honesty – and the inglorious history of sexual abuse and racism in the film industry. A few days later, she features in one of the cinema events of the year – Steven Spielberg’s remake of the Bernstein/Sondheim classic West Side Story, released 60 years after Moreno mesmerised audiences as Anita, the girlfriend of the gang leader Bernardo. This time, she plays a character specially created for her by the film’s scriptwriter, Tony Kushner – Valentina is the widow of Doc, who ran the sweet shop in the original. Moreno was born in Puerto Rico to a seamstress and a farmer. When she was four, her mother took her to New York in search of a better life, leaving behind Rita’s father (whom she saw again only once) and brother. They settled in Manhattan. From her earliest days, she remembers being called a “spic”. Dancing was her salvation. At six, she made her professional debut at Greenwich theatre. She dropped out of school at 15 and by 16 was the family’s breadwinner. In 1950, at 18, she signed to MGM; a year later, she moved to 20th Century Fox. Moreno had a brutal introduction to showbusiness. As a teenager, she was raped by her agent. The shameful thing, she says, is that she kept him on because she thought he was the only person in the industry looking out for her. Moreno met him recently for the first time in 70 years. “When I saw who it was, I went white. I froze. He said: ‘My wife would like to meet you; would you have lunch with us?’” For some reason, she said yes. “I was examining every inch of his face and his soul and, when his wife went to the bathroom, he came back to the day he raped me and said: ‘You know, I always wished I had made you pregnant.’ She repeats his words, still shocked. “I was so horrified that all I was able to say was: ‘You’re a piece of work,’ and I got up and left.” Soon after being raped, she was introduced to the notorious sexual predator Harry Cohn, the co-founder of Columbia Pictures, at a party. “I had just met the man and he said, with his wife in the room, by the way: ‘You better watch out – I’d like to fuck you.’ That may have been the third time I’d heard that word in my life, and I stood there and giggled. I didn’t know what to say. But I was horrified.” If Cohn was alive today, does she think he would be in jail for sex offences? “Yes, I think Harvey Weinstein would have had company. He had a dreadful reputation.” Then there was Buddy Adler, who ran 20th Century Fox. “He found my phone number and started to call me all the time. It turned into a stalking situation.” Did she realise beforehand what went on in Hollywood? “I had no idea.” Nor did she have any idea about the roles she would end up playing. “Illiterate, immoral characters – men’s little island girls,” Moreno says. Her skin would be darkened; she would be told to speak lines such as: “Why you no love me no more? Why you like white girl?” in an “exotic” accent. She found it humiliating. In 1952, she got a cameo in Singin’ in the Rain as the silent movie star Zelda Zanders. Moreno hoped this would be her escape, but she was soon back playing dusky maidens. In 1953, at 21, Moreno began a tumultuous on-off eight-year relationship with Marlon Brando, regarded by many at the time as the most desirable man in the world. She was obsessed with him and has compared him to cocaine. “He had a gorgeous intelligence. He was the funniest person I’ve ever met in my life. He was not only famous, he was the king of sexy actors.” Was he a good lover? “Oh yes! That part of it was incredible. That’s all I’ll say. No other details.” Her best lover ever? “Ever!” But he was also monstrous. Moreno thought he couldn’t love anybody else because he loved himself so much. When she became pregnant, he made her have an abortion. During the course of their relationship, he had numerous affairs and married twice. He seduced everyone he met, she says – even his psychiatrist. She tried to get her revenge by dating 25-year-old Elvis Presley. “I was still seeing Marlon. I was trying to make him jealous after I found some lingerie in his house.” Was Elvis as sexy as Brando? “Not in a million years. He was very sweet, but no.” She says he was shy and bumbling. Their evenings would inevitably conclude with a clumsy fumble on the floor, as a fully trousered Presley gyrated against her while Moreno waited for more. She gave up on him. Meanwhile, Brando was unchanged. Her self-belief, already low, reached a nadir. Shortly after filming West Side Story in 1961, Moreno tried to kill herself at Brando’s home. She would have succeeded if Brando’s assistant hadn’t found her and rushed her to hospital. “I was told I was crying all the time I was unconscious,” she says. Did she really want to die? “It wasn’t done for drama, that’s for sure. What I really wanted to do was kill the bad Rita who was always getting me in trouble, but it turned out if you’re going to kill the bad Rita, you’re also going to kill the good one.” She chose life and dumped Brando. West Side Story was huge and Moreno was phenomenal as Anita. Here was a woman ahead of her time in the macho ganglands of New York – sexy and sexual, proud and principled, complex and compromised. It is impossible not to fall in love with her. Moreno says she fell in love with Anita, too. “I thought: ‘Wow – she’s what I’ve always wanted to be!’” I assumed you were like her, I say. She laughs and insists she was weak and subservient and couldn’t have been more different. But I have seen chatshows from then in which you seem so sure of yourself. “You are perceiving that Rita Moreno I presented to the world. What was I gonna do, say: ‘Really, I’m a weak person’? No, that was the persona. I am now that person, but it took me a very, very long time to become her.” She won an Oscar for West Side Story and was convinced she had finally cracked the film industry – then she didn’t make another movie for seven years. That is unbelievable, I say; was it your choice? “It was my choice, because I was being offered such crappy stuff. I was only offered gang movies on a way lesser scale and it was like the same fucking battle again. I couldn’t believe it. And it broke my heart. It. Absolutely. Broke. My. Heart. I thought: ‘I’ll wait for something better,’ and something better kept not coming. It was horrific.” Have things improved for Latino actors? “Latino people are still horribly under-represented. It has changed, but nowhere near as much as for the black community. The black community in films has done an incredible job of getting themselves in the picture and we have a long way to go.” Why have Latinos struggled so much? “I think part of the reason is because, unlike the black community, we don’t mainly come from America. We come from all kinds of countries and we’ve siloed ourselves rather than supporting each other, as we should have. We still think of ourselves as Argentinian or Puerto Rican or Mexican rather than Hispanic. Until we get over that and become one big wonderful community, we’re still going to have problems.” Moreno was targeted recently by Latino activists after defending her friend Lin-Manuel Miranda from criticism that he had not cast enough dark-skinned Afro-Latinos in the film of his musical In the Heights. “I said: boy did they pick on the wrong person, ’cause this is the guy who wrote a play called Hamilton where most of the cast was black and tan.” Equally, it felt as though they had picked on the wrong woman – after all, Moreno has campaigned for minorities throughout her adult life, marched on Washington in 1963 and stood only a few metres from Martin Luther King when he made his “I have a dream” speech. But she took on board what her critics said. “I thought their timing sucked and they were strident, but they did have a point.” As a thoroughly modern woman, she apologised on Twitter with grace and humour for failing to acknowledge the need to be “more inclusive of the Afro-Latino community”, concluding: “See, you CAN teach this old dog new tricks.” Perhaps those who attacked Moreno weren’t fully aware of how closely the issue resonates with her. After West Side Story, and despite the Oscar, she more or less gave up on the movies because her opportunities were so limited. Instead, she focused on theatre, TV, one-woman shows and activism. The breadth and piecemeal nature of her career are reflected in the other awards that make up her Egot – a Tony for playing the talentless singer Googie Gomez in The Ritz, two Emmys for The Muppet Show and The Rockford Files and a Grammy for the children’s TV show The Electric Company. In 1965, she married Leonard Gordon, a cardiologist. They had one daughter, the actor Fernanda Gordon, and stayed together until he died in 2010. The most moving, and shocking, part of the documentary is when Moreno talks about what a wonderful man Gordon was – then says she should have left him long before he died, because he was so controlling. “I was with him to the very last, including a month in hospital where I slept on a cot and was with him 24/7,” she says now. “It’s what you do when you love and respect somebody.” But she admits that, as soon as he died, she felt liberated. “I got up, cut a lock of his hair, which I still have – beautiful silver hair – and as I left I stopped at the door and I looked at him. He was so small and slender and white, and I thought: ‘How is it that little wizened person made me so unhappy? Where did he get that power?’ It was a mystery to me.” When she got home, she asked her assistant, Judy, to pour her a big glass of wine. “I sat on the patio, took in the sun and there was this enormous sense of relief. When I woke up the next morning in bed and turned on the news on the TV, I said to myself: ‘Oh my God, I can do this for the rest of the day if I want to. I can just get up and go to the bathroom and pour myself a cup of tea and get back into bed and stay here.’ I was astonished and I loved every second of it. I revelled in it.” What had been stopping her doing this beforehand? “It was in my husband’s head and in my head. I’ve always been a newshound, so I had the news on constantly and it drove him crazy. I think it was also a way of having company. “He didn’t like the raucous side of me and I love that side of me. I think I’m funny as hell and I think I’m cute and I think I’m mischievous. I know I’m mischievous. And that’s the kind of thing he discouraged, and that makes me very sad, because he was missing out on something pretty wonderful about me.” It’s great to hear you talk about yourself, like this, I say. “You know, I think I owe an enormous debt to psychotherapy. Without that, I wouldn’t be the Rita you know and love.” She giggles. It took her years of therapy to start liking herself, she says. “If you have been traumatised from the time you were a child to believe you were a ‘spic’, that you were a garlic-mouth, that you are not worthy, it takes a long time to get rid of that. That’s why therapy so often takes so long, because you’re trying to get rid of that trash before you can deal with the you that wants to get better. I went into therapy wanting to get better, knowing that in some way I had a sickness. And the sickness was Rita hates Rita.” Those days are long gone. Nowadays, she can accept how special she is and how much she has meant to so many people. After her relationship with Brando ended, they rebuilt their friendship and remained in touch throughout his life (much to her husband’s chagrin). “There was always this attachment between us till he died. Every now and then, he’d call me and he would say to me: ‘You were the only woman in my life who was able to make that right turn.’” What did he mean? “That I didn’t need him any more. That I found a sense of dignity about myself.” She stops talking, looks a little distant for a moment, then smiles contentedly. “Oh boy!” she says. “I know now that he did actually love me. And when I realised that, I was so happy. It meant so much to me.” When did she realise? “Oh, way after it was over. Then, if I needed proof, it was in the newspapers that there was only one picture of a woman in his bedroom and that was me.” She is almost right. The New York Post reported that the only piece of movie memorabilia found in Brando’s home after his death was a picture of him in the 1969 film The Night of the Following Day, locked in a passionate embrace with a naked Moreno. Since her husband’s death, she has done just as she fancies and is getting to be more herself by the day. In the documentary, her daughter mentions the time they were at a fundraiser and no money had been raised, so Moreno offered to cook for four people and flash her breasts for $10,000. She got the $10,000. When asked in 2017 to play the grandmother in One Day at a Time, she agreed on the proviso that they made the character sexual. Why was that so important to her? “Being sexy? Because nobody my age is ever thought of as somebody who has ovaries. You can’t have a baby, but you can still play for sexy.” She has lived by herself for a decade. It amazes her how many people assume she is lonely. “I love being by myself,” she says. “It’s not hard to be alone. In fact, it’s great, if you like the person you live with.” • This article was amended on 2 December 2021 to refer to Moreno as having moved to New York, rather than to “the US” as a child. Rita Moreno: Just a Girl Who Decided to Go for It is available on digital download from 6 December. West Side Story is in UK cinemas from 10 December In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is on 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.orgSuccession 9pm, Sky Atlantic “Shit is about to pop off …” It’s Kendall Roy’s (Jeremy Strong) 40th birthday and, boy, is he out to celebrate, throwing a party where hundreds of guests he doesn’t know are invited to be “born” into his world for the evening – *pause for shudder*. Shiv (Sarah Snook) and Roman (Kieran Culkin) arrive to try to do business with tech mogul Lukas Matsson (Alexander Skarsgård) – but all he wants for the night is “privacy, pussy, pasta”. Meanwhile, Greg (Nicholas Braun) tries to work up the guts to ask out a longtime crush with the help – or hindrance – of Tom (Matthew Macfadyen). It might just be the standout episode patient fans have been waiting for this season. Hollie Richardson The Outlaws 9pm, BBC One What started as a deceptively low-stakes comedy now concludes with a high-drama finale – and a number of emotionally complex realisations. As we learn more about Christian’s history, the gang come together to try to save him. Will wannabe police officer Diane help them? And look out for the Banksy cameo that made headlines. HR Royal Bastards: Rise of the Tudors 9pm, Sky History The innovation in this documentary series – in lieu of a voiceover, actors of the calibre of Sophie Rundle, Sheila Atim and Philip Glenister deliver the narration to camera – succeeds in bringing the dramatic reconstructions to life. This week, as the Earl of Warwick schemes on behalf of Henry VI, Margaret Beaufort plots to reclaim her son. Jack Seale Frankie Boyle’s New World Order 10pm, BBC Two With its mix of discomfiting monologues, hot-button topic debates and trenchant media analysis, New World Order has evolved into perhaps the perfect vehicle for Boyle’s scorched-earth outlook. The penultimate episode in this run sees the ire-and-brimstone Scot welcome more guests into his Govan Batcave. Graeme Virtue Along for the Ride With David O’Doherty 10pm, Channel 4 As the comedian David O’Doherty continues to cycle around the UK with celebrities, this episode is for anyone who has ever tried to ride off a skin-crawling hangover (respect to you). Tonight, mountain biker Grayson Perry gets on the saddle and embarks on a two-day trip with a night of booze. HR Dexter: New Blood 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic The return of Dexter seemed more warranted than most TV reboots, if only because the original farewell was so unsatisfactory. Dexter appears slightly more fallible now, which might make for a more satisfying conclusion. Tonight, the father of his latest victim has a shock announcement and Angela makes progress in the missing persons case. Phil Harrison Film choice 14 Peaks: Nothing Is Impossible (Torquil Jones, 2021) Netflix The former Gurkha and SBS commando Nimsdai Purja’s attempt to climb every mountain in the world above 8,000m in just seven months is the inspiring subject of this documentary. The challenge (which he dubs “Project Possible”) is also driven by a desire to place climbers from Nepal in their rightful place in the firmament of the sport. Purja smilingly leads his all-Nepali team into the high-altitude “death zone”, where the most extreme physical and mental challenges await. Simon WardellTop story: Mask up, secondary school pupils told Hello, the news looks like being challenging terrain this week. Warren Murray here to help you pick your way through. The Covid booster vaccination scheme could be significantly expanded as early as today in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation is expected to advise boosters for younger people, and could also recommend a cut in the current six-month wait between second and booster doses, it is understood. Secondary school pupils in England are meanwhile being told to wear masks in communal areas, and it will be mandatory again from tomorrow in shops and on public transport. For the global Omicron situation, including Japan closing its borders, read our latest news wrap, and remember our live blog is covering further developments. A third case of the Omicron variant has been confirmed in the UK, in someone linked to southern Africa. Investigators looking into one of the two cases announced on Saturday have sought potential contacts in Brentwood, Essex, as far back as nine days ago, raising questions over how long the new variant has been in the UK. Boris Johnson announced on Saturday that all arrivals to the UK “must take a day-two PCR test and self-isolate until they receive a negative result”. With other countries also tightening entry requirements, such as Switzerland requiring 10 days’ quarantine, travel firms are once again scrambling to rearrange people’s holiday plans. What does the advent of Omicron mean for the double vaccinated? Experts seem cautiously optimistic that even with its more than 30 mutations in the crucial “spike protein”, the variant will still be targeted by the antibodies and T-cells that a person builds up from previous infection or vaccination. Prof Paul Morgan, an immunologist at Cardiff University, said: “I think a blunting rather than a complete loss [of immunity] is the most likely outcome.” If necessary, it would be possible within a matter of months to produce a vaccine with antigens tailored to a new variant, said Dr Peter English, a retired consultant in communicable disease control. * * * Icy Monday in Arwen’s wake – A minus 10C Arctic blast is forecast to follow the blizzards and close to 100mph winds of Storm Arwen, which caused power blackouts for half a million households in swathes of the north of England, Scotland, Wales, the south-west and the Midlands at the weekend. Three people were killed by falling trees, two of them in their cars. The Met Office said that as the storm cleared towards Europe, temperatures would drop to the coldest of the season so far. “Even if you do live in a city, you can expect to be scraping frost, ice or even snow off your cars on Monday morning,” said forecaster Tom Morgan. * * * Crisis in the making – Britain’s manufacturers are facing a crisis of rapidly rising costs and towering debts that many fear could push them over the brink, the trade body Make UK has said. It is urging the government to introduce loan payment holidays as factories struggle with debt racked up to get them through the pandemic, as well as other challenges. Britain’s supply chain meltdown, much of which relates to Brexit, is leading to gaps on shelves and price rises. British manufacturing has endured its worst downturn for more than 30 years, and the closely watched RSM survey says it now faces a “sharp inflationary spiral”. The government says it is “committed to supporting business as they grow and recover from the pandemic”, offering the Recovery Loan Scheme and Pay as you Grow schemes. * * * Old Bexley and Sidcup poll looms – One habitual Tory voter may brand the prime minister a “blithering idiot” while another wants Boris Johnson to “sort himself out”. But Labour still faces an uphill battle to win the seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup in Thursday’s byelection. Daniel Francis would need to overturn the 19,000 majority earned by James Brokenshire, who died from cancer at the age of 53 last month. Louie French is the Conservatives’ candidate and his team did not respond to Guardian requests for an interview. There are 11 candidates in total standing. It is the first in a series of three – possibly four – byelections, including in North Shropshire, the safe Tory seat vacated by Owen Paterson following his official rebuke over lobbying. Analysis by Best for Britain, meanwhile, suggests the Tories would be stripped of their majority and unable to form a government if opposition parties cooperated in fewer than a quarter of England’s parliamentary seats. * * * Battle to keep care homes afloat – Social care across England is “rapidly deteriorating” with waiting lists soaring and councils struggling with care home closures, service chiefs have warned. Long-term waiting lists have almost quadrupled and 1.5m hours of necessary home care were not delivered in the three months to November amid a staffing crisis. Half of councils have had to respond to a care home closure or bankruptcy in the past six months. Separately, Conservative voters in the north of England view Boris Johnson’s changes to social care funding as toxic and say his broken pledge on not selling homes to pay for care is a betrayal, according to research seen by the Guardian. The polling and focus group undertaken for Labour found more than two-thirds of the public oppose the plans, with pro-Brexit voters (71%) as likely to oppose them as remain voters (74%). * * * Housing hoopla – This year’s property market is poised to become the busiest for 14 years, with one in 16 privately owned homes on course to change hands by the end of December, according to new data. Zoopla also said the annual rate of UK house price growth was running at 6.9% – up from 3.5% in the same month last year – and that the average cost of a home had risen by £15,500 over the past 12 months. However, interest rate rises – the first is expected next month – and rising inflation could put a brake on the market. Today in Focus podcast: Inflation rises again The inflation rate keeps going up – and some economists are warning that it’s time to take urgent action. So what is causing the change, what does it mean for ordinary people, and what’s the best way to deal with it? Lunchtime read: Barbados cuts ties with the Crown Late on Monday night, local time, Barbados will declare itself a republic, becoming the first nation to remove Queen Elizabeth II as its head of state in nearly three decades. The transition, flagged last year in the thick of activism inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement, is being executed amicably, in the presence of Prince Charles, and circumspectly, more than 20 years since it was recommended by a government commission. Michael Safi reports from the ground. Sport Michael Carrick said after Manchester United held Chelsea to a 1-1 draw at Stamford Bridge that Ralf Rangnick had no influence on his decision to name Cristiano Ronaldo on the bench. Pep Guardiola described as “fantasy” the idea that Manchester City can launch another long unbeaten run to match last season’s 28-match sequence following their 2-1 win against West Ham. Tributes from across motor sport have been paid after the death of Sir Frank Williams at the age of 79. Emma Raducanu has spoken in glowing terms about the support and positive advice she has received from Lewis Hamilton since her US Open victory as she looks to move on and continue her growth as an athlete. Great Britain triumphed against Czech Republic in the Davis Cup, winning Group C and progressing to the quarter-finals thanks to a decisive 6-4, 6-2 doubles victory by Joe Salisbury and Neal Skupski. England’s Roses opened their three-Test netball series against Jamaica with a 55-45 victory after a storming comeback. Billy Vunipola celebrated his comeback from injury by creating the try that broke Sale’s resistance in a 25-14 Premiership victory for Saracens. Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi played to a third successive draw in the third game of their world championship showdown in Dubai as the Russian challenger weathered another atypical position before negotiating a bloodless result after 41 moves in 2hr 42min. World No 1 Mark Selby was knocked out of the UK Championship after suffering a 6-2 defeat to Iran’s Hossein Vafaei in York. And Mikaela Shiffrin marked the return of the women’s World Cup to North America by setting yet another record. Business Japanese’s Nikkei index dropped 1.4% in morning trading but recovered to be 0.02% lower at the midday break. US stock futures have been leading a market rebound. Oil prices bounced more than $3 a barrel to recoup a chunk of Friday’s falls, while safe-haven bonds and the yen lost ground as markets latched on to hopes the Omicron variant of Covid would prove to be mild. The FTSE is poised to open higher, while the pound is on $1.332 and €1.182 at time of writing. The papers Apart from boosters and Omicron, our Guardian front page also features “French fury over UK ‘double talk’ on refugees”. The interior minister in Paris, Gérald Darmanin, said: “The more France is used as a punching bag for British domestic politics, and we hear provocative statements like ‘France has to take back all the immigrants’, the harder it becomes to find a solution. It’s not only insulting, it’s totally unrealistic.” Darmanin was speaking after France convened a meeting of immigration ministers from Germany, Holland and Belgium, as well as officials from the EU, Europol and the border agency Frontex. The UK home secretary, Priti Patel, was barred from the meeting because of Boris Johnson issuing public demands of the French about the Channel crisis, without paying the courtesy of putting them to Paris beforehand. The Express seeks to offer reassurance this morning: “Vaccine makers – we CAN defeat Omicron variant”. The Daily Mail says “Booster for all over-18s”; the Times headline is similar, appended with “in bid to save Christmas”. The Mirror adopts the “save Christmas” line as well. Between supply chain crises, supermarket shortages and Covid, Christmas is certainly taking a lot of saving this year. Commuters’ friend the Metro says “Cover up, protect others … It’s not too much to mask” – their use in England in shops and on public transport will become mandatory again from Tuesday. The lead story in the Financial Times is the travel angle – it says Omicron has “sparked restrictions around the world”. “Face masks in schools to restrict Omicron” says the i, while the Telegraph has “Curbs on Omicron will cause ‘chaos’ in schools” – it’s talking about self-isolation requirements for close contacts. The latter paper also covers a 10-year deal between Israel and the UK to deepen trade and defence ties, including a joint commitment to prevent Iran obtaining nuclear weapons.Nikki Jamieson sat before the royal commission into defence and veteran suicide with a photo of her son in uniform in front of her – and his slouch hat. “This is what I have left,” she said quietly, on the first day of evidence in Brisbane on Monday. Jamieson said her son, private Daniel Garforth, “was committed to his service but because of the constant belittling and demoralisation … by his chain of command, he felt incredibly betrayed by those who were supposed to protect him”. “They didn’t have his back,” she said. Her son, who was posted away from his family including his infant daughter, took his own life in November 2014. He was 21. In forthright and at times emotional evidence, Jamieson told the royal commission there were clear signs her son needed help, but he felt trapped inside a military regime unwilling to respond. “Daniel was left traumatised when he felt unable to help a colleague who was also struggling with mental health problems. He was ordered back on duty again.” The other service member later died also, Jamieson said. “I had that phone call with my son when he was traumatised and he was devastated because he couldn’t help that person. So I was the one on that phone with him trying to counsel and support him through that process,” she said. “So I know something happened. I know something went drastically wrong.” Jamieson said her son felt isolated being within the military’s chain of command, and said there were catastrophic flaws in the army’s response to his deteriorating mental and physical health. He had applied for a discharge from the military and expected to be home for Christmas, but was then told it had been cancelled. “He wanted to come home, he wanted to leave,” his mother said. “Something happened in that process.” Jamieson described her son, who arrived in Australia aged 13 from the UK, as “one of life’s little helpers” and a “cheeky chappy”. “He was … loyal to the core, which ultimately became a bit of an achilles heel.” Jamieson is a suicidologist and expert on moral injury and trauma in veterans, her work inspired by her son’s experience in the military. “Since his death, I have dedicated my life to defence and veteran suicide prevention and have been actively involved in the advocacy and push for a royal commission.” Jamieson has also accepted a role working with the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, arguing the defence force’s institutions need “positive, sustainable and continuous change”. She said for family of veterans and defence members who suicide, getting information about their loved one was often difficult and re-traumatising. She accessed information about her son’s death through freedom of information laws, but it took four years. “We as the loved ones want to know what happened to our children so we can start to work towards some kind of closure,” she said. The royal commission, tasked with investigating “systemic issues” around defence and veteran suicide, will hear 10 days of evidence in its first set of hearings this year, with a focus on people with lived experience, such as serving defence personnel, veterans and bereaved family members. Counsel assisting the commission, Kevin Connor SC, urged veterans to approach the commission if they felt able. “Your voice needs to be heard,” Connor said. “Your stories will throw light on the systemic issues that the royal commission needs to explore.” Connor said veterans organisations had long disputed the official suicide statistics reported by the defence and veterans’ affairs departments. “Their concern was that the official number was low and not reflective of what they were seeing on the ground,” he said. “This appears very much to be the case.” The latest statistics compiled by the Australian Institute of Health and Well-being found 1,273 defence force members and veterans committed suicide between 2001 and 2019. The cohort examined was anybody who had served in Australia’s defence forces since 1985. The rates of suicide for serving defence force members is lower than the general population – a reflection of the so-called “healthy soldier effect” – but significantly higher for those who have left the services: 24% higher for ex-serving males; and 102% (or 2.02 times) higher for ex-serving females, the AIHW said. The inquiry has already flagged its inquiry will include confronting accounts of life in Australia’s defence services, including bullying, concerns over the treatment of women, sexual and physical assault, and the ritual hazing of new recruits. It will cross-examine government and defence force officials in subsequent hearings in 2022. The commission heard three key elements had been identified in its preliminary work and through previous inquiries: “Culture, transition [out of the services], and mental health support.” • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.orgHomeless people and those in poor housing are at increasing risk from the climate crisis, while suffering the consequences of our dependence on costly fossil fuels, housing charities have warned. The leaders of three of the UK’s biggest housing charities have written to ministers to call for urgent action for this winter for people facing homelessness, and to improve inadequate housing. They also want a coherent strategy for the future on how to meet the UK’s net zero emissions target while building the new homes needed around the country. The chief executive of Shelter, Polly Neate, said: “It’s clear the climate emergency is only making the housing emergency worse. Already, people who are sleeping rough are feeling the awful effects of flooding and heatwaves, while the fossil fuel energy price hike means many people are having to choose between heating their homes or paying their rent.” She warned: “This winter is going to be a tough one. We urgently need a guarantee, including funding, to get everyone off the streets to protect them from our increasingly extreme weather.” The first named storm of this winter hit the UK this weekend. Storm Arwen brought winds of almost 100mph to parts of the country. The letter, seen by the Guardian, and signed by the chiefs of three major housing and homelessness charities – Shelter, Homeless Link and Crisis – is the first time they have jointly intervened with ministers about the climate crisis. They are increasingly concerned about the impacts of extreme weather on the vulnerable, and fear that the opportunity to improve people’s housing while reducing greenhouse gas emissions is being lost. They cited examples of rough sleepers who had their tents washed away in flash floods this summer, and families in emergency housing who could not stay cool in the summer heatwaves, and now face inflated costs for fossil fuel heating which they cannot afford. Recalling the recent Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, where the government promised to spearhead global action on the climate crisis, they wrote: “It is the poorest who are being hit hardest by the climate emergency … We know we need to do what we can now.” In the letter to Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, they called for an urgent review of whether current rough sleeping emergency weather measures were fit for purpose in extreme weather, and for funding for “a new era of climate-resilient and carbon-negative housing offered at a social rent”, showing that reaching net zero could reduce bills and result in better housing. They suggest a pilot scheme that could demonstrate how better housing that is lower in greenhouse gas emissions could be achieved at reasonable cost for social rents. That would “show how a net zero transition could help the most vulnerable reduce bills and produce better places to live”. One homeless man from Sheffield, Chris, who was living in a tent while on the street for six months and working in a supermarket, struggled through extreme conditions in Storm Desmond in 2015, nearly losing his tent. He fears that scientific warnings that more extreme weather – including very cold spells as well as heatwaves and storms – will hit as the climate crisis continues mean people such as him will face harsher conditions in future. He told the Guardian how vulnerable people in that position could be: “I chose to put my tent in an exposed area because at night you are very vulnerable – if you’re in a doorway someone can trap you and do malicious things to you. So you want to be able to see people approaching, but you are then exposed to the elements. It was bitter cold, with a biting wind, my tent was blowing away and I did not have anywhere I could go – it was frightening.” He is now being supported by Shelter and plans to petition the prime minister to ensure that no one is on the streets this winter. Between March 2020 and February 2021, the government ensured about 37,000 people were given emergency accommodation, in the Everyone In scheme. But many of those people are now back on the streets and facing a winter of extreme cold and storms. Rick Henderson, the chief executive of Homeless Link, which represents frontline homeless charities across England, said the problem was worsening: “Periods of extreme weather can be very dangerous for people sleeping rough. As these grow more common, addressing the current emergency weather measures is imperative to make sure they reflect our current environment and keep people as safe as possible.” The government will not introduce its future homes standard, requiring new homes to be built with adequate insulation and low-carbon heating, until 2025. More than a million homes have been built in recent years with insulation that is well below the standards needed, and without low-carbon heating such as heat pumps, or solar panels and other low-carbon technology. An estimated 1 million more will be built to poor standards before the new standard is introduced, although installing such measures costs only about £5,000 for developers when building new homes, while retrofitting them costs an average of £20,000 for the householder. A government spokesperson said: “We are building more social housing and taking action to reduce waiting lists, which have fallen by almost 600,000 households since 2010. But we must go further, so we’re investing over £12bn in affordable housing over the next five years – the largest investment in affordable housing in a decade – along with over £2bn in the next three years to tackle rough sleeping and homelessness. Homes built to current standards won’t need extensive retrofitting to reach net zero – and we’re increasing the standards further to reduce emissions from new homes by 31%.”Universities in England risk breaking competition laws if they add loopholes letting them withdraw offers from students at the last minute if courses are oversubscribed, ministers and regulators have told vice-chancellors. For the last two years, the surge in A-level grades allowed more students than forecast to meet their offer targets, and some universities withdrew offers when it became clear that courses would be oversubscribed. In a concerted push by the government, the Office for Students (OfS), the higher education regulator for England and the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), universities have been told to remove the oversubscription clauses from their offers or face possible punishments from the regulators. Michelle Donelan, the universities minister, told vice-chancellors that it was “vital” that their offers were fair as an incentive for hardworking students to attain their grades. “It is therefore disappointing that, during previous admissions cycles, there have been instances of providers introducing oversubscription conditions that permitted them to withdraw places where the number of students meeting offer conditions exceeded the number of places,” Donelan said in a letter sent to all vice-chancellors in England. The OfS said it was “concerned” that higher education institutions had added the oversubscription clauses to their contracts with students. “Our view is that providers should not use such clauses, as doing so would probably contravene consumer law,” the OfS stated. “A potential breach in consumer law may prompt the OfS to investigate and, if appropriate, carry out enforcement action to address any failures to comply.” The CMA, which regulates universities for possible breaches of competition law, reiterated its view that the offer and acceptance of a university place was effectively a legally binding contract, with the university obliged to reserve a place providing the student met specific entry requirements such as A-level grades. A clause allowing wide discretion to cancel an accepted offer “is likely to be unfair under ‘unfair terms’ legislation”, the CMA said. Similar clauses that would limit the liability of a university if it fails to provide qualified students with a place “are inappropriate and potentially unfair”. Universities UK, which represents the leadership of major institutions, said decisions on admissions were a key area of university autonomy, and that institutions were “well aware of their legal obligations under consumer law and strive to ensure these are met”. University leaders say they have been forced to withdraw places or offer incentives for students to change courses or delay their study because of the uncertainty created by the pandemic, especially the government’s decision to cancel formal exams and use teacher-assessed grades instead. That led to a much higher number of top grades awarded than admissions offices had forecast. Donelan also welcomed efforts by Universities UK and GuildHE to draw up a new sector-wide code of practice for admissions. But she also urged universities to reject the use of “conditional-unconditional” offers, which give students a guaranteed place in return for immediately rejecting all their other choices. During the pandemic, the OfS placed a temporary ban on the use of these offers, which expired in September. Donelan said she would “strongly encourage” universities to continue “avoiding the use of conditional-unconditional offers and other practices which may place undue pressure on students to make choices”.Senate candidates endorsed by Donald Trump have struggled of late, from Sean Parnell’s withdrawal in Pennsylvania while denying allegations of domestic abuse to the former NFL star Herschel Walker angering party leaders with his run in Georgia. But to one candidate for the Republican nomination in Missouri, Congressman Billy Long, the former president’s endorsement still carries the ultimate weight. “If he endorses in this race,” the 66-year-old told Politico, “I don’t care who he endorses, it’s over ... And that’s what I’m trying to impress upon him is that, you know, ‘You need to get involved in this race and put an end to it.’” Long said he would tell the former president: “You’re looking at the guy that was with you from day one.’ Never ever left. I mean, look at this tie.” The former auctioneer duly showed off his neckwear, a gold striped number signed, apparently in his signature Sharpie marker, by Trump himself. Long said Trump signed the $37 tie in Nevada in 2016, when Long spoke on his behalf. Long has had – and auctioned off – other ties signed by the president, including a striking example featuring flags and caricatures which Long wore to the State of the Union in 2019. Trump’s own ties played a prominent role in the 2016 election and its aftermath. In 2015, Macy’s made news when it dropped Trump’s menswear line – many headlines said the retail giant was “cutting ties” – over his racist remarks about Mexicans at his campaign launch. In 2019, the former New Jersey governor and Trump ally Chris Christie revealed that Trump advised him to wear longer ties in order to look slimmer. Politico described Long as “built like a lineman” and said he spoke with a “thick ‘Missoura’ twang”. In Missoura’, whose other sitting senator is the Trump-supporting controversialist Josh Hawley, a large field is jostling to replace the retiring Roy Blunt. One candidate, Mark McCloskey, rose to fame in 2020 when he and his wife pointed guns at protesters for racial justice near their home in St Louis. Both pleaded guilty to misdemeanours. Another, Eric Greitens, resigned as governor in 2018, amid scandals over sex and campaign finance. Criminal charges were dropped. Speaking to Politico, Long called Greitens “Chuck Schumer’s candidate”, a reference to the Democratic leader who will defend control of the Senate next year, hoping to face weak or controversial Republicans in key states. A spokesperson for Greitens told Politico: “Billy Long is a much better comedian than he is a Senate candidate.” Observers including Blunt said Long, who also has a habit of handing out fake money with Trump’s face on it, had a chance of winning Trump’s endorsement. But though Long voted to object to electoral college results in 2020 he has also recognised Joe Biden as president, thereby failing a key test in a party in Trump’s grip. Long told Politico he would not follow his leader in the House, Kevin McCarthy, to Florida to worship the party’s golden idol. “I have people say: ‘Call him, call him every day. Go sit at Mar-a-Lago and tell him you’re not leaving till he endorses,’” Long said. “I’m smart enough to know that’s not going to win favour with Donald Trump.” Others might say that it would.Decide on a budget The price of secondhand cars has rocketed, rising at “unprecedented rates”, according to the AA – amid a shortage of new vehicles rolling off the production lines. Incredibly, some models now cost more used than they would new. So even if you are going for secondhand rather than new, still make sure you’re not overstretching yourself. Check on the prices, running costs and depreciation of different models using comparison tools on Parkers, and What Car? Once you’ve decided on a model, Cargiant.co.uk and Autotrader.co.uk are good places to start your search. Haggle down costs Don’t pay the list price. Dealers will often be looking to hit targets and may be able to juggle figures to increase their chances of closing a deal. Negotiate using the cheapest online prices, and on used cars haggle over any defects, even if they’re minor. If you want any add-ons, such as a satnav, ask for these to be included as part of the deal. What Car? lists a “target price” for negotiation on new cars which you should check out before heading to a dealer. Consider borrowing The cheapest way to buy a car is usually with cash. But a 0% purchase credit card can be a good option. You need to repay the debt in full over the interest-free period to avoid charges. For example, Santander offers 31 months at 0% on its balance transfer card with a 2.75% fee. After the 0% deal ends, the rate is about 20.9% APR. Paying by credit card gives you section 75 protection, making the card provider equally liable with the dealer if things go wrong. Taking out a cheap personal loan may also be possible. If you have an excellent credit score, rates on borrowing from £7,500 can be as low as 2.8%. MoneySavingExpert’s loans eligibility calculator finds deals you’re likely to be accepted for using a soft search that won’t leave a mark on your credit file. Look at hire purchase Get hire purchase (HP) or personal contract purchase (PCP) finance directly from a dealer. Or use an online comparison site to search for the best rate and find a car once you’re pre-approved for a deal. Under HP, you pay for the car and interest over the contract period, and the finance company owns the vehicle until you make the final payment. Under PCP, you take a loan, but won’t own the car at the end of the contract unless you pay a large final “balloon payment”. Alternatively, you can hand back the car, or trade up to a new model and sign up again. Beware of being lured by low monthly repayments on PCP. These deals typically run for between three and five years, but monthly payments are lower than HP because you’re only borrowing the amount that the new car falls in value over the term, rather than enough to buy the whole car. For example, a £30,000 model may only be worth £15,000 after three years, so the payments will only cover £15,000. Matthew Harwood, a car finance expert at Confused.com, says: “HP is the best option, as payments are spread evenly across the term – with PCP, you face paying the lump sum balloon payment.” Compare finance deals Compare costs across the whole market before you sign up. For example, let’s take a Ford Fiesta Zetec 1.0 EcoBoost at an on-the-road price of £12,000 and £0 deposit. If you have a good credit score, taking out a four-year personal loan at 5.9%, costs £280 a month. The total to repay is £13,461, according to Confused.com. Under HP, if monthly payments are £291 over four years at 7.9%, the total payable is £13,964 (including a £10 purchase fee). Under PCP, monthly repayments are £218 at 8.9%. The optional final payment after four years is £4,424 to own the car, increasing the total to £14,911. Check any setup costs and early repayment charges. Erin Baker, the editorial director at Auto Trader, says: “Adjust your deposit and the term of your agreement to get the right balance of upfront expense and ongoing monthly costs.” Get a deposit contribution There are a growing number of deposit-free finance deals. But if you do pay a deposit (and you’ll probably get a better rate by doing so), you may be able to get a contribution towards this from the dealer if you take out a specific deal. A deposit contribution is free cash, but compare costs across the market. Baker says: “Any deposit contribution is typically knocked off your upfront payment rather than the amount you are financing. This can make the cost of a new car more affordable, but monthly payments generally remain similar.” Rent the car If you have no desire to own the car, leasing is an option. Also known as personal contract hire, it typically offers cheap, flexible deals – for example you can sign up for shorter terms of only a few months to trial a car. You can lease a car directly from a manufacturer or through a car finance firm, with many now operating online. You pay a deposit, and a set amount each month for two to four years. Compare the total cost of leasing deals on manufacturers’ websites if you’re after a particular model, and on comparison sites such as Leasing.com. But remember, while you won’t take a hit on depreciation, you’ll be left with nothing at the end of the deal. Ask your employer Leasing a car from your employer can be much cheaper than buying from a dealership. So check if your workplace offers a company car scheme. For example, you may be able to halve the cost of leasing a new electric car if your employer is signed up to a work scheme. Cash in your old car You’re unlikely to save money by part-exchanging your car for a new one, as the dealer will want to make a profit. If you’re prepared to put in the groundwork to sell privately, check out free listings on Gumtree, eBay and Facebook, or you can pay to advertise on PistonHeads or Auto Trader. You can also get a valuation, without committing to selling, on sites such as Webuyanycar, Auto Trader and Motorway. But even though it’s not as profitable, the ease of part-exchanging appeals to many people. “The lack of hassle involved in this option is often worth the small financial hit you’ll take when trading in for a new model,” Baker says.It’s an awkward start to my pottery journey. I’ve arrived at the Kiln Rooms in Peckham, south-east London, dressed as Demi Moore, star of the movie Ghost, and the most famous pottery scene ever filmed. “Should I have worn a tank top?” asks my tutor David McGuire. Tank top? I realise with horror that he has never seen the film. “When you say you’re a potter, people always mention Ghost!” he winces, almost in physical pain. I have no idea why he thinks Patrick Swayze wears a tank top in it. Then again, when I check the film, I realise I am dressed nothing like Demi Moore either. Is McGuire choosing not to watch Ghost purely on a point of principle? Perhaps, he admits. You should watch it, I insist, it’s classic Whoopi Goldberg. “Shall we make a start?” he says. The lesson begins with physical heft, pushing and turning the clay in an arduous technique known as ram’s head wedging. Wedging removes air pockets from the clay, lest they cause the finished product to bloat or explode in the oven. It’s like kneading dough, I remark, always thinking about pizza. It’s the opposite, says McGuire, apologetically, as kneading introduces air to dough. He has a lovely Donegal accent, which makes corrections easy to hear. Also, I’m thinking about putting a quattro formaggi in my oven tonight, which will certainly lead to bloating, possibly an explosion. Time for us to throw down. McGuire sits at a parallel wheel, like a driving instructor. I throw wedged clay on to the centre of the electric wheel, depress the foot pedal, and we’re rolling. McGuire talks me through coning and doming, pulling the clay up into a small tower, then pushing it down into a sourdough shape. It feels like sorcery, shaping clay by merely positioning one’s hand at its edge, letting the wheel do the work. It is muscular and finely controlled at once, from an elbow wedged into the hip for support to minuscule calibrations of fingertips. It is hard, too, judging angle, pressure, speed. Keeping the clay from drying with a wet sponge, stopping it getting too wet. I’m trying to make a bowl, but if it’s hideous, we’ll call it an ashtray. Anything can be an ashtray. I’d expected a comic buckaroo, floppy clay flying everywhere. Instead, the endless revolution of round clay, within concentric circles of the spinning wheel, feels like gazing into infinity. Throwing is a portal to mindfulness, as once the wheel is in motion, the options are tune in, or spin out. “Look at your hand, not at the clay,” advises McGuire, like the Jungle Book’s Bagheera warning Mowgli not to look into the eyes of Kaa. I could watch this revolving earth for ever. The notion that humans were first made from clay, with life breathed into it, appears in the cosmologies of the Qur’an, the Bible, and the Yoruba religion. Any divine pretensions I have are punctured, however, when McGuire mentions that inhaling clay dust causes silicosis. I later do a quick, horrific search for the condition online, in which inhaled silica, too fine to be seen in normal light, causes blue skin and lung failure. “Single exposure is fine, but when students are blowing on their glaze, I do think: ‘You’re killing me,’” he muses, in his lovely lilt. Pleased with my bowl, I have a go at making a plate. This time we use a mould, curved like an upside down turtle’s shell, pressing the clay into shape. It feels lumpen, after the elegance of throwing. Every student is drawn to different aspects of pottery, McGuire says. This technique suits anyone with a talent for decoration. Maybe that’s me! I rake striations into the clay with a decorative comb, then attempt a marbling effect, washing green and blue glaze over it. McGuire isn’t sure the combination will be vivid; colours are complicated. Earthenware pottery takes reds and oranges readily, while firing stoneware renders pinks less vibrant. Electric versus gas flames makes a difference, too. How does one ever know enough to make anything good? Time, he answers gently. Coil work, throwing, glazing: all pathways you could spend years exploring. Once pottery works its way into your life, it starts to shape you. The annealing process – a slow cooling, after kiln firing – means it is weeks before I see my finished kitchenware. Time goes by slowly; but time can do so much. When I return, I am met with the most beautiful small bowl. Even, smooth, boasting a deep blue glaze. My plate is something else. It’s irredeemably ugly, thick and monstrously heavy. The colours are insipid and formless. It’s rough and cracking in places, jagged elsewhere. It can’t even pass as an ashtray. Potters spend a lifetime refining their craft. It would be insulting for me to turn up on a Tuesday and toss out a Ming vase. I’ve walked through Morrisons dressed nearly like Demi Moore (Semi Moore?) for nothing. But I think I should try again. Pottery is as much meditation as craft; elemental yet peaceful, earth and water and fire calling one to slow down. It’s ancient, and it’s what we need now. If I’m too lazy to Swayze, I’m in love all the same. Point, break Appreciate the making, McGuire urges, not the final products. Get comfortable with letting them go. “Does this need to exist?” is the question he asks himself before firing anything. Maybe pottery was Buddhism all along? Smugness points Moore practice required. 3/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.Sheila Rowbotham, co-founder of the first Women’s Liberation conference in Oxford in 1970, dared to hope then that the revolution, if not nigh, was at least possible. By the end of the decade – a period of profound dislocation and dissent that included a miners’ strike, the three-day week, the Vietnam war, the Troubles in Northern Ireland, the rise of gay liberation, a Labour government introducing deep welfare cuts, followed by the election of Margaret Thatcher and the arrival of neoliberalism – Rowbotham writes: “Socialist feminists like me did not give up on hope but the daring was diminished.” Daring to Hope: My Life in the 1970s records an exhausting life of activism, lecturing, pamphleteering, editing, book writing, journalism, travelling, speech-making, struggling with the emerging ideas and conflicts in the allegedly non-hierarchical sisterhood (“Who was to start a meeting when everyone was competing not to be leader?” ), motherhood and, as a sexual libertarian, a complicated love life with, at one point, three men on the go and a communal house in Hackney to maintain on a highly unreliable income. “A vision of us birthing a new politics of harmony” did not allow for much sleep. Rowbotham, now in her late 70s, is a multi-award-winning social historian and co-founder of the History Workshop movement, viewing history from the perspective of women and “ordinary people”. For decades, she has been a chronicler of radical groups in Algeria, Cuba, Vietnam, China, Russia and Britain (as documented in 1972’s Women, Resistance and Revolution and Hidden from History in 1973). Crucially, what she learned helped to shape the ideas that sparked the second wave of feminism. Rowbotham deserves to be better known by younger generations. Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, first published in 1973 and reprinted several times over the decade, is still a powerful primer to how “in a world defined by men” women face huge barriers to “heave ourselves into the future”. Then, it was about mutual support and grassroots collective action to run nurseries, rape centres and refuges, unionising contract cleaners and supporting female strikers – discovering that what women had in common was systemic discrimination. The personal had become political. “That sense of recognition that could signal new ways of seeing,” she writes. Rowbotham has wisdom – and wit. When Paul Atkinson, the father of her son, Will, announces that they will be “practising celibacy and [having] historical outings”, she writes: “I must respect a man’s right to choose”, drily echoing the pro-abortion slogan. (One friend says of leftwing feminist men: “Somehow, once they got over their chauvinism, their life leaked out.”) In 1970, Rowbotham was 27. It was a time when rape in marriage was permitted, a woman needed a male guarantor to obtain a mortgage, equal pay legislation was still to come and among the left’s many factions, women were seen but definitely not heard. The first Women’s Liberation conference demanded equal pay, equal education and job opportunities, contraception and abortion on demand and free 24-hour nurseries. Even then, Rowbotham worried that “once achieved, women would remain oppressed”. Her aim as a socialist feminist was not to “lean in” , climb the corporate ladder and contribute to the maximisation of economic growth but to create a better society. In Daring to Hope, Rowbotham writes of her disenchantment with traditional Marxist history because it neglects the role of housewives in supporting the economy, and the issues of sexuality, sexual oppression and motherhood. In the 70s, she questioned the whiteness of the women’s movement. “Is this a movement for liberated women or a movement to liberate all women?” she asks. At the end of the decade, along with Lynne Segal and Hilary Wainwright, Rowbotham wrote Beyond the Fragments: Feminism and the Making of Socialism to try to strengthen the fraying bonds of solidarity when hope had been destroyed by the rise of the right. “Sisterhood demands a new way of living,” she writes. “The ultimate oppression of women forces a redefinition of what is personal and what is political.” If that sounds antiquated, it demonstrates just how much daring has been diminished. • Daring to Hope: My Life in the 1970s by Sheila Rowbotham is published by Verso (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIn the early 1970s, law enforcement leaders in Chicago decided the practice of illegal abortion was intolerable in their city and, in a mostly forgotten chapter of history, undertook a campaign to root out those who performed the procedure in secret. On a tip, police turned their attention to “Call Jane”, a feminist collective of young women who, since 1965, had provided safe but illegal abortions to roughly 3,000 Chicagoans per year. The collective was raided after two Catholic women told police their sister-in-law planned to have an abortion performed by the group. A Chicago homicide detective was assigned to the case and traced “Jane” to the South Shore neighborhood, bordered by the blue waters of Lake Michigan. There, police raided an apartment, arrested nearly 50 people for questioning, and sent three women who were actively undergoing abortion treatment to the hospital. Seven women were charged with 11 counts of performing an abortion and conspiracy to commit abortion. They would soon be dubbed the “Abortion Seven” by newspapers. But the Call Jane members protected people they served – they even ate index cards detailing patients’ contact information. Then, in 1973, the Abortion Seven had a reprieve. Prosecutors abandoned the case when supreme court justices issued a landmark ruling in the case of Roe v Wade, effectively legalizing abortion across the US. In Roe, the court affirmed that access to safe and legal abortion was a constitutional right. The court ruled that states could not ban abortion before a fetus can survive outside the womb, roughly considered to be 24 weeks gestation (a full term pregnancy is considered to be 39 weeks). Now, Roe faces a direct challenge. US supreme court justices have taken up the case of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Clinic, in which they will consider whether the state of Mississippi can ban nearly all abortion from 15 weeks. Abortion advocates believe the choice to take the case implies that at last four justices see it as a chance to reconsider the precedent set by Roe. Oral arguments in the case are set to be heard on 1 December, with a ruling expected in June 2022. But already, pro-choice campaigners are warning of a future where abortion may no longer be legal in the majority of the US, and where prosecutions like that of the “Call Jane” collective could once again become a reality. In court briefs and reports, defense attorneys, prosecutors, judges, international human rights experts and academics have begun to unpick what a return to illegal abortion might look like in a country with a vast law enforcement apparatus, with the world’s largest incarcerated population, and with women as America’s fastest growing imprisoned demographic. “It’s like a thought experiment – to think about what ‘Call Jane’ would look like,” in the modern era, said Cynthia Conti-Cook, a technology fellow with the Ford Foundation. Her work in gender, racial and ethnic justice explores how law enforcement could use the data produced by digital infrastructure – phones, internet browsers, social media – to prosecute people who seek or aid abortions, should Roe v Wade be overturned, and the procedure become illegal in some states once again. A single mobile phone could reveal the entire collective, Conti-Cook warned. Just one encounter with law enforcement – a traffic stop, a search, an arrest – could expose the entire network “through digital connections”. ‘So much harsher’ With the supreme court scheduled to hear oral arguments on the most consequential abortion rights case in nearly five decades this week, Conti-Cook is not the only person entertaining such thoughts. If Roe v Wade were to be overturned, at least 26 states hostile to abortion would outlaw abortion either immediately or as quickly as possible, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-choice research organization. Abortion advocates believe this would probably result in desperate people (who have the resources) seeking abortions in more liberal states where the procedure remains legal, such as Illinois or New York. In just one example, Louisiana has passed a “trigger law” designed to outlaw abortion if Roe is overturned. A person from Louisiana seeking an abortion would need to reach Kansas to obtain one legally. However, most people are unlikely to make that long, expensive and arduous journey. Campaigners warn that poor, young and people of color are far more likely to turn to illegal methods, creating another layer of racism and classism in the criminal justice system, alongside the same preventable public health disaster seen before Roe. Miriam Krinsky, the executive director of Fair and Just Prosecution, a group that educates newly elected local prosecutors, said her group’s brief filed to the supreme court regarding the Mississippi case “reflects a growing recognition that overturning 50 years of precedent and potentially criminalizing personal healthcare decisions could have incredibly dire consequences”. The brief was co-signed by nearly 100 prosecutors, police and high-ranking former Department of Justice officials. “This is not just blue, urban-area elected prosecutors and law enforcement leaders – these are leaders from New York and California and everywhere in between – urban, rural, red states, blue states. District attorneys in Texas, Georgia, Missouri, Wisconsin,” said Krinsky, speaking about those who signed the brief. “It’s not just a voice that comes from so-called ‘liberal bastions’.” The nation’s preeminent association for defense attorneys has also published a report ahead of the oral arguments that lays out a future in which the US could undertake “rampant criminalization” and “mass incarceration on an unprecedented scale” in the name of the unborn. “States are laying the groundwork now, and have been laying the groundwork for criminal penalties that are completely different,” than the pre-Roe era, said Lindsay A Lewis, a criminal defense attorney in New York who co-authored a report on abortion for the National Association of Criminal Defense Attorneys (NACDL), the first such report in the organization’s history. “They are so much more advanced, and so much harsher than what existed before Roe was enacted.” State legislatures have spent recent decades “modifying their criminal codes” in ways that “completely changes the calculus when it comes to what it would mean to go back to pre-Roe times,” said Lewis. Criminal charges could come from specific abortion laws, but also from criminal codes that penalize attempted crimes, conspiracies and accomplices to crime, all relics laws developed during the US’s so-called war on drugs. Those laws “could subject a wide range of individuals to criminal penalties if Roe is overturned”, the NACDL report outlines, including prosecuting people from states where the procedure is illegal who attempt to seek abortions in states where it remains legal. For example, Louisiana law defines an “accomplice” to a crime as anyone involved in its commission, even tangentially, whether “present or absent” if they aid, abet or even counsel someone. Experts say this could be deployed against a wide range of friends, loved ones or counselors, such as clergy or abortion fund networks which help shepherd people to clinics. As Lewis and her co-authors laid out, there are thousands of laws like Louisiana’s across the country. What’s more, recent prosecutions of pregnant people also show how digital evidence can be used as powerful prosecutorial tools. More than 2,000 police agencies across the US have already purchased “mass extraction” technology that allows them to download, organize and archive a phone’s entire contents. The technology is sometimes called a “window into the soul”. This digital evidence has then been used to identify search queries for abortion pills, including in the prosecution of Latice Fisher, a mother of three in Mississippi. Fisher gave birth to a stillborn child. The child was pronounced dead at Fisher’s home by emergency responders. Prosecutors used Fisher’s cell phone records to show she had searched for abortion pills online before her child was stillborn, and brought charges against her twice. Prosecutors dropped the first case amid criticism of an archaic test used to determine whether an infant is born alive. Prosecutors then tried to indict Fisher again, but a grand jury refused to indict her when presented with scientifically accurate information. “There are many possibilities, and one way that I have tried to imagine what those possibilities could be is looking at the way surveillance technology is used today on investigating crimes related to sex work,” said Conti-Cook. Conti-Cook said police may choose to set a “honey pot”, in which law enforcement sets up a fake website to entice people seeking abortion pills to provide their contact information. They could use “reverse geo-fencing” technology, to create a digital border around a location of interest – perhaps a clinic – and identify all phones that enter. “The danger about a world where the states can criminalize abortion, again, is that the tools they have to investigate every crime have increased exponentially with surveillance technology,” said Conti-Cook. ‘Every single one of these is a human rights violation’ Other American historians, such as Leslie J Reagan, the author of When Abortion Was a Crime, have warned of Ceausescu-like regimes where prenatal care becomes about ensuring “all pregnancies are progressing to term”, and authorities monitor menstrual cycles. In Missouri, health department officials have admitted to monitoring periods to identify “failed medical abortions”, part of a bid to close the state’s last abortion clinic. In a brief to the supreme court, the United Nations special rapporteur on the right to health warned that overturning Roe v Wade and banning or criminalizing abortion would be “irreconcilable” with international human rights laws. Even so, some states have already instituted bans, such as Texas, which banned the vast majority of abortions. Particularly in the south, prosecutions of pregnant people have already taken place recently, even when they have given birth to healthy babies. Advocates said these contested prosecutions, often dropped under public pressure or overturned on appeal, are evidence of the zeal some prosecutors have for criminalizing pregnancy. Alabama has prosecuted nearly 500 women since 2006 for allegedly exposing a fetus to a “controlled substance” in the womb, even including prescription painkillers. The charge carries a potential 10-year prison sentence, if the child is born healthy (more if the baby is not), and the controlled substance was prescribed to the person under investigation. “The Alabama supreme court in two decisions says we treat the unborn as persons,” said Lynne Paltrow, executive director of National Advocates for Pregnant Women, which has helped provide counsel to people charged under such statutes. In South Carolina, courts have said the word “child” in state laws should be interpreted to include unborn fetuses, meaning people could be held liable for child abuse during pregnancy. Oklahoma recently sentenced 21-year-old Brittney Poolaw to four years in prison after miscarrying, following use of methamphetamine, though there is no evidence drug use caused the miscarriage. “The most recent published figures cite 24 people since the year 2000 who have been criminally punished for ending a pregnancy or helping a loved one do so,” said Farah Diaz-Tello, senior counsel and legal director for If/When/How. Diaz-Tello said her organization is now conducting research which will likely prove twice as many people per year have been prosecuted. “Every single one of these is a human rights violation,” said Diaz-Tello. “Any non-zero number should be shocking, should be alarming.”Apple’s MacBook Pro has been given its biggest upgrade in power, ports and screen quality since 2016, ticking almost every box on the wishlist of eager Mac users. But the new 14in and 16in models are no longer machines for the average consumer. Costing from £1,899 ($1,999 or A$2,999) they are workstation laptops for creative pros and developers and priced accordingly. They leave the excellent £999 M1 MacBook Air as Apple’s foremost consumer laptop. Apple has listened to the demands of its power users, making the new laptops slightly larger and heavier, with longer battery life and more ports. They are all the better for it. The design is almost retro. The aluminium body apes the first-generation MacBook Pro from 2006, while the 14in version (as tested) has a similar screen size to iBook models from 2002. Open the lid and two things stand out: the screen has an iPhone-like notch cutting into the top of the screen and the Touch Bar from previous models is gone. This marmite-like feature had enormous potential but wasn’t loved by most. The standard function and utility keys are back instead, including a large escape key that will please developers. The power button has a Touch ID fingerprint scanner that works great. The new 14.2in screen is in a different league. It is taller than its 13.3in predecessor and has two technologies borrowed from the 12.9in iPad Pro: ProMotion and miniLED backlight. ProMotion refreshes the screen up to twice as fast as most 60Hz non-gaming machines for significantly smoother animations. It is slick but the jump is less impactful than on touchscreen devices such as tablets and smartphones. The miniLED backlight is a huge leap forward, producing up to 1,600nits (a standard measure of screen brightness) of peak brightness for stunning HDR content. Most competitor screens top out below 500nits. It can produce super-bright whites and deep, inky blacks for extremely good contrast. But the screen is limited to the same 500nits as previous models for standard dynamic range content, which is everything that’s not HDR movies, images and games. It is certainly bright enough for most situations. Specifications Screen: 14.2in mini LED (3024x1964; 254 ppi) ProMotion (120Hz) Processor: Apple M1 Pro or M1 Max RAM: 16, 32 or 64GB Storage: 512GB, 1, 2, 4 or 8TB SSD Operating system: macOS 11 Monterey Camera: 1080p FaceTime HD camera Connectivity: wifi 6, Bluetooth 5, 3x USB 4/Thunderbolt 4, HDMI 2.0, SD card, headphones Dimensions: 221.2 x 312.6 x 1.55mm Weight: 1.6kg M1 Pro and M1 Max chips The 2021 MacBook Pro is the first computer to feature more powerful versions of Apple’s M1 custom processors used to great effect in the MacBook Air and iMac. The new M1 Pro and M1 Max chips have performance rivalling most workstation-level machines from competitors but at a fraction of the power consumption. They are significantly faster than all previous Apple laptops and close to the most expensive Mac desktops. Whatever you want to get done, be it multi-stream 4K/8K video editing, development work or editing enormous image projects, the MacBook Pro will handle it with no dip in performance when on battery. The laptop runs completely silently most of the time. Only when playing the Intel Mac version of the game Xcom 2 with graphics settings cranked up to maximum could I hear the low roar of fans. Battery life is equally impressive, lasting for 14 hours of light work consisting of email, browsing, writing and photo editing or more than 11 hours with more demanding tasks such as editing videos and advanced photo manipulation. Push the machine really hard by exporting high-res video or compiling large apps and the battery life can plummet but I estimate you’ll still be able to get at least five hours. Sustainability The case of the MacBook Pro is 100% recycled aluminium. It contains 98% rare earth element while 100% recycled tin is its logic board solder, and at least 35% recycled plastic was used in multiple components. Apple breaks down the computer’s environmental impact in its report. The computer is generally repairable and the battery can be replaced for £199 by Apple. The repair specialists iFixit awarded the machine 4/10, mostly because of the difficulty in replacing some parts. Apple offers trade-in and free recycling schemes, including for non-Apple products. MacOS Monterey The MacBook Pro runs Apple’s latest macOS Monterey software, which looks and feels similar to its predecessor Big Sur. Briefly, Monterey adds the ability to FaceTime video call in a grid layout like Zoom, spatial audio surround sound for movies, live text recognition in photos, quick note taking and improved privacy options in Apple Mail. It also adds “focus”, an expansion of the “do not disturb” settings, and other features from iOS 15. The more ambitious Share Play and Universal Control features will be available as part of a software update later in the year. As with Big Sur, most software developed for Intel-powered Macs runs very well but compatibility isn’t guaranteed for older apps. Observations Blooming, where the backlight shines like a halo around dark edges, is extremely well controlled compared with most LCD-based screens. The six speakers are amazing for a laptop and produce a surprisingly effective virtual surround sound for movies. The M1 Max has up to twice the graphics performance of the M1 Pro but both chips have the same processor performance. Price The 14in MacBook Pro starts at £1,899 ($1,999/A$2,999) for an M1 Pro chip with eight-core CPU and 14-core GPU, 16GB of RAM and 512GB of storage. Models with the M1 Pro 10-core CPU/16-core GPU cost from £2,199, while M1 Max models start at £2,799. The 16in MacBook Pro starts at £2,399 ($2,499/A$3,749). It is not possible to upgrade the RAM or storage after purchase. For comparison, the MacBook Air starts at £999, while roughly equivalent Windows laptops to the new machines such as the Dell XPS 15 cost about £2,099, the Razer Blade 15 about £1,700 and Microsoft’s Surface Laptop Studio costs about $2,100 (£1,576). Verdict The 2021 MacBook Pro is the power laptop Apple users have been waiting for. The combination of workstation-level processing power and long battery life are unrivalled. The display is stunning and will allow people who work with video to work in HDR away from their desks with dedicated high-end monitors – many of which cost eye-watering sums on their own. The taller, larger screen of the 14.2in compared with 13.3in laptops makes email, writing and browsing more comfortable while still being easy to fit in bags. The keyboard is great and the best-in-class trackpad is huge. Even the new 1080p HD webcam is a big upgrade. The expanded port selection and SD card slot are very welcome. Unlike previous models, the chips are the same for the 14in and 16in versions, making size the key choice, not power. The machine isn’t perfect. I wish it had a USB-A port, the HDMI port is not the latest standard, the webcam doesn’t have Apple’s excellent Centre Stage technology that keeps the user in frame in video calls and the lack of Face ID is baffling. As is unfortunately normal these days you can’t upgrade the RAM or storage after purchase. But these are minor niggles. The MacBook Pro is no longer a consumer laptop. Instead, it is the best compact pro-grade workhorse I’ve ever used. If you’re an Apple-using creative or developer in need of an upgrade, this is the machine for you. You’ll pay a princely sum for it but it is absolutely brilliant. Pros: very powerful, very long battery life, fantastic miniLED ProMotion screen, lots of ports, SD card slot, brilliant speakers, Touch ID, great keyboard and trackpad, MagSafe, competitively priced for the power, 14in is great size. Cons: no USB-A, no Face ID, no Centre Stage camera, no HDMI 2.1 support, RAM or SSD cannot be upgraded after purchase, no BootCamp/Windows support, some niche apps may have issues running until updated. Other reviews Apple MacBook Air (M1) review: gamechanging speed and battery life 16in MacBook Pro review: bigger battery, new keyboard, new Apple Microsoft Surface Laptop 4 review: Windows 10 as it is meant to be Samsung Galaxy Book Pro 360 review: flexible laptop with beautiful OLED screenWe are renovating a 1950s bungalow that still has coal-fired central heating and we had planned to install a new clean heating system. Just before the government axed its green homes grant scheme, we applied and were delighted when it got in touch in late June to tell us that we had been accepted, and would be able to receive £5,000 towards the £15,000 cost of insulating the home and installing an air source heat pump system. The voucher had an initial deadline of 30 August 2021. I requested an extension (due to the amount of time it would take us to do the necessary work) and was told it could be extended to 30 December 2021. A week later, it emailed again to say that it had made an error and the voucher could only be extended to 30 November, because that was when it closed. It seems that if we can’t get the work done by the deadline, we lose the £5,000. We have worked flat out to get it all ready, but have now discovered that the heat pump hasn’t been dispatched from the manufacturer and it can’t say when it will arrive. It seems very unfair that we will lose this grant due to the supply chain problems. I’ve requested a further extension and have been told it’s not possible to extend the voucher any further. Our scheme’s viability rests on this. DT, Berwick-upon-Tweed The £1.5bn green homes grant was launched last year and was supposed to offer households up to £10,000 to improve their home with better insulation and cleaner heating. It was designed to help people in exactly your kind of property. However, almost immediately it ran into difficulties and was finally scrapped in March. You must have been one of the last households approved for the grant. Completely insulating a home and installing a new air source heating system with underfloor heating was always going to be tight in just over four months, even before the current supply chain problems hit. I asked the Department for Business, Energy &amp; Industrial Strategy about your case, and it has now intervened. You have been offered a month’s extension to complete the work – until 30 December. “There may be some limited and very exceptional cases where the voucher deadline could be extended, and applicants should discuss their case with the scheme administrator,” it says. Meanwhile, it’s worth others noting that the boiler upgrade scheme, that replaces the green homes initiative and offers £5,000 vouchers to households, opens for business next April, so start planning now. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsWe welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Every year the remarkable maths website Mathigon runs a puzzle advent calendar, publishing a problem a day from December 1 to 24. I’ve had a peek at this year’s puzzles and selected three of the ones I liked the most. 1. The seven digits 2. A plurality of paths. You could count them all one by one, but that’s too laborious. There’s a lovely method to be found instead. 3. Flipping frogs. Thanks to Mathigon for today’s puzzles. If you haven’t visited the site before, it’s a beautiful, free website that explores school maths via gorgeous and clever interactive animations. I’ll be back at 5pm UK with the solutions. Please NO SPOILERS! UPDATE: The solutions are up here. Thanks to Philipp Legner of Mathigon. Flipping frogs was designed by James Tanton. The Mathigon puzzle advent calendar begins on December 1. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch. I’m the author of several books of maths and puzzles, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, but all of which would make fantastic Christmas gifts!On Friday, a new Covid-19 variant first identified in southern Africa was revealed, and by Saturday, the World Health Organization (WHO) had named it Omicron and declared it a “variant of concern”. This is because it carries a high number of mutations on its spike protein linked with increased transmissibility, and which may decrease the effectiveness of measures such as vaccinations and treatments. By Sunday, two Omicron cases were confirmed in Australia, where the government promptly slammed the border shut to travellers from nine African nations. So how worried should Australia be about Omicron, and when will we know more about it? The speed Omicron is being studied should give us comfort Prof Stuart Turville heads the Kirby Institute’s ‘containment lab’ at the University of New South Wales, where the virus is grown in many of its mutations. This week, his team will begin growing Omicron. By the weekend, he hopes the virus will have bloomed, and they can test how effectively antibodies bind to it, taken from all different kinds of patients. “In early 2020 it would take us about a month in the lab to understand how well antibodies bind to it and how ‘fit’ the virus is,” Turville said. “Now, we can get that information within a week.” Turville’s team will test how the virus behaves against antibodies from vaccinated patients; antibodies from people who are recovered and vaccinated; and antibodies from people who are sick and vaccinated. They will also work with other research institutes to test how the virus responds to therapeutics like hyperimmune globulin, an antibody-rich therapy developed using plasma donations. Prof Sharon Lewin is a world-renowned infectious diseases expert and the director of the Doherty Institute in Melbourne, which provides pandemic modelling to the federal government. She predicts the mutations Omicron carries will have the greatest interference with the antibody treatments being used to treat Covid patients, while vaccines will remain effective. “They’re very sensitive to spike protein mutations,” she said. “But vaccine-induced antibodies have a bit of tolerance for variation in the virus. The vaccines that we designed worked really well against Delta.” She added that the protection vaccines offer against hospitalisation and death may be due to other parts of the immune system than antibodies, such as T-cells, which attack invading pathogens. “T-cells target all parts of the virus, not just the spike protein. Vaccinated people may well have T-cells that can do a pretty good job at protecting against variants,” Lewin said. What is Australia hoping to learn about Omicron? It takes time to see how a virus behaves in the real world, including new variants. While Omicron has been identified in about a dozen countries to date, including South Africa, the UK, Israel and Australia, the numbers are too low to see if it is overtaking Delta and if it is, if that is due to the mutations. Most cases are in South Africa, where the World Health Organization says Omicron infections are increasing steeply. Because Australia is not swamped with Omicron patients or Covid-19 cases generally, sequencing can be performed in the laboratory for every person in quarantine who tests positive to it. “Yes, the lab isn’t the real world but it’s a really good early-warning signal and surrogate for the real world, and it can be the first line of evidence we have after seeing something that’s not quite right in the real world,” Turville said. “Epidemiological efforts, such as understanding the disease severity in people who are both vaccinated and unvaccinated is very important. We learn a lot from watching it spread in the community. But that data can take two-to-three months to tell us enough.” How worried should we be about Omicron in Australia? The health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Monday the federal government had asked the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation to examine whether third “booster” vaccine shots should be brought forward to sooner than six months. But he said there was no strong evidence yet that Omicron evades vaccines, and given Australia has a high vaccine coverage this will offer strong protection. Even if Omicron does prove to evade vaccines, Pfizer can tweak the mRNA vaccine within six weeks and ship initial batches within 100 days. “We’re well-prepared and we are in the best scientific hands in the world,” Hunt said. However, the arrival of Omicron has raised concerns about vaccine equity, with most of Africa having very poor vaccination rates while Australia rolls out third doses. There have been calls for countries like Australia to do more to increase global vaccine supply. We must not get ahead of ourselves Lewin said “maybe we need to rethink” the WHO classification system, given WHO had labelled Omicron a “variant of concern” in the absence of enough evidence that it is more transmissible or evading vaccines. Other factors may have led to it spreading rapidly, for example, if it got into highly vulnerable populations. It could also be due to chance. “The WHO chose to press that ‘variant of concern’ button very early, after seeing a new strain rapidly replace Delta in South Africa and assumed therefore it must be more transmissible,” she said. “But once you push that button, it creates chaos around the world. We should only be ramping up our response dramatically, including closing borders, if there is a real variant of concern, meaning it’s causing more severe disease or deaths and evading the immune response. We don’t know all that yet. As a global community we need to think about what this means when we identify a variant of concern, because we don’t really have an agreed plan.” Lewin said she was concerned border closures punished countries with excellent surveillance systems like South Africa. She said variants always find their way in eventually, with Delta coming into Australia even with international border closures. There could be other highly mutated forms of the virus that had not been detected, she said. “You can’t keep a variant out, she said. [Omicron] may well be in northern Africa and we don’t know about it … many parts of Africa and many other countries don’t have a really good surveillance system.”When the X-Press Pearl container ship caught fire and sank in the Indian Ocean in May, Sri Lanka was terrified that the vessel’s 350 tonnes of heavy fuel oil would spill into the ocean, causing an environmental disaster for the country’s pristine coral reefs and fishing industry. Classified by the UN as Sri Lanka’s “worst maritime disaster”, the biggest impact was not caused by the heavy fuel oil. Nor was it the hazardous chemicals on board, which included nitric acid, caustic soda and methanol. The most “significant” harm, according to the UN, came from the spillage of 87 containers full of lentil-sized plastic pellets: nurdles. Since the disaster, nurdles have been washing up in their billions along hundreds of miles of the country’s coastline, and are expected to make landfall across Indian Ocean coastlines from Indonesia and Malaysia to Somalia. In some places they are up to 2 metres deep. They have been found in the bodies of dead dolphins and the mouths of fish. About 1,680 tonnes of nurdles were released into the ocean. It is the largest plastic spill in history, according to the UN report. Nurdles, the colloquial term for “pre-production plastic pellets”, are the little-known building block for all our plastic products. The tiny beads can be made of polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride and other plastics. Released into the environment from plastic plants or when shipped around the world as raw material to factories, they will sink or float, depending on the density of the pellets and if they are in freshwater or saltwater. They are often mistaken for food by seabirds, fish and other wildlife. In the environment, they fragment into nanoparticles whose hazards are more complex. They are the second-largest source of micropollutants in the ocean, by weight, after tyre dust. An astounding 230,000 tonnes of nurdles end up in oceans every year. Like crude oil, nurdles are highly persistent pollutants, and will continue to circulate in ocean currents and wash ashore for decades. They are also “toxic sponges”, which attract chemical toxins and other pollutants on to their surfaces. “The pellets themselves are a mixture of chemicals – they are fossil fuels,” says Tom Gammage, at the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA), an international campaign group. “But they act as toxic sponges. A lot of toxic chemicals – which in the case of Sri Lanka are already in the water – are hydrophobic [repel water], so they gather on the surface of microplastics. “Pollutants can be a million times more concentrated on the surface of pellets than in the water,” he says. “And we know from lab studies that when a fish eats a pellet, some of those pollutants come loose.” Nurdles also act as “rafts” for harmful bacteria such as E coli or even cholera, one study found, transporting them from sewage outfalls and agricultural runoff to bathing waters and shellfish beds. The phenomenon of “plastic rafting” is increasing. Yet nurdles, unlike substances such as kerosene, diesel and petrol, are not deemed hazardous under the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO’s) dangerous goods code for safe handling and storage. This is despite the threat to the environment from plastic pellets being known about for three decades, as detailed in a 1993 report from the US government’s Environmental Protection Agency on how the plastics industry could reduce spillages. Now environmentalists are joining forces with the Sri Lankan government in an attempt to turn the X-Press Pearl disaster into a catalyst for change. When the IMO’s marine environment protection committee met in London this week, Sri Lanka’s call for nurdles to be classified as hazardous goods attracted public support, with more than 50,000 people signing a petition. “There is nothing to stop what happened in Sri Lanka happening again,” says Gammage. Last year there were at least two nurdle spills. In the North Sea a broken container on the cargo ship MV Trans Carrier lost 10 tonnes of pellets, which washed up on the coasts of Denmark, Sweden and Norway. In South Africa, a spill in August 2020 came after an accident in 2018, which affected up to 1,250 miles (2,000km) of coastline. Only 23% of the 49 tonnes that were spilled were recovered. In 2019, 342 containers of plastic pellets spilled into the North Sea. Awareness is growing about the huge threat posed by the tiny pellets. Last year two environmental protesters in the US were charged under a Louisiana state law with “terrorising” a plastics industry lobbyist when they left a box of nurdles outside his house as part of a campaign to stop the Taiwan-based Formosa Plastics opening a factory in Louisiana. The nurdles came from another Formosa plant in Texas, which had spilled vast amounts of the pellets into Lavaca Bay on the Gulf of Mexico (Formosa agreed to pay $50m to settle a lawsuit for allegedly violating the Clean Water Act). The charges against the activists, which carried a 15-year prison term, were later dropped. Such incidents are preventable, campaigners say. “The sinking of the X-Press Pearl – and spill of chemical products and plastic pellets into the seas of Sri Lanka – caused untold damage to marine life and destroyed local livelihoods,” says Hemantha Withanage, director of the Centre for Environmental Justice in Sri Lanka. Consumption of fish, the main protein source for 40% of Sri Lankans, has reduced drastically, he says. “It was a huge accident and unfortunately there’s no guidance from the IMO.” Classifying nurdles as hazardous – as is the case for explosives, flammable liquids and other environmentally harmful substances – would make them subject to strict conditions for shipping. “They must be stored below deck, in more robust packaging with clear labelling,” says Tanya Cox, marine plastic specialist at the conservation charity Flora &amp; Fauna International. “They would also be subject to disaster-response protocols that can, if implemented in the event of an emergency, prevent the worst environmental impacts.” But the nurdle can has been kicked down the road, with the IMO secretariat referring the issue to its pollution, prevention and response committee, which meets next year. Campaigners said it was disappointing that the Sri Lankan proposal was not properly discussed. The EIA’s Christina Dixon said: “The attitude of the committee members was extraordinary and showed a callous disregard for plastic pollution from ships as a threat to coastal communities, ecosystems and food security. This is simply unacceptable.” Meanwhile, the cleanup continues in Sri Lanka. Some of the 470 turtles, 46 dolphins and eight whales washing ashore have had nurdles in their bodies, says Withanage. While there is no proof the nurdles were responsible, he says: “I’ve seen some of the dolphins and they had plastic particles inside. There are 20,000 families who have had to stop fishing. “The fishermen say when they dip [themselves] into the water, the pellets get into their ears. It’s affected tourism, everything.”Four cases of coronavirus from the Omicron variant have been confirmed in New South Wales after the discovery of two more infected people. Almost 150 people have arrived in NSW from southern African countries where the new Omicron Covid variant is running rampant, with four cases now confirmed. The two new cases arrived on a Singapore Airlines flight from southern Africa on Sunday and every other person who was on that flight is now a close contact who needs to get tested and isolate for 14 days immediately. Both of the newly confirmed cases are fully vaccinated and are in special health accommodation, the health department said on Monday. Genomic testing on Sunday confirmed two overseas travellers who arrived in Sydney on Saturday night had been infected with the new coronavirus variant. Both passengers were asymptomatic when they arrived and are also in isolation in health accommodation. Both were fully vaccinated. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said 141 people had come to the state from the nine countries of concern over the past 24 hours and all have been sent to hotel quarantine for 14 days. Although he has ordered all international arrivals to quarantine at home for 72 hours, Perrottet insisted the NSW international and state borders would remain open. The three-day quarantine order is on top of a federal government requirement for travellers to enter quarantine for two weeks if they have been in South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi or the Seychelles in the past 14 days. “Ultimately we need to open up to the world [and] we need to do so safely,” the premier told reporters on Monday. “We don’t need to have a knee-jerk reaction, we need to have a proportionate and balanced response to the situation that’s in front of us. The responses should not be ‘Let’s shut down’.” Perrottet also stressed NSW was better equipped to confront new variants. “We’ve got to learn to live alongside the variants of the virus that come our way,” he said. “The vaccination rate here is one of the highest in the world. That is not the case in the southern African nations.” The premier has said there are no plans to adjust the state’s reopening roadmap, which has restrictions easing for the unvaccinated on 15 December. However, restrictions will be tailored in response to the variant if needed, he said. Meanwhile, the state added 150 new infections to its caseload on Monday. For the fifth consecutive day, no new deaths were reported. Hospitals are treating 170 patients, five more than the previous day, including 25 people in intensive care. Ten require ventilation. NSW is 94.5% single-dosed for everyone 16 and over, while 92.4% are fully vaccinated. Of 12- to 15-year-olds, 81.3% have received one jab and 76.5% both. Also on Monday, the Northern Territory government confirmed a man in his 30s had tested positive to the Omicron variant after returning on a repatriation flight from Johannesburg. The man was in quarantine in the Howard Springs facility. The territory’s deputy chief health officer, Charles Pain, said it was “business as usual” at the quarantine facility, but it was possible there could be more cases from the man’s flight. “It’ll be an interesting outcome if there are further cases on there because of the higher infectivity of this virus, but we just don’t know that yet,” he said. Amid global concern and border closures after the emergence of the new variant, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, announced he had asked Australia’s Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation to provide advice on whether the rules on booster shots need to be reviewed. Booster shots are available to people who had their second vaccination six months ago or more, but Hunt said the new strain had prompted him to ask for advice on whether those timeframes should be brought forward. More than 400,000 Australians have received a booster shot. “If they provide advice that there is a change required then we will take it. I wouldn’t speculate on any timeline, I’ve given them an open brief,” he said. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed an urgent national cabinet meeting would be held in the next 48 hours to consider whether plans to reopen the international border to students and visa holders will go ahead as planned. On Monday, Morrison said it was “too early” to make a decision about whether hotel quarantine regimes should be introduced before Christmas, but urged state leaders to stick to their current plans. “It is important we just calmly and carefully consider this information, work together, take the decisions that are necessary and that is exactly what everybody is doing,” he told the Seven Network. “We have to live with this virus. The fact we’ve had a new variant is not a surprise. We’ve been saying all through the pandemic that new variants also come and we’ll deal with them as they turn up.” Also on Monday, the country’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said authorities were still trying to understand what, if anything, Omicron meant for transmission and the efficacy of vaccines. He called for people to be “alert, but not alarmed”. Kelly said information out of southern Africa suggested the strain was particularly transmissible, but that were mixed reports about the symptoms for people infected with the strain. “Some reports out of South Africa are that it’s mostly mild. Other information we have is that hospitalisation rates are increasing. So, we need to get further information there, and we are getting that information,” he said. “What we do know of the two cases that have so far been diagnosed in Australia – and there may be more, but at the moment, two – both young people, both from South Africa, both fully vaccinated, asymptomatic. That’s just two people. “We know in Hong Kong: two cases there. Young people, a transmission in hotel quarantine from one person to the other, young, fully vaccinated, asymptomatic. “So, we need to see whether that is actually the characteristic of this virus. Of course, if it is, that’s very reassuring, but it’s too early to definitely say that.” The South African doctor who alerted authorities to the new variant emphasised the strain did not appear to cause severe illness. A man in his 30s came to see Dr Angelique Coetzee suffering from fatigue, body aches and pain before he and his family tested positive. “They were not very sick, none of them were extremely sick,” Coetzee said.And that’s where we’ll leave you today. Here’s what we learned: There have been five Omicron cases confirmed in Australia at the time of writing – four in New South Wales and one in the Northern Territory. All those diagnosed are returned travellers. We still don’t have stacks of information about the seriousness of the variant, but national cabinet is meeting on Tuesday to discuss the response to Omicron and border restrictions have tightened as a precaution. Parliament will sit for just 10 days in first half of 2022, which has given rise to all kinds of federal election date speculation, with the Labor party tipping it to be called for May. Victoria reported 1,007 new Covid cases and three deaths this morning, while NSW recorded 150 new cases and no deaths. Queensland will “proceed” with reopening its borders, even though it’s keeping an eye on Omicron, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said today. The royal commission into veteran suicide began hearing evidence today, with a suicidologist and the mother of an army veteran who took his own life the first witness to appear at its first round of public hearings. And there were all kinds of shenanigans in question time in parliament, as usual. We’ll be back at the same time tomorrow with more. Ben Doherty has been listening to the royal commission into veteran suicide today. The commission has been tasked with investigating “systemic issues” around defence and veteran suicide, and will hear 10 days of evidence in its first set of hearings this year, with a focus on people with lived experience, such as serving defence personnel, veterans and bereaved family members. Here’s the report from today’s proceedings: Some more information about those new Omicron cases: both passengers arrived in Sydney from southern Africa on Singapore Airlines flight SQ211 yesterday (that’s Sunday, 28 November). They are fully vaccinated and isolating. Everyone on the flight is considered a close contact and will need to get tested immediately for Covid-19 and isolate for 14 days, regardless of their vaccination status. That brings to the total in the state to four. Do you need a First Dog on the Moon fix? I definitely do. Here’s an absolutely true story in which only the names have been changed (and some of the details that weren’t funny). Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said the state will move ahead with reopening its borders, even though it’s keeping an eye on Omicron, AAP reports. Palaszczuk says it’s too early to know if the variant will impact plans to scrap quarantine for vaccinated domestic arrivals once the state hits the 80% vaccination target. “At this stage the plan is still to proceed,” she told reporters on Monday. The premier sidestepped a question about what could derail the plan, but she said more information about Omicron would be shared at Tuesday’s national cabinet meeting. Let me have a look at the report first, but as I said, we’re in a good position because we have mandatory hotel quarantine ... So if there is anything, it’ll be detected in hotel quarantine ... I am a bit worried about how many people are in Australia at the moment that are not in hotel quarantine, so I’d like some answers on that tomorrow. A new Aboriginal heritage alliance will advise the Morrison government on possible law reform, a month on from a parliamentary report which found “countless instances where cultural heritage has been the victim of the drive for development and commercial gain”. The new group held its first roundtable meeting with environment minister Sussan Ley and the minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, on Monday. It will look at ways to reform legislation, and at how to set standards for states and territories to follow, according to the chairman of the National Native Title Council and co-chair of the First Nations Heritage Protection Alliance, Kado Muir: This gives us Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples around Australia a brief pause for hope that, together with the federal government, we can come up with a set of legislative reforms that protects sacred sites to a national standard. Good evening. Thanks so much to the inimitable Amy Remeikis for her blog-wrangling today. If you’re just joining us and would like a quick catch-up on how our elected representatives are responding to the emergence of the Omicron variant, here is a handy 2.23-minute video on the matter: On that note, I will be handing you over to the very lovely Stephanie Convery who will take you through the evening shift. The Senate is still going through its condolence motion, and the house is dealing with non-controversial legislation – the government hasn’t brought on voter ID yet – that is still in the house, but is listed for tomorrow. The government MPs who have been threatening to withhold their votes appear to have been pulled into line, but who knows what will happen tomorrow. Tuesday morning is also party room/caucus meeting day – the last one before the parliament rises, so prepare yourself for a lot more talk about unity and the like. And no, no one other than the prime minister knows when the election may be called as yet, despite what the sitting calendar for 2022 says. A very big thank you to Mike Bowers who as always, kept us all sane and informed (and well caffeinated) as well as Paul Karp, Daniel Hurst, Sarah Martin and Katharine Murphy, who are still toiling away with stories. Anthony Albanese will be on 7.30 tonight, so we’ll let you know if there is any major announcements from that, but mostly, the parliamentarians are in holiday season mode, which means the (Covid safe) end-of-year events are taking up the evenings once parliament has risen. No one is going too wild though, I am not sure anyone is particularly in a celebratory mood. Thank you to everyone who followed along with us today. I know that switching off comments gets frustrating, but it is for all of our protection in these legal climates. You can always reach me on email, or here or here if you have a burning question or comment. I’ll answer what I can. I’ll be back early tomorrow morning – in the mean time, take care of you. Nationals minister David Gillespie is now on the ABC quoting WWII slogans when asked about the omicron covid variant: I think we’ll take it all in our stride. By all accounts so far we just know it’s a new variant with a lot more mutations on it. But the original reporter of it described it as a milder illness with a lot of muscle aches and tiredness that faded after a couple of days. When these viruses do mutate and they will continue to mutate, because that’s what viruses do, sometimes a lot of the potency fades away with mutations. So we are obviously being cautious. We are not panicking. Keep calm and carry on is what I say. Kristy McBain on the sitting calendar: Look, there is no doubt there’s an election coming up next year, but to have only 10 sitting days in the first quarter of 2022, doesn’t really allow anyone to hold the government to account for range of announcements that they have made over a number of years and are yet to deliver on. We’ve seen for the first time ever a budget in March which indicates to many people that an election will be called very shortly after that which means there won’t be any sittings in May or June. There’s an obligatory break in July as always. And that means we probably wouldn’t be back to this parliament until August under this government. I don’t think any Australian is happy with members of parliament only sitting for 10 days in the first three months of 2022. I want to be here and asking questions to the government on behalf of my electorate. I think there will be many MPs right across this building who are very unhappy about this sitting calendar. Matt Canavan on the sitting calendar: The prime minister doesn’t determine the constitution. And the constitution says we have to have an election by May. (No, but the PM does determine the election date, and knows when the election has to be held by). I think it’s right and appropriate that the prime minister is being, the government, not the prime minister’s calendar, it’s the parliament’s calendar, the parliament has been transparent around the fact we can’t have a budget in May because it has to be an election by then. We’ve outlined one in – that doesn’t mean we’ll even get there. Perhaps we’ll have an election early next year. I don’t know. At least the provision is there for it. There’s provision in the budget for estimates as well. So that’s very important. That’s the Senate effectively sitting. And doing their work. So I think it’s exactly right the parliament has done these things. In terms of the budget being in May, that’s not something that was outlined in the constitution. It’s a relatively modern innovation and there have been many years where the budget has been shifted for a variety of reasons. It is almost certainly next year. Labor frontbencher Ed Husic is also asked about the debate over freedoms vs lockdowns and how it is being presented as a binary choice when it comes to public health responses: Having represented a part of Western Sydney that had to live through a very long lockdown, with very different sets of rules for the west compared to the east, where a city was divided and the health advice said you didn’t need to do that, I understand full well that people don’t want to face the prospect of another lockdown or going through that and want to have their freedoms. But I’m very mindful of this, this lame political line the Prime Minister has been putting out that people will want their freedoms back. They would have if the federal government had done their job properly, if they had seriously undertaken a vaccine program that would get people vaccinated early. A public health program that would have backed it in, a public education campaign to potentially reduce some of the stuff that we’ve seen going around, sunning things about the vaccine that simply doesn’t stack up. If that stuff had been done thoroughly and quickly, then maybe we wouldn’t have had to have had the lockdowns as long and widespread as they were. So the stuff that’s been said now by a federal Liberal government that didn’t do its job on vaccines, we are seeing a rewriting of the history that’s going on. They’ve still got to get their job and act together on local mRNA manufacture that I said a year ago we would be right to go right now. All we’re seeing is an announcement about future announcements that don’t end up providing any substance and we still have got no local mRNA manufacture of vaccine which would be important, with respect to variants, which will be important with respect to boosters and it should be happening in line of what they’ve said to us a year ago. Ed Husic is on Afternoon Briefing where he is asked about the proposed sitting calendar (which Labor is not opposing, FYI): I think this is more a slouch than a sitting calendar. If we look to go and do the budget which they’re suggesting in this calendar that we will, have we got 10 days? There is no legislative agenda. It’s all political agenda. A lot of the stuff they’ve announced they say we’ll do, the parliament is not even... the stuff they’ve been talking about today with respect to reform of online bullying, and the stuff around Facebook and other social media, they still haven’t got legislation for that or the anti-corruption commission. It’s all talk. No action. And I’ve never seen, I have to say, a Liberal party so focused on winning and gaining power and then doing nothing with it when they get in. And this sitting calendar is testament to that. They get back from the Christmas and January break. They hav a bit of a yawn and a stretch. And 10 days are over and we’re into an election campaign. I think most Australians would expect their parliament to sit longer and do more. In Victoria, locally transmitted cases (not omicron) are being linked to the recent protests: For those keeping an eye on borders as we head into the holiday season (where expectations for reunions are sky high), Michael McGowan has you covered on what international travel changes have been made. Again – the omicron variant is not one anyone knows a lot about as yet, so it is watch and wait, but there is no need to panic. Health experts are still gathering data, but the early indications is that this is a more mild variant. We will bring you the updates as they come (and we’ll know more tomorrow afternoon following the national cabinet meeting) Moving away from politics for a moment, AAP has an update on Jarryd Hayne’s appeal: Jailed former NRL star Jarryd Hayne should be acquitted or at least retried due to a number of issues in convicting him of sexual assault, his appeal hearing has been told. Hayne’s barrister Tim Game SC told the NSW court of criminal appeal on Monday that his trial judge’s directions to the jury were “flawed in almost every possible way”. The former representative player faced a re-trial after his first ended with a hung jury, and was found guilty of assaulting a woman in her Hunter NSW bedroom on the night of the 2018 NRL grand final. Hayne, 33, only stopped the assault when the 28-year-old victim started to bleed, not when she told him to stop, the sentencing judge said. He was jailed in May for five years and nine months with a non-parole period of three years and eight months. Game outlined four main grounds of appeal including “the jury verdict in respect of both counts was unreasonable”. He also said trial judge Helen Syme was in error to give certain directions to the jury he described as “highly problematic”. Words such as “may” and “might” confuse the legal issues, and a jury could not be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt in convicting him, Game said. Prosecutor Brett Hatfield did not say the judge’s directions were in error, but rather the language could have been tighter, and that “perfection is not required”. Game says there was ample evidence that showed the victim had an “abiding interest in having sex with Jarryd Hayne”, and the Crown ran the gauntlet with its case. Hayne’s appeal hearing against his conviction continues while he watches on via video link. And the big issues Over in the Senate, a condolence motion is being held for Alex Gallacher. Here is how Mike Bowers saw QT: Just for those playing guess-the-election-date game (which is fruitless, you have be warned) there can still be an election before May, despite what the sitting calendar proposes. There can be an election any time Scott Morrison wants one (before 22 May). Sittings just get cancelled. Labor is assuming that the election, based on those sittings, would be held in May, which would delay parliament’s return until August (because of the break between elections and new sittings). Just so you can see what that looks like – here is the sitting calendar the government has proposed. The sitting calendar has been released. Tony Burke says he can’t remember a sitting calendar where there were less sitting days in the first half of the year. None in January – that is normal. Seven in February – that is not normal. THREE in March – that is definitely not normal. The three days in March are set for the budget. The parliament then doesn’t sit again until August. So that makes 10 sittings days from Friday until 9 August. Kristy McBain to Scott Morrison: The prime minister proclaimed his emergency response fund would fund immediately response activities [to the tune of] $200 million every year. Why then did the prime minister spend nothing for two years and has only recently spent the first $17 million. With people in my electorate still living in caravans and parts of NSW now flooded, why didn’t the prime minister use the money for immediate response activities like he said he would? Morrison: I thank the member for her question in the very serious issue of providing support to constituents, as a result of those bushfires. The answer is we have already provided $1.7 billion from the National bushfire fund. It has been used to deliver efforts on the ground, including $350 million for local economic recovery projects impacting communities, including those in the member’s electorate, but also in Queensland, NSW, Victoria and South Australia, and funding to support a range of mental health assistance and counselling, small business advice, and primary produce assistance. The $280 million black summer bushfire recovery grants program assists communities directly impacted by the black summer bushfires to address remaining priority bushfire recovery needs, and applications opened on 22nd July 2021. The emergency response fund was meant to be there when there weren’t other funds available. We created those funds during the middle of the fires themselves, that allocation of funding was made, $1.7 billion provided. ... the emergency response fund has [been] drawn on where there is a need for support in addition to funding already available. We will continue to provide those resources if needed, for what was then the Bushfire Recovery Agency and is now the agency led by the Honourable Shane Stone that has people on the ground working with them to make sure they can get the support they need. One of the most important of those is, the Member will recall, and I thank the state member for Bega*, we worked closely with to make sure the small business grants program was able to be more responsive to the needs on the ground. We worked together on that program and I know he was pleased we could deliver that support on the ground. $1.7 million delivered already on the ground directly, with more funding to follow because the recovery effort takes time, as the minister in the previous answer to the last question indicated. It is important we are in there for the long haul and there will be hundreds of millions of dollars that will continue to flow to affected communities in building the resilience for the future. *That is a shout out to Andrew Constance, who Morrison wants to run in the Labor seat of Gilmore. Constance and Morrison were on the outs during the bushfires, but have since made amends. The branch has not agreed to preselect Constance, so there is a bit of a fight brewing – Morrison is reportedly looking at using special powers to install who he wants, which risks a war with the branches more widely. Scott Morrison is going on about “technology not taxes” again, as well as non-existent mandates in regards to Labor’s (still-to-be-announced) climate policy (there was never an electric vehicle mandate). Putting aside that the government’s ‘plan’ relies on yet to be developed technologies, there are those who have looked at the modelling released by the government on its net zero by 2050 plan and found the government has embedded ... a carbon price. Don’t believe me? Here is the AFR on that exact point earlier this month: Scott Morrison and Angus Taylor – sitting atop the party that destroyed Julia Gillard’s carbon tax in 2013 and Bill Shorten’s climate plan in 2019 – have done the unthinkable. For the first time, they have acknowledged Australia cannot and will not get to net zero by 2050 without a carbon price of some form. The stunning and politically explosive concession, which is embedded in modelling released without fanfare last Friday afternoon of the government’s long-term emissions reduction plan, reveals every household may need to pay a carbon price equivalent of more than $1400 a year. That’s because the full reduction in net emissions by 2050 that Morrison and Taylor promised the world at this month’s UN climate summit in Glasgow requires a carbon price of $80 a tonne, according to the model. Clearly, for the Coalition, such a price is completely politically untenable. Which is why the government’s plan is modelled on a far less threatening price of $24 a tonne. The irony? Gillard’s short-lived carbon price – before Tony Abbott’s government legislated to abolish it – began at $23 a tonne. Anthony Albanese will be the interview guest on ABC 7.30 tonight. Tanya Plibersek to Scott Morrison: What impact will the government’s proposed controls on social media have on the reported activities of the Member for Bowman? Morrison: Mr Speaker, the question may ask for a legal opinion and I will leave that in your guidance, Mr Speaker. I can tell you what our laws do do, Mr Speaker... We believe this is a very serious issue! We believe this is an incredibly serious issue! I doubt there is a parent in this country who does not on a nightly basis have concerns about what their children are being exposed to online and the abuse and harassment that can take place. I know I feel that way is a parent, Mr Speaker and I know Jenny does, Mr Speaker and I think every single parent in this place would! Mr Speaker, this is a serious piece of legislation the government is bringing forward... There is now an argument about whether or not the prime minister’s answer is relevant or whether the question is asking for a legal opinion. We don’t really resolve that, but Morrison is brought back to the question. Morrison: The legislation we will be bringing forward means that everybody should identify themselves online, Mr Speaker when they are making statements or posts. That applies right across the country. Where the social media companies do not identify that individual, Mr Speaker, they will be identified as the publisher (they are already identified as publishers and have been for years). That is what the bill does. That is what our proposed remedy is, Mr Speaker, and it builds on the world leading work that has been done in the online safety act, Mr Speaker, the work being done to combat the use of the Internet by terrorists, Mr Speaker, it builds on the work done by the world’s first eSafety Commissioner. All we are doing is standing up for Australians who are at risk in the online environment, and those most at risk, Mr Speaker, are our young people and our women. Mr Speaker, I would hope this would have bipartisan support. I would call for it to have bipartisan support, Mr Speaker, and not be used in the typical, political games playing we’re getting from the Opposition, and this is a very serious issue, Mr Speaker, and I would have thought the Labor Party would be only too quick to support it but it seems that is not the case by the jeering and interjections we have had on this matter today. Just wondering how many young people and women have the resources to begin defamation actions? There is no bill – it is meant to be coming very soon, but right now, no one knows what is in it, beyond what the government says is in it. Social media platforms are already counted as publishers. State laws cover a lot of what the government says this bill will be able to do. It does not ban ‘anonymous’ accounts, and it does not make it any easier to unmask an anonymous account. We don’t know what will happen if the account in question has an international IP address. Plus, the laws will give you, best case scenario, an email address. That’s about it. Catherine King to Scott Morrison: Does the prime minister’s model of a national anti-corruption commission have the power to investigate the purchase of land in the Leppington Triangle for 10 times its actual value? Morrison sends this one to Paul Fletcher: I do thank the shadow minister for her question. The facts are, Mr Speaker, that our government has a well-developed model for a commonwealth integrity commission. The full exposure draft of the bill underpinning our model is in the public domain and has been there for many months. We have committed $150 million of funding for our Commonwealth integrity commission and stand ready to proceed with the legislation, should the Labor Party indicate it wants to engage seriously on this matter, rather than engaging in the kinds of cheap political stunts that we have heard from the Shadow Attorney-General and now the Shadow Minister. We are getting on with engaging seriously with an important question of public policy and we stand ready to introduce this legislation as soon as the Labor Party shows us that they are ready to work seriously on this, and work with us! So apparently, the government can’t bring on its bill, in the chamber where it has a majority, because the opposition won’t support it. The opposition does not support the voter ID legislation (among countless others) and that has been introduced, so it doesn’t really seem to make sense. Peter Dutton finishes with this (which is becoming one of the pseudo election slogans): The fact is this government has and will continue to invest record amounts into the Australian Defence Force because Mr Speaker, we are not on weak national security. We are strong on national security. We have demonstrated through our actions, and the Labor party through their weakness condemns their own actions. Peter Dutton is doing his now daily “How safe are you, defence edition” dixer. Richard Marles to Scott Morrison: Does the prime minister’s model of an anti-corruption commission have the power to investigate the energy minister meeting the environment department about an investigation into illegal poisoning of endangered grasslands on land on which he had a financial interest? Morrison: The minister representing the attorney general will respond to that. That’s part of nine frivolous questions that were dismissed. “Mr Frivolous,” yells someone from the government benches, which many on the government side find HILARIOUS. The minister representing the attorney general does not take the question. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: I note it has now been more than 1,000 days since the prime minister announced a national anti-corruption commission. It is the last week of parliament for the year. Isn’t the prime minister delaying the legislation to make sure a national anti-corruption commission won’t be established this term? Morrison: The Member will be aware there is a 349 page legislation (it is not legislation, it is an exposure draft) the government has prepared in relation to the design of our proposal for a Commonwealth integrity commission, we have $150m in the budget (which was missing in the last budget). The Labor Party proposal, it is two pages. The government has a proposal for such a commission, the Member for Indi has a proposal, the Greens have a proposal, the Labor have no proposal on this matter. The government has set out legislation that will be made available and carefully decided upon and the Labor Party [can] support it. The government position on an integrity commission is very clear, 349 pages of well drafted legislation to back it up. The Labor Party has no such proposal and no integrity on this issue. Again, there is no bill from the government – there is an exposure draft. So Albanese asks Morrison to table the legislation. Peter Dutton denies leave. (So the government just refused leave to table its own ‘legislation’ that the prime minister was just talking about – because it is not actually legislation, it is an exposure draft.) In case you missed this in the Senate. Jim Chalmers to Josh Frydenberg: If he doesn’t know how many funds in his budget are allocated at the discretion of the minister and the total value, we provide this answer at the end of today’s Question Time. Shouldn’t the Treasurer know how much of his trillion dollars in debt he has borrowed to spray around marginal seats? Frydenberg (who now has a document to read from) So there are programs like roads of strategic importance, the bridges renewals programs, building better regions program, the blackspot program, the stronger communities program. I would ask that the Shadow Treasurer if he would actually go and inspect... Probably something he hasn’t been able to do because reality is these various programs, these areas support the economy... Roads of strategic importance, the bridges renewal program, the building better regions program, stronger communities, blackspot program, what is the Member for Rankin got against those? Frydenberg decides he has said enough and sits down. Chalmers asks him to table the document. Andrew Wallace asks Frydenberg if it is a confidential document, and Frydenberg says no, it’s publicly available. Tony Burke enters the fray and says in that case, he needs to table it, because Wallace didn’t ask if it was publicly available, he asked if it was confidential. Wallace seems lost. Peter Dutton gives him an out. We move on. Jim Chalmers to Josh Frydenberg: How many funds in his budget are allocated at the discretion of the minister and what is the total value? That’s related to this story from Murph: Frydenberg (who does not seem at all prepared for this question) Mr Speaker, there are various funds which are in the Budget which provide grants across various important areas of the economy, Mr Speaker, and what I can tell you, what I can tell you ... we have important programs across the budget providing for competitive grants processes. Greg Hunt is using his statesman voice again for dixers. That’s how you know the government is back in your life. He keeps pointing out Australia’s low fatality rate from Covid – which is true, thanks to the border closure. But where did most of the fatalities occur? Aged care homes. Which are a federal government responsibility. Andrew Wallace is still struggling in the Speaker’s chair. He is now saying he is “not in a position to determine whether the treasurer should allocate a certain percentage of his answer” to a particular topic. That’s after Josh Frydenberg spent almost his entire answer speaking about “alternative approaches” of the opposition – which is just an excuse to sledge Labor on the floor of the parliament. Tony Burke points out that determining how much of an answer can be dedicated to something is kinda the Speaker’s job: If you’re not in a position to deal with how much of a proportion of a question is dealt with in different areas, how on earth are the rulings about preambles? It is the role of the Speaker [to determine] whether or not the question time is used for ministers to be accountable for their portfolios! Wallace says the treasurer is relevant. All is going really well with the new Speaker. He is totally nailing the bipartisan thing (upside down head emoji). Scott Morrison ends his answer to Bob Katter with this attack on Labor – which takes Peter Dutton’s commentary and steps it up: It took our government to do that and invest in defence capabilities, took our government to stand up to those who would seek to coerce us. We didn’t have an each way bet on national security on this side of house, we have always stood up strongly to those who would seek to coerce. Others may wish to appease, our government will always stand up who would seek to coerce Australia. Bob Katter asks a question which I think is on national sovereignty. I think. It’s always a little hard to find the question in the preamble. Scott Morrison says his government is protecting Australia’s sovereignty in his answer, so let’s just stick with that Ed Husic to Scott Morrison: More than a year ago the industry minister announced Australia would be producing its own mRNA vaccines by now. Since there have been several announcements promising further announcements, yet nothing has happened, why not? Morrison: The member for industry may wish to add to my answer – we have been progressing strongly with discussions we have had regarding mRNA vaccines in Australia ... before the commencement of those negotiations, to proceed to discussions with premiers about the support they can provide. We are progressing well with this initiative, working with those who have that capability. Angus Taylor then takes the answer, but he doesn’t really have anything to say other than ‘we are working through it’. The trade minister, Dan Tehan, is not in the House. He flew to Geneva late last week in expectation of attending the 12th ministerial conference of the World Trade Organisation (which was due to begin tomorrow). But in an unfortunate turn, the meeting was cancelled while he was up in the air. As the WTO explained it: “The General Council agreed late Friday to postpone the imminent ministerial conference after an outbreak of a particularly transmissible strain of the Covid-19 virus led several governments to impose travel restrictions that would have prevented many ministers from reaching Geneva.” Tehan popped up on Sky News yesterday morning, when he explained that he would still meet with the director-general of the WTO, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala. Speaking from Geneva yesterday, Tehan explained: So, Kieran, I was obviously in the air, I took the 17 hour flight from Darwin to London and when I got off the plane heard the news that the WTO MC12, the ministerial meeting had been postponed. They took the decision that because seven, eight or nine Southern African countries couldn’t attend in person, and it’s a consensus-based organisation you need all 164 countries to agree to be able to get rules changed, that the meeting would need to be postponed because those countries couldn’t attend. Also, there was, the variant was found in Brussels so there was also something done to stop people from Brussels coming. So obviously incredibly disappointing for this ministerial meeting, a lot of time and effort that has gone into it. It’s incredibly important that we continue to set global trading rules not only for Australia but for all our trading partners. And I will meet with the Director-General of the WTO tomorrow [Monday], plus the chair and the other vice chairs, Australia was a vice chair at this meeting to work out what we will do to proceed with MC12 now, when it will take place next year, whether there will be virtual meetings in between that, so important discussions with the Director-General of the WTO tomorrow.” The current deputy prime minster, who took an online rumour which did not have a huge amount of traction and spoke about it publicly on mainstream media, thereby amplifying it well beyond a social media echo chamber, is now speaking about anonymous accounts on social media and the issues with that. Mark Butler to Scott Morrison: Why doesn’t Australia have any federal quarantine facilities to strengthen our defences against new variants? Why does the prime minister always go missing when he has a job to do? Morrison: In response to the previous question, from the leader of the opposition I made it very clear the 2,000 space facility in the Northern Territory has been serving Australia very well, enabling Australians to come in from all around the world, when Australians were coming back from parts of the world especially with the Delta strain, now those coming on facilitated flights out of southern Africa, they have been accommodated there in federally supported facilities. The ones in Melbourne are under construction and also facilities in Western Australia and Queensland which full be there not just in the near term, but for the longer term to ensure those facilities are there to do with other pandemics when they will inevitably come to this country. In this country, Australia has had one of the lowest fatality rates in the world in relation to Covid-19, (because the international border was closed) Australia has also had one of the strongest economies among the advanced world, as we pushed through Covid-19, Australia now has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. It was this government that closed the borders, this government that made sure Australia was protected early on in the pandemic, and saved more than 30,000 lives, working together, the states and territories around the country to produce one of the best responses to Covid-19 in the world. Those opposite, they want to talk down the achievements of Australians who responded to Covid-19, we will keep leading them through the Covid-19 crisis. Scott Morrison in this dixer is claiming his social media legislation will “unmask the trolls”. It won’t. That is not what it is about. It’s about defamation – which is an option open to a very select, powerful few. National cabinet will meet tomorrow afternoon. I am told that the 2022 sitting calendar will be tabled after question time ends. Let the election guessing games get even more intense! Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: Nearly two years after Covid reached Australian shores, how many new federal quarantine facilities have opened? Morrison: I think that the opposition leader would be aware of the national facility at Howard Springs which has a capacity of nearly 2,000. That was the facility that the most recent facilitated flights, where we’ve been running the flights to bring Australians home from around the world and those flights that more recently over the last few weeks had come in from South Africa. There of the one case of Omicron that came up to be identified there and they’re in quarantine at that federally supported and funded facility. Bob Katter is using his 90-second speech to call for a ban on all oil/petrol exports from Australia. “It’s disgraceful,” he says. He wants one of the major parties to support him. “We’re going to ban it,” he says. Asked about her own former anonymous social media account ‘Mandy Jane’ (you can catch up on that whole 2020 snafu here) Amanda Stoker tells the ABC it was more of a ‘technical” issue than anything. First thing, it was more of a technical snafu, me being a bit of a boomer rather than anything calculated!” Stoker is well and truly a millennial. In some of the posts ‘Mandy Jane’ made, Stoker defended Amanda Stoker by referring to herself in the third person. Stoker later admitted ‘Mandy Jane’ was her personal profile. Fantastic, Great Move, Well done. Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi says it is time for Australia to step up and co-sponsor an intellectual property waiver on Covid-19 vaccines at the World Trade Organisation. India and South Africa suggested the intellectual property waiver over a year ago. Faruqi: The global Covid crisis continues to evolve but Australia is missing in action. Omicron has put further pressure on wealthy countries like Australia to step up and support vaccination across the world. It’s absolutely critical that Australia comes out in strong support of the intellectual property waiver as proposed by India and South Africa. By refusing to co-sponsor the waiver, Australia has taken the side of big pharmaceutical companies over the health and wellbeing of millions of people. In addition, Australia should substantially boost funding to the COVAX vaccine facility to ramp up vaccination in low-income countries. Our per capita contributions, to this point, have been miserly.” First Nations Justice campaign director Larissa Baldwin has responded to the failure of the Senate to disallow the public funding for fracking exploration in the Beetaloo Basin: “Parliament’s vote today to greenlight a $50 million handout to help the gas industry frack the Beetaloo Basin is an unmitigated disgrace. Despite strong crossbench opposition, the Morrison Government voted to give their gas industry donors free rein to desecrate the Beetaloo – against the express wishes of Traditional Owners. “First Nations communities across the Northern Territory have been fighting the incursion of fracking in the Beetaloo Basin for years. Their resolve will not be broken just because the Morrison Government would rather give gas corporations handouts than listen to Traditional Owners.” More hearing locations have been announced for the royal commission into veteran suicides: The royal commission into defence and veteran suicide has announced public hearings will be conducted in Sydney, Canberra, Townsville and Wagga Wagga. More details will be available once dates have been confirmed. The announcement was made in Brisbane today, at the first public hearing to hear evidence from witnesses. In his opening address, counsel assisting the royal commission, Kevin Connor SC, said for many veterans, defence service was an “enriching experience from which they progressed to other fulfilling roles and careers”. “Unfortunately for others, this is not their reality. They suffer and their families and loved ones suffer.” Connor revealed two public hearings will take place in Sydney, in February and March. The February hearing will run for 10 days. Connor also confirmed the royal commission would conduct hearings in locations where ADF facilities were located. These include: Wagga Wagga, where the army recruit training centre is located Kapooka Townsville, where the Lavarack army barracks and a Royal Australian Air Force Base are located. Canberra, which is home to the Royal Military College Duntroon, the Australian Defence Force Academy and the Departments of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs. Less then an hour until QT and we have only heard from the prime minister in two commercial TV breakfast interviews this morning. We’ve heard even less from Anthony Albanese. Seems like everyone needs a bit of a break. As expected: Katharine Murphy has an update on the Kate Jenkins review into parliament workplace culture: The Australian Human Rights Commission has agreed to brief the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins before it hands over the much-anticipated review into whether parliament house has a toxic workplace culture to the Morrison government. Guardian Australia understands the commission initially flagged Higgins would not be briefed until the final report was made public by tabling in parliament. This is despite the former Coalition adviser being the catalyst for the investigation. But that position has shifted in recent days. The briefing is imminent, because the report is due to be handed to the Morrison government on 30 November. The Greens are again attempting to disallow the public funding for fracking in the Beetaloo Basin – Labor has not been supporting these motions in the past, so this won’t have the numbers to pass. It is certainly a slower start to the parliamentary week than it was last Monday – looks like there has been a bit of work done behind the scenes to corral the ‘rebels’ and bring about at least the appearance of unity within the government. The Northern Territory has reported its first case of a traveller testing positive for the Omicron Covid variant – they are in quarantine and have been since arriving in Australia on 25 November. There have been two more local cases which have brought the local Katherine cluster to 58. Lots of economic data out this week, headlined by Wednesday’s release of September quarter Gross Domestic Product. Since the Morrison government’s handling of the economy will likely be central come next year’s election, the pace of the recovery will be scrutinised closely. The figures when they land will likely show Australia posted its second-biggest quarter-on-quarter drop on record, in the order of 3%. The only bigger dive came in the June quarter of 2020, when the economy shrank 7% as the first wave of Covid crested. The quarter just finished, in other words, with be the second big dip, and the rebound now under way is the final leg of a “W-shaped” economy. Whether we get a third downward leg with the Omicron variety omniscient, we’ll have to see. A couple of stats out today give us more of a clue how bad Wednesday’s overall GDP growth figures will look. Inventories held by companies fell 1.9% for the quarter, a not-unexpected drop but worse than the median market forecast of no change, according to Westpac (which tipped a 1.1% retreat). That discrepancy will have a few economists pencilling in a bigger September quarter GDP drop. More promising, though, was a 4% increase in company profits. Westpac had predicted a 5% rise, but the market was only expecting 2.3%. And who should companies address their Christmas cards of thanks to? Taxpayers, apparently, since our subsidies bolstered that famous bottom line. “The public sector is using its balance sheet to support the balance sheet of the private sector – households and businesses – to assist them in navigating the lockdowns,” Westpac concluded in a quick note accompanying today’s numbers. Amanda Stoker also spoke to streamed radio station Australia Today, where she was asked about why the prime minister is so against the NSW Icac (this was after his verbal explosion against the anti-corruption commission in parliament last week, while defending former NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian). Here is what Stoker said: The New South Wales Icac has been, in many ways, guilty of the kind of abuses of its power that you absolutely would not want to see replicated anywhere else anywhere in the world, let alone the commonwealth level here in Australia. So, it’s really important we learn the lessons from the New South Wales Icac, make sure that it doesn’t start – that we don’t establish something that has the potential, like New South Wales Icac, to start to ignore the law that it is meant to operate with so we aren’t empowering a system of tyranny in itself. Once again, Icac investigates. Not all of it is done in public. It does not pass judgement, it does not lay charges. It hands over its report and recommendations to public prosecutors, who make those decisions. It was the same process used with Eddie Obeid, who the prime minister has also been bringing up lately, but in the context of how Labor should be embarrassed. Anyone who has been through an investigation of any kind knows how uncomfortable and public they can be. Police investigations can also play out publicly, and we have seen recent examples of that. Icac is not doing anything different. The assistant minister to the attorney general, Amanda Stoker, spoke to Sky News overnight where she was asked about the new social media legislation Scott Morrison wants everyone to focus on. There was this bit, which states what the legislation is actually about. The government is focussing on children and women in its sell of the legislation – but it’s actually all about defamation actions. Which, given the expense, is not an option for the vast majority of people. Stoker: When defamation ruins reputations and destroys livelihoods, there needs to be an avenue to peel back the mask of the username, get to the identity of the person who’s engaging in appalling and trolling behaviour that breaches our laws if they were don’t face to face, so that person who has been defamed or have their reputations destroyed or faced criminal acts online can get accountability for that, can take them to court, can sue if necessary or can deal with them through the police. So no major changes as yet. It’s a watch and wait situation, as more information is gathered. Greg Hunt finishes on this: I want to thank everybody and just to remind Australians that we are vastly, vastly better prepared than the overwhelming majority of the world, and I say that with great respect to the immense work that’s been done globally – one of the highest vaccination rates. One of the most recently vaccinated countries. One of the first whole of nation booster programs after Israel and a hospital system which is well prepared. And there are some heartening signs about what may turn out to be mild symptoms. The coming weeks will show that. But as we approach Christmas, know that out of all of the countries in the world, Australia is as well prepared as anybody. Greg Hunt: What’s our job as a nation? Our job so make sure that we keep Australians safe and give them a pathway. The national plan is that pathway. The national plan always contemplated, as did our vaccine contract, as did our system design, that we would need to respond to a disease which, by its nature, would have not just variants but variations. I think the [variant] database has almost 30,000 sequences that have been logged. And so that’s the nature of this disease. And where we have to make changes, then we do. But we have a clear direction. Vaccinations up, progressively restrictions down. Those directions remain constant. Will there be a change in when people receive their boosters? A shorter time period? Greg Hunt on Atagi: We’ve asked them to review. And if they provide advice that there is a change that’s required, then we’ll take it. I wouldn’t speculate on any time frames. We’ve given them an open brief. Prof Paul Kelly on what they know so far about the variant: Some reports out of South Africa are that it’s mostly mild. Other information we have is that hospitalisation rates are increasing. So, we need to get further information there, and we are getting that information. What we do know of the two cases that have so far been diagnosed in Australia – and there may be more, but at the moment, two – both young people, both from South Africa, both fully vaccinated, asymptomatic. That’s just two people. We know in Hong Kong: two cases there. Young people, a transmission in hotel quarantine from one person to the other, young, fully vaccinated, asymptomatic. So, we need to see whether that is actually the characteristic of this virus. Of course, if it is, that’s very reassuring, but it’s too early to definitely say that. The third one is about vaccine effectiveness and treatment effectiveness. And the minister mentioned he’d spoken with the CEOs of our two major suppliers of vaccine at the moment – Moderna and Pfizer. Both of those companies have put out public statements over the weekend saying that they are on to this. They know that they can change, and this is one of the other major advances in the last two years. We did not have vaccines, we did not have proven mRNA technology. We have both of those now. We have contracts with those companies. They are already starting on considering what they would do as a specific vaccine if it is needed. At the moment, we have no definite evidence, either clinical or laboratory or at the population level, that the vaccines are less effective against this virus. We have no evidence of that. And Pfizer and Moderna can move quickly, if that was to come to pass, to make a specific vaccine. That’s a major advantage. Chief health minister professor Paul Kelly then steps up: As of Thursday, we’d never heard of this. As of Friday, we had some information. As of Saturday, it became a “variant of concern”. And as the minister said, we met and we’ve taken actions. This is not the first variant we’ve seen. This virus, we’ve learnt over the last two years, does change. Most of those changes lead to nothing. Some require further information and information gathering. And then a small number have led to this “variant of concern” designation by the World Health Organisation. Now, several of those that have been seen – and we’ve gone through the Greek alphabet, we’re now up to Omicron – several of those started with concern, a lot of concern about, for example, vaccine effectiveness, or further severity, or more transmission. Most of those – and some of those have actually lost their “concern” status because with further information as it’s come, that concern was not justified. So, I think that’s really key. So far there is nothing new in this press conference – Greg Hunt is going through what we already know: Vaccination rates. Booster program. Quarantine for certain travellers. National cabinet in the next 48 hours. Waiting for more information on the variant. We’re in a vastly different position from where we were on 1 February 2020. We are one of the most highly vaccinated, one of the most recently vaccinated, and one of the first to commence a whole-of-nation booster program from around the world. And perhaps the most interesting to-be-confirmed early evidence, to which I’ll ask Paul Kelly to speak, is that much of the early evidence is of a mild set of outcomes and symptoms. But there is more evidence to come. The world is looking at this. We’re cooperating with our international partners. We’re well-prepared and we are in, I think, the best scientific hands in the world. The health minister starts his press conference with an update of Australia’s vaccination progress as well as the booster program. He then moves into a recap of what has been done: In relation to the variant, I’ll discuss the actions, and Professor Kelly will take you through the latest information. The actions taken, as we know: already, we’ve stopped the flights from nine countries in southern Africa. We have temporarily banned non-citizens who have been in those nine countries from entering Australia. We’ve required Australians who have been in those nine countries to have 14 days’ quarantine. We’ve applied those rules to those coming under bubble arrangements, travel bubbles. And we’ve also required returned Australians who have been in Australia prior to the commencement of these rules to undertake quarantine from 14 days after their – for as long as 14 days after their departure from southern African area. And we’ve worked with the states and territories, who have put in place public health orders to cover all arrivals with home isolation for a 72-hour period if they’re coming into Australia. There are additional actions which the Australian government is now taking. Firstly, the prime minister is convening the National Security Committee today to review the evidence and to review the range of actions in relation to the Omicron variant. We will not hesitate to take additional steps if the medical evidence is that more are required. We convened our first meeting on this on Friday, and on Saturday we took the steps to cease those flights and to close those borders. The Omicron Covid variant has been ruffling investors globally but it seems the panic button’s not been pressed in Australia yet despite the first cases turning up over the weekend. The ASX200 benchmark share index did dive at the opening, losing more than 1%. But after two goes at breaking 7200 point mark, it has bounced back, paring losses to about 0.5% for the day. Still, other markets, such as Japan’s Nikkei is due to open about 1.9% lower, according to Reuters, so there’s still some nervousness around. Oil prices are also clawing back some of their losses, another sign that the fear factor has eased from late last week. Of interest to Australians, or course, are interest rates. Omicron’s emergence on Friday sent US Treasury bills lower by the most since March 2020 when the threat of Covid began to emerge. That concern has also moderated a bit today. Australians, meanwhile, have been flocking to the regions. New data from CoreLogic showed 24 of 25 areas sampled showed at least a double-digit increase in the past year in property prices. Half of the regions posted rises of at least 20%. The best performing regional areas were the Southern Highlands and Shoalhaven region in NSW, recording an annual growth rate in house values of 35.9%, followed by the Richmond – Tweed region in northern NSW (32.8%) and Queensland’s Sunshine Coast, which recorded an annual growth rate of 32.3%, CoreLogics said. Laggards included Queensland’s Townsville, where houses rose by 8% in price in the year, while those in New England and north-west NSW took the longest to sell, averaging about 62 days on the market. The Northern Territory rights bill debate is momentarily adjourned and the Senate moves on to a health insurance legislation amendment. For those with one eye on the Hunter river at the moment. Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy says she does not personally support voluntary assisted dying (which the NT rights bill focuses on) but she thinks the territory should have the rights to set its own laws. Zed Seselja has switched the ensuring Northern Territory rights bill (Sam McMahon’s private members bill) to what it would mean for the ACT – and he is not a fan. This Labor-Greens government would have more powers than the NSW government. Greg Hunt will be holding a press conference at 11.30. The royal commission into veteran suicide begins today in Brisbane. AAP has a recap: A suicidologist and the mother of an army veteran who took his own life will be the first witness to appear at the royal commission into veteran suicide at its first round of public hearings. Nikki Jamieson will join a panel of experts to give evidence about her own experience, following the death her son Daniel in 2014 and her subsequent work as a university researcher into the impact of “moral injury” within veteran communities. Evidence from veterans and their families will be the main focus in the first two weeks of the wide-ranging inquiry being held at the Brisbane Convention Centre from Monday. The commission has flagged its landmark inquiry into Australia’s defence force culture will include confronting accounts of life in the service, including bullying, “concerns over the treatment of women”, sexual and physical assaults and ritual hazing of new recruits. Evidence will also be heard about the challenges of accessing mental health support after deployment and “the loss of identity and community” after transitioning to civilian life. Chair of the inquiry, commissioner Nick Kaldas, said on Friday he and his two fellow commissioners believe it is a “once in a generation opportunity for lasting, fundamental change” to tackle the suicide crisis. Commissioner and psychiatrist Peggy Brown added that “while I don’t believe that any government department ... in Australia sets out to fail, or to lack compassion, there can be no doubt that systemic issues are contributing to the suicide deaths of our defence members and veterans.” “That is something this royal commission must change – absolutely.” Labor’s ploy worked. Labor has worked with the crossbench to bring this forward – the bill belongs to Country Liberal party MP Sam McMahon, but it was dropped by the government last week in exchange for Pauline Hanson’s anti-vaccine mandate bill (which the government didn’t support, but five government senators, including McMahon crossed the floor on). For those wondering what the parliament will be doing today (legislation wise). If you are in the flood zone, we are thinking of you. New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet says that a third person in the state has “possibly” tested positive for the new strain of Covid-19, Omicron, but has urged other leaders against making “knee-jerk” reactions to the variant. The state’s health department announced yesterday that two people who had recently returned from southern Africa had tested positive for the new variant in Sydney. New rules introduced by the government over the weekend means that people arriving from a series of southern African countries – where the variant was first detected – must undergo 14 days quarantine. On Monday, Perrottet announced that in addition to the two confirmed cases, NSW Health was reviewing whether there was “possibly” a third case among the 141 people who flew into the state from southern Africa in the past 48 hours. But the premier – who despite reintroducing quarantine measures has resisted any changes to the state’s roadmap out of Covid-19 restrictions – warned he was not interested in returning to wide scale hotel quarantine or heavy handed restrictions. We don’t just need to live alongside Covid, we need to learn to live alongside the variants as well. When there are new variants the response should not be, ‘Let’s shut down.’ Ultimately we need to open up to the world, we need to do so safely, we don’t need to have a knee-jerk reaction, we need to have a proportionate and balanced response to the situation that’s in front of us. Parliament begins at 10am today. Who will be voting for what? Who knows these days. The federal government plans on changing regulations to let the telecommunications sector shut down scam text messages. But that won’t stop you getting spam messages from the Palmer United party. That’s a different thing entirely. And ahead of parliament (where the government does not want to talk about an anti-corruption commission) there is also this story from Katharine Murphy: Scott Morrison enters the final parliamentary sitting week of the year facing fresh questions about the Coalition’s record of administering grants to government electorates. New analysis has found, since 2013, the bulk of government grant money has gone to government-held seats. The analysis says $3.9bn has been allocated under seven federal programs since the Coalition came to power, and $2.8bn, or 71% of the total taxpayer-funded pool, has gone to projects in government electorates. According to the analysis, conducted by the Australia Institute, only $903m was distributed to Labor-held seats in programs that gave ministers discretion over how grants were allocated, while $232m went to electorates held by independents or minor parties. NSW and Victoria have posted their daily updates: Radio and TV broadcaster Patricia Karvelas will replace Fran Kelly on RN Breakfast on ABC Radio it was announced this morning. The host of Radio National’s RN Drive will move into the Breakfast slot next year, replacing Kelly who is stepping down after 17 years. Known as PK, Karvelas said the radio show set the national agenda each day and it is “the best job on radio”. Karvelas will host the show from Melbourne, joining ABC TV’s News Breakfast as a Victorian based national news program. The ABC’s head of entertainment and specialist Michael Carrington said PK “has something to offer every listener from political analysis to important and intriguing social and cultural issues”. Kelly’s last day is Thursday. The Kate Jenkins review into the parliamentary workplace culture will be handed to the government today. Asked about it last week, Scott Morrison did not commit to making it public. NSW premier Dom Perrottet is not for closing: We’re having a national cabinet meeting in relation to developments, I think, tomorrow or later today. In addition to that, working very closely with the Victorian premier Dan Andrews. We have obviously put in place a 72-hour isolation for people who are overseas travellers coming into Australia. Over the last 24 hours, we had 141 people from those nine affected countries come in. There are two possibly three positive cases. Those 141 travellers on five flights over the last 24 hours are in our health quarantine facility. But ultimately, as I said yesterday, we don’t just need to learn to live alongside Covid, we need to live alongside the variances as well and we are very confident, based on our high vaccination rate. I said yesterday and I say it again, vaccination is key to NSW being able to continue to open up safely. And for everybody across NSW who has made the effort, can I thank you? Close to 95% of people have received their first dose vaccination. That is incredibly, incredibly important. And it addition to that, our booster shot program is up and running as well ... My key measures today is those people across the state where it has been six months since your second dose vaccination, please go out and get a booster shot. As is this from Luke Henriques-Gomes: In case you haven’t seen this story yet from Peter Hannam, it is worth your time: The Morrison government has used sweeping new powers to override state and territory government support for an international agreement to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The federal government has deployed recently passed laws to overturn the participation of five states and territories in the global Under 2 Coalition. In an email dated 23 November, an official with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade told his counterpart in the Victorian government that its participation in the coalition was “no longer in operation”. The email warned the Victorian government that under the new Foreign Relations (States and Territories) Act 2020, sign up to the agreement was now illegitimate. Bob Katter was apparently thrown out of a Tamworth pub over the weekend for not being able to prove his vaccination status and well, I’ll let you read his statement: Bob Katter, says Australia’s governments are taking away the right to freely assemble at the local pub, after he was kicked out of a Tamworth Hotel for failing to prove he was fully vaccinated on the weekend. Katter was in Tamworth meeting with local leaders to discuss issues that affect inland Australia and polices that will reverse its population decline. “I’ve had both of my Covid vaccinations, but I don’t have a smart phone so I can’t check-in using the state government app, but I did give them options to verify. “However, the local media and police was called. “This is un-Australian. We have a right to associate and assemble. “Full praise to the local police officer carrying out their duties in a very respectful manner.” There is no more political a game, than the election date – which rests solely in the prime minister’s hands. Speculating on when the election might be though, is apparently, a political game, says Scott Morrison, that he won’t be distracted by. Of course he won’t. Because it is his decision. He is the only person who knows when it will be: The election is due by the third week of May. But the point about this, there’s all sorts of political games and theatre that goes on down here. I’m not distracted by it. Last Thursday we had to send troops into the Solomon Islands. And AFP officers. They’re there right now dealing with a concerning situation there. We’re dealing with the Omicron variant here. We’re dealing with other very serious issues in our region. We’re getting people back into jobs. These are the things I’m focused on. People play political games down here in Canberra and carry on. I’m not distracted by it. Our team is focused on ensuring we secure this economic recovery. We keep Australians safe whether from virus or other threats we face. National cabinet was meant to meet on Friday, but there will be a meeting either today or tomorrow. Just don’t call it an “emergency meeting”. Morrison: I wouldn’t describe it that way. I wouldn’t describe it that way. I wouldn’t describe it as emergency meeting. I’d call it as normal meeting we would convene in these circumstances to bring everybody up to speed with the same information. That’s my primary concern at the moment. I want to make sure we’re working off the best information that we all have that we’re drawing as federal government from our partners overseas and making sure their chief health officers are feeding into that conversation. So we’ll be looking at that. Making an assessment of it all. If there are decisions, that further decisions that need to be taken then of course we will. What I’d say to everybody is it’s just important we remain calm about this. There’s no evidence to suggest that this leads to any more severe disease. If anything it’s suggesting a lesser form of disease, particularly for those who are vaccinated. One thing everybody can do is get vaccinated. If you have been vaccinated and it’s more than six months get the booster shot. Scott Morrison is now speaking to the Nine network (he declined to appear on the ABC) about the possibility of a wider border shut down: We never rule anything out. No one should read into that. We will take decisions based on the best information. The national security committee is meeting again this afternoon. This morning I’ve advised premiers and chief ministers that I’d like to get them to get together over the next 48 hours. So we can all be looking and get the same information and make decisions that are necessary based on the same expert medical advice. There’s a lot of information starting to come in. It’s still very early days with this variant. In all states except NSW and Victoria, there is 14-day hotel quarantine. There are capped arrivals into those states and territories. In NSW and Victoria there is a 72-hour home isolation for those who arriving. If they’ve come from those, any of those affected countries in the last 14 days, they’re going into 14-day health quarantine. They’re the measures we put in place on the weekend. That started early Saturday morning. When I received that information from our health advisors, the health minister made those announcements. The states and NSW and Victoria followed that up. Just literally got off the phone from the premier in NSW again this morning now. We’re just aligning our decisions and ensuring we’re all working off the best information to keep people safe as we always have. Patricia Karvelas will be the new host of ABC RN Breakfast radio. The federal government has decided on the new site for Australia’s nuclear waste. From Keith Pitt’s statement: Following further consultation, the Australian government today confirmed that a site for the location of our country’s national radioactive waste management facility has been selected, near the town of Kimba in South Australia. The government has acquired approximately 211 hectares of land at Napandee, 24km west of Kimba, where the facility will be built after detailed designs, technical and heritage studies are completed. Under the relevant legislation, the effect of the declaration is that the land is acquired by commonwealth. “I’m pleased to confirm we have reached a major milestone in our work to deliver this national facility, and a solution that has eluded consecutive governments for more than 40 years,” minister Pitt said. “This new facility will create 45 new, permanent jobs in the local Kimba community, in fields as diverse as security, administration, environmental monitoring, scientific services, health and safety.” Australia’s radioactive waste is currently spread over more than 100 locations around the country including in science facilities, universities and hospital basements. You’ll be finding out very soon. Prof Paul Kelly was also on the Nine network, where he was asked about the possibility Omicron could replace Delta as the dominant strain of Covid, and how that could be a good thing, given the early advice is that it seems a more mild version of the virus. Kelly: If I was to have a wish list for Christmas, and this is very much an evolutionary biology theoretical process – but if I was to have a wish list for Christmas I would want a variant of Sars-CoV-2 which was highly transmissible and replace other versions of the disease as is happening in southern Africa to a more mild human disease. If that was the case, then that would be a very good Christmas present. But we do not know that yet for sure. I think it’s very much we need to have a precautionary approach now until we get that information. Over on Sydney radio 2GB NSW police minister David Elliott said he met with with premier Dominic Perrottet and health minister Brad Hazzard on Sunday about what NSW would do: I’m not panicking at the moment because it appears that this is going to be the new normal. We need to prepare and ... make sure that we’re flexible and agile when it comes to variations and we need to be defensive and that defensive mechanism of course, is the vaccination. Professor Paul Kelly is pressed on the border issue, given how important it is to the thousands of Australians hoping to get home for the first time in two years, for Christmas: So, we’re taking a risk-balanced approach at the moment and concentrating on those nine southern African countries. We have increased our surveillance at the border, and after the border, we’re working very closely with our colleagues in New South Wales and Victoria, particularly, because they’re the ones that have had quarantine-free travel, as well as in the ACT, as to what is the best approach. At the moment, we’ve bought time to get more information and to consider that balance, but there’s always pros and cons for these sorts of decisions. That’s what we’re doing at the moment. AHPPC met over the weekend every day. We’ll have another meeting today. There will be further discussions on that matter and, you know, when decisions are made, of course, we’ll always communicate those. Does Prof Paul Kelly believe there will be a wider shutdown of the Australian border in response (at this every early stage): I spoke to a colleague at the ministry of health in Israel yesterday and that’s a decision that they’ve made. And that relates to their circumstances in Israel. But most countries in the world at the moment are concentrating on that where we know that there’s virus circulating in what could be large numbers and the other nations that we’re looking at. I’ll continue to give that best advice to the government that ultimately is a decision for the national government, for the federal government and I’ve already spoken to the prime minister this morning and we’ve been talking several times over the weekend and I’ll continue to give that advice. Chief health officer Prof Paul Kelly is also doing the morning media rounds. Here he is on the ABC talking what we do and don’t know about Omicron so far (spoiler – not a lot, but what we do know is cause at this stage to take a breath): So, what do we know? Firstly, this is a variant of concern, this Omicron variant. It’s the 13th variant that’s had that designation from the World Health Organization. Why are we concerned? Firstly, genetically, there are quite a few changes to this. I will stress, that it’s still the same SARS-CoV-2 that we’ve become used to, but it is different from previous versions and there are suggestions from that genetic variation that there could be changes in severity, transmissibility or indeed, interference the efficacy of vaccines and treatments. On those, firstly on severity, there are some signs in South Africa, but particularly those in other countries, and that number is growing overnight, that it is relatively mild compared with previous versions. But it is early days and we need to be careful of that. But there’s no sign that it is more severe at the moment. Secondly, transmissibility. It does transmit from person-to-person quite readily – at least at well as the Delta virus. And so that means that it will spread. And thirdly – in terms of the vaccines. There is no solid evidence at the moment that there is a problem with that. Although we will wait for further advice and laboratory studies in coming days and weeks. Over on ABC News Breakfast, Bill Shorten responded to the current deputy prime minister: What really frustrates me is that this government’s constantly surprised. Like every day is Groundhog Day with them. What I’m referring to is – if we’re going to bring travellers in, and I really support Australians being able to come home, we need to have an effective quarantine system. We need a short, sharp, effective response to Omicron. We don’t really know all that we should have about yet. Hopefully, whilst it’s more contagious, it doesn’t make you as sick and we are highly vaccinated. But I’m not sure that 72 hours quarantine is enough. But this Omicron variant shows, yet again, what the government hasn’t done. See, I’ve got concerns with the ethics of hotel quarantine. You put people in there. You know, I read somewhere that one in 100 people who was negative or didn’t have Covid when they go into hotel quarantine gets Covid whilst in hotel quarantine. We need purpose-built facilities. So I’d say to Barnaby – if we want calm, we’re going to need to work out how to bring people at home in the interim. Perhaps it has to be longer than 72 hours. The cycle of the virus is longer than that. A short sharp response until we know what Omicron is doing. But also desperately need purpose-built quarantine facilities. Howard Springs is not enough. If Barnaby Joyce wants business-as-usual, then the government has a duty to not be asleep at the wheel. I don’t think anyone is talking a shutdown at the moment – the whole world is in watch-and-wait mode on the new Covid variant, as we don’t know that much about it as yet. Barnaby Joyce though, has views: There will be new variants and they’ll continue on. And you know, the economy won’t work, society won’t accept it if we just keep shutting the show down. So, I think that there will be a tempered, sober approach to the assessment of what we do next. The nation has to work as a nation. Trade has to go on. Businesses have to survive. You know, other factors become more prominent. The economics of how this works is also in play, otherwise, the ramifications from business and the ramifications from our economy, which we must also protect, become dire. We can’t let that happen. So we’ve got ... there’s got to be a balance. Racehorse trainers, jockeys and breeders will pay part of their income to ensure that racehorses have a long and happy life after they retire from racing under a radical plan designed by the racing industry to improve equine welfare and recover the industry’s crumbling social licence. The plan would involve setting up a national not-for-profit organisation called Thoroughbred Welfare Australia , which would support training and rehoming programs for the more than 8,000 thoroughbreds that leave the racing and breeding industry each year. It was devised by a committee of equine, veterinary and agricultural policy experts in the Thoroughbred Aftercare Welfare Working Group, led by former Victorian premier Dennis Napthine. The work was commissioned by the Thoroughbred Breeders Association and funded by the breeders, jockeys and trainers associations, as well as the Victorian Racing Club, Brisbane Turf Club and Sportsbet. The group was commissioned after reports of ex-racehorses from NSW being killed at an export abattoir in Queensland. “Modern Liberal” Tim Wilson is in election mode. The inner-city Victorian MP tweeted a photo of his electorate office Christmas tree, which included former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian as the “angel”, to get attention late last week. Now we have “puppet media”: Here is a little more from Scott Morrison on the Omicron Covid variant and whether it will mean the reinstatement of the 14-day quarantine for (vaccinated) international arrivals in Australia: I think it is a bit too early and at present it is a 72-hour arrangement with those states and territories, 14 days’ hotel quarantine in the other states and territories, so the national cabinet will come together over the next couple of days and a key purpose of that is to ensure we are working off all the same information and on all the latest information and on all the latest information we have available. It is coming through at different rates from different places so it is just very important that we remain calm, the national plan is about opening safely so we can remain safely open. Let’s not forget also that we have got over 1,000 cases at the moment in Victoria each day but the hospital system that is coping very well and remember that is what it is all about at the end of the day. The issue is insuring our public health systems are able to cope with any infectious diseases and particularly any new variants that occurs and what we’re saying is that is already being successful in Victoria and NSW where we have had case numbers but the health system has not been overwhelmed, they have planned well for it we have worked well with them and that is keeping people protected. Welcome to the last sitting week of 2021 – and possibly until the next election. Who knows. Scott Morrison attempted another reset at the weekend, using the time off from parliament to make anonymous social media trolling the biggest issue facing the country. With the government trying to blame Labor for not bringing forward its commonwealth integrity commission legislation and Morrison attacking the NSW anti-corruption commission, Icac, while backing in former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian, who he wants to run for the Sydney seat of Warringah, he wants to move away from messy topics. So after giving the party room the usual “disunity is death” talk last Tuesday, now the prime minister is talking up the rebellion happening within the Coalition’s backbench as a good thing, because apparently, they are not “drones” in the Liberal party. Never mind that six of the seven MPs who crossed the floor did so over public health measures Morrison himself was supportive of until recently. Or that it was Tasmanian Liberal Bridget Archer who received a talking to, while Gerard Rennick was allowed to “negotiate” and offered a talk with constitutional lawyers over his position. But Morrison may not get his way with attempts to reset the agenda for what seems like the third time this sitting – a new Covid variant has made its way into Australia, just as the reopening was gathering pace. Morrison was doing the breakfast TV rounds this morning (not the ABC, from what I can see so far) and of course it’s what the hosts wanted to speak about. Australia has gone from “borders open” to “of course they are not open” very, very quickly. Here’s Morrison on the Seven network: Let me stress firstly, our borders are not open. The only country to which our borders are open are Singapore and New Zealand, otherwise the only people coming to Australia are those who have very specific exemptions and those who are Australian residents and citizens, we don’t close our borders to Australian citizens, that has only been done once in the case of India and for a very short period of time. Of course it is concerning and that’s why we’re getting all the information we possibly can. National cabinet will be meeting either this afternoon or tomorrow to work through the available information. We will bring you all the information as it comes – on both parliament and any border changes. Mike Bowers is already up and about for you, and Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Daniel Hurst and Paul Karp are on deck to bring you all the Canberra news. The rest of the Guardian team is also at your disposal for news happening around the nation. It’s most likely going to be a four-coffee morning. Let’s see how it plays out. Ready?Christian Porter’s declaration that part of his legal fees in a defamation case were paid by a “blind trust” did not breach parliamentary rules, a powerful lower house committee has concluded, while calling for them to be updated. A report by the privileges committee following an investigation into the former attorney general’s disclosure that he’d received funds from the “Legal Services Trust” calls for the rules to be changed to uphold the “intent and integrity” of the register of interests. The committee says MPs should provide the “greatest” transparency on the source of gifts. The report, to be tabled in parliament on Tuesday, will see Porter escape sanction for his update to the register revealing the trust part-paid his legal fees for his defamation case against the ABC and reporter Louise Milligan. The committee, chaired by Liberal MP Russell Broadbent, reached a consensus decision declining to uphold Labor’s complaint that Porter had broken the rules. However, the committee noted all members should seek to provide the greatest level of transparency in disclosing the sources of gifts received by them. It concluded that – as with all members – it was up to Porter whether to provide further information about the source of gifts. Labor defeated a bid by some Liberal members to table the report after parliament finishes its 2021 sittings – which could have pushed it beyond a possible announcement from Porter about whether he intends to recontest his Western Australian seat of Pearce or quit politics at the next election. Porter revealed the gift in September but said that as a “potential beneficiary” of what he described as a blind trust he had no access to information about the source of the funds. In October, the Morrison government blocked a move to refer Porter to the privileges committee by asking it to consider the rules on funding legal cases generally. Nevertheless, the committee continued to examine a complaint from the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, into Porter’s disclosure. Porter maintains he has properly disclosed his interests in accordance with both the rules and the ministerial standards, but he resigned as a minister in September on the basis the issue had become an “unhelpful distraction” for the government. The register of interest rules require MPs to declare “registrable interests of which the member is aware” including gifts worth more than $750 from official sources or more than $300 from other sources. But the rules also state that gifts from other sources “need not be registered unless the member judges that an appearance of conflict of interest may be seen to exist”. Explanatory notes suggest this exception applies for gifts received “from family members or personal friends in a purely personal capacity”. In parliamentary debate, Labor’s Tony Burke labelled the trust a “brown paper bag stitched together by lawyers”. The former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has called the disclosure a “shocking affront to transparency”. Burke noted Porter’s public assurances that no “foreign donors” or people on the lobbyist register had donated to the trust. “So he has made clear that he can find out whose money is in this trust, from which he has personally benefited for a personal bill,” Burke said. Dreyfus’s complaint similarly argued that Porter’s reasons for not disclosing were not valid, and queried whether he had “acted contrary to house resolutions on the registration of members’ interests”. Guardian Australia understands that after the committee wrote to Porter giving him a right of reply, the backbencher disputed Dreyfus’ interpretation of the rules and restated his belief that no appearance of a conflict of interest existed. On the day he resigned from cabinet, Porter said in a statement he was “not willing to put pressure on the trust to provide me with any further information … to which I am not entitled”. Porter said he did not want to expose people who donated to the trust to “become targets of the social media mob”. The report deals only with the Dreyfus complaint about Porter, not the general referral by the leader of the house, Peter Dutton, to clarify the rules around how to declare gifts from third parties to fund personal legal matters. In October, Labor rejected a suggestion from Dutton that could have resulted in taxpayers footing the bill for MPs’ defamation cases because it could be considered a “workplace entitlement”. Guardian Australia contacted Porter for comment.1) Rangnick’s time to revive United is short The good news for Ralf Rangnick is that no manager, whoever it might be, could possibly extract less from Manchester United’s squad than has been the case over the last few months. Ole Gunnar Solskjær was rightly held responsible for this – though it is worth noting that had Harry Maguire and Luke Shaw given him performances that were as good as poor, he would still have a job. In any event, a difficult run for United ends with Arsenal on Thursday, after which they face an easier programme that should, in theory, leave them well-placed to secure a top-four finish. The decision Rangnick must make is whether to change as little as possible and simply improve what’s there – the lower-risk, lower-reward option – or introduce further complexity into an already busy period by introducing the style in which he wants United to play as soon as possible, in the knowledge that it might make things worse before they get better. Daniel Harris Match report: Chelsea 1-1 Manchester United 2) Benítez must take risks to halt slide Everton supporters have long come to dread the Merseyside derby and that is undeniably the case ahead of Liverpool’s visit on Wednesday. Jürgen Klopp’s side are rampant while their rivals are well and truly in a rut having now gone seven games without a victory following their defeat to Brentford. For Rafael Benítez the situation is critical and while he insists he retains the backing of the club’s majority shareholder, Farhad Moshiri, things could quickly turn against him should his former side inflict serious damage on his current one. For this most cautious of managers the time may have come to take some risks. A change of system, from 4-4-1-1 to 4-3-3, would make sense given it would allow Everton to match up with Liverpool, while from a personnel point of view, now may be the time to give highly-rated young striker Ellis Simms a start. The 20-year-old cannot do much worse than Salomón Rondón and it may just be that what this stale team needs is a burst of youthful endeavour. Sachin Nakrani Match report: Brentford 1-0 Everton 3) Aubameyang’s waning powers cause concern Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has a habit of offering effective ripostes to his doubters, so perhaps Manchester United should feel concerned about Arsenal’s visit on Thursday. But the Gunners’ form cannot hide a problem that needs resolving sooner or later: their captain’s strike-rate has slowed drastically and, while the burden is being shared more healthily around an exciting young side, the situation needs resolving. Mikel Arteta is pleased with Aubameyang’s improvement off the ball and punched the air when he charged down a first-half clearance in the win over Newcastle; shortly afterwards, though, the striker produced one of the misses of the season and it means he remains stuck on four league goals. Aubameyang missed a penalty in the previous home game, against Watford, and his rustiness may worry Arteta. He turns 33 next June and Arsenal need a credible succession plan: what a timely afternoon it was, then, for Gabriel Martinelli to provide a long-awaited reminder of his predatory gifts. Nick Ames Match report: Arsenal 2-0 Newcastle 4) Tuchel needs more from his forward line Frank Lampard was sacked following a run of three clean sheets in 12 matches – a situation Thomas Tuchel addressed immediately. In his first 10 league games, Chelsea conceded just twice, so far this season they have let in only five, and though their best is not as good as Manchester City’s best, the Premier League boasts more attacking talent than ever before so it is no coincidence that its most solid outfit are top. That said, Chelsea often lack attacking imagination, making it surprising that the misfiring Timo Werner started against Manchester United. His movement and pressing are useful, but these simply cannot be the best qualities of a centre-forward, and though Romelu Lukaku will soon retake his starting spot, the balance still isn’t quite right. The sense persists that Tuchel can find an attacking combination to make his team an even sterner proposition. Daniel Harris 5) Dennis gives Hornets hope of staying up Watford may not have kept a clean sheet in a club-record 23 top-flight games but in Emmanuel Dennis they have a goalscorer who can spearhead enough of an attacking threat to keep Claudio Ranieri’s team clear of relegation danger. Only Mohamed Salah has more goal contributions in the Premier League this season than the 24-year-old Nigerian who cost a paltry £4.5million from Club Brugge. He scored his sixth goal of the season in the 4-2 defeat at Leicester and could have had a fifth assist when he attempted to play in Josh King early in the second half when the game was still in the balance. He had won the penalty that King earlier converted. Pete Lansley • Match report: Leicester 4-2 Watford 6) Eze to build momentum after return Patrick Vieira believes Eberechi Eze could take a couple of months to rediscover his best form for Crystal Palace after returning from injury in the defeat to Aston Villa on Saturday. The 23-year-old injured his achilles during a training session in May and had been due to link up with Gareth Southgate’s England squad before Euro 2020, only to be ruled out. But while Vieira was delighted with the reception for Eze in the loss to Villa, he knows that the player signed from QPR last year must be handled with care over the coming weeks. “He is one of the fans’ favourites and he has been doing really good,” said the Palace manager. “But we need to understand that when a player has seven months out of competition it will take time for him to get to his best. Every week he is making progress but we are not expecting very much for the first couple of months.” Ed Aarons Match report: Crystal Palace 1-2 Aston Villa 7) Bielsa needs to change Leeds dynamic Marcelo Bielsa had never previously spent more than two seasons at any club. This is his fourth at Leeds, which means we are in fresh territory. Threatened by relegation and with growing fan disgruntlement, Bielsa now has to breathe new life into his project. Summer signings are yet to make an impact. Injuries and Covid have hit his team harder than most. The return of Patrick Bamford and Luke Ayling should help, and Bielsa will certainly not compromise on his approach, but does the old master have any new tricks up his sleeve? Jonathan Liew Match report: Brighton 0-0 Leeds 8) Reds back to their best as Klopp learns from errors With Liverpool again recognisable in form and personnel to the side that swept to the title in 2020 - but currently more prolific - there is a temptation to gloss over last season and leave its injury torment locked behind closed doors. To Jürgen Klopp and his players, however, it remains a valuable lesson and motivation. Klopp admits he “made mistakes” last season - primarily in not trusting Nat Phillips and Rhys Williams earlier in central defence and attempting to plug defensive holes with midfielders. “I learned a lot,” he said after Saturday’s comfortable defeat of Southampton made it 702 goals in 338 games in the Klopp era. His players are also driven by the desire to reassert title-winning credentials. “My job is to make the lineup, organise training sessions and help create an atmosphere within the team,” added Klopp. “But on the pitch the players have to do it themselves. The things that happened to this team in the last few years were special and massively because of their outstanding mindset. They push each other.” Andy Hunter • Match report: Liverpool 4-0 Southampton 9) Hammers should add quality to help top-four bid On this performance West Ham may be wise to take the plunge in the January transfer window for the one or two players to help seal a memorable top-four finish. David Moyes’ plan A is for Declan Rice to maraud midfield, claim the ball, and then he, or a teammate, to hit Michail Antonio. After this, plan B is well, plan A. Against Manchester City’s team of gliders and expert game-managers there were only flashes of the ploy and while it did hurt the champions Manuel Lanzini’s late strike was consolation only. To find the extra dimension that may allow West Ham to end as Champions League qualifiers Moyes has to add the quality that can give them a different option. This could close as the most successful Premier League campaign in the club’s history if the purse strings can be loosened. Jamie Jackson Match report: Manchester City 2-1 West Ham 10) Shot-shy Wolves require more dynamism Wolves’ sixth place represents a decent start to life under Bruno Lage. But they are still struggling to score, managing just 12 goals in 13 games and, at Norwich, drew their sixth blank of the season. Were Nuno Espírito Santo still in charge, this could be explained by his reactive, defensive inclination, but they now play more aggressively, and even allowing time for things to settle, to be so impotent with so much talent is bizarre. In midfield, João Moutinho and Rúben Neves have touch and vision, while in front of them, Raúl Jiménez, Adama Traoré, Hwang Hee-chan and Francisco Trincão offer pace, power, trickery and nous. Given their collective struggles can be blamed on neither philosophy nor ability, might the issue be one of personality? Do any of these players have the competitive charisma necessary to regularly impose themselves on games? If they cannot find it or develop it, Lage might soon be looking around for players who can. Daniel Harris Match report: Norwich 0-0 WolvesIt’s not a pair of box-fresh Bottega Veneta boots, or cashmere spun from the wool of a rare-breed yak, that will ensure you strike gifting gold with fashion fans this Christmas: it’s the revelation that you bought their present secondhand. Once a dirty word, secondhand is an increasingly valued quality (the global “preloved” fashion market alone is worth $130bn). A survey conducted by the online secondhand marketplace Vinted found that one in six of us are committed to giving preloved only this Christmas, and buying secondhand can also help to combat the £42m worth of unwanted Christmas gifts sent to landfill each year. If a “vintage” gift was once considered cheap or twee, it’s now an inspired choice – a signal that the person giving it has a finger pressed firmly on the pulse. With this in mind, here are the etiquette guidelines for secondhand gift-giving this Christmas. Tell the truth Avoid any awkward moments by shouting about the origins of your secondhand present. Lucy Mackay, founder of east London-based vintage children’s clothing site And They Wear, suggests putting a note in a card to hammer home the point. “I think a bit of explanation helps confirm that it’s a thoughtful choice,” she advises. “Just about everyone thinks vintage is cool these days. It should go down well.” Stay on message A terrible Christmas present is usually one that says “I have no idea who you are or what you’re into”, so giving it some thought is essential. “A handpicked vintage gift is a treasure. It’s a considered piece that’s going to add real character to a home,” says Chloe McDonald, who sells vintage homeware from her Instagram account @scenebychloe and says zigzag candle holders and onyx and alabaster bookends are coveted gifts this December. Anna O’Brien, a seller on Depop and car-booter from Frome, suggests homing in on pieces that increase with value as they age, such as first editions of novels or clothes designed to stand the test of time. For guaranteed sentimental value, she suggests getting personal. “Think about the year they were born or their favourite colour, and shop accordingly.” Do it for the kids Preloved childrenswear is increasingly big business – but a pair of secondhand PJs makes for a bit of a dull gift. For guaranteed success, seek out independent sellers who stock cult brands. Mackay says OshKosh dungarees and Levi’s denim jackets are among her customers’ favourite pieces to buy as presents. Pastel knitwear also does well. “I change the buttons to smiley faces. Customers love that because then they’re getting something that is customised and a one-off,” she says. Make sure your gift looks the part All secondhand presents should be subject to a strict vetting process. With books, check for missing pages; with toys, replace any batteries; if it’s clothing, sniff with vigour and take to an eco-friendly dry cleaner before passing on – O’Brien also recommends a spritz of vodka mixed with water to remove the musty secondhand smell. Those without time to do the legwork themselves should look to curated vintage sites and sellers. Aside from her own business, McDonald recommends Finna Vintage, The Attic, Foxberry Vintage and The Antik Store. “They have already gone through the trouble of sourcing of-the-moment and interesting pieces.” If you’re buying luxury clothes secondhand, sites such as Vestiaire Collective have a rigorous authenticity process, which will dramatically reduce the chances of you passing on a fake. It’s all about the ‘add-ons’ Seasoned thrifter and vintage influencer April Salsbury (@knackered_cow) believes that finding the perfect pairing for a preloved gift is the key. She suggests teaming a bestselling novel with a cashmere jumper picked up in a charity shop, or a vintage wine decanter with a bottle of red. Regifting is frowned upon … But there are exceptions. While it’s not yet socially acceptable to wrap up a pair of boots you no longer want and pass them on to a pal, treasured pieces make lovely gifts. Jewellery is excellent for this, as is art. “It really is the thought that counts,” says Elle Richie, who runs Depop shop Studio Ell Richie. “Look at what you have and consider the items no longer serving you.” Think about presentation You’ve sourced your best friend an almost-impossible-to-track-down dress from a Stella McCartney collection of old. Now, don’t go ruining it with cheap foil wrapping paper and sticky tape. McDonald purchases vintage wrapping paper to make her gifts sing. But keeping things simple also has its benefits. “I add velvet ribbon, cuts of foliage from the garden and a few drops of essential oil to brown paper,” says Salsbury. To cut out the middleman, McDonald recommends shopping from the direct-to-consumer Instagram sellers who post goods in packaging that’s pretty enough to go straight under the Christmas tree. “Most offer gift messaging, too,” she says, ‘‘so when the product arrives it feels special.”Something has gone badly, wildly wrong in the world of Christmas cuisine. Where Christmas dinner used to be a once-a-year extravagance, the concept has become nebulous and all-encompassing. “Christmas dinner” is no longer a meal – it is a flavour, spread indiscriminately across every foodstuff imaginable in a desperate bid to seize upon good cheer. There have long been Christmas dinner sandwiches, but now we also have Christmas dinner crisps, Christmas dinner pizza, Christmas dinner pasties, Christmas dinner soup. And, while the thought of someone sullenly microwaving a bowl of Christmas soup barefoot in their kitchen between Zoom calls on a Thursday in November is genuinely the most dispiriting thing you could think of, it is possible that some of these products are actually good. There’s only one thing for it: time to put on a novelty jumper and try them all at once. Starbucks ’Tis the Season turkey sandwich (£3.79) There is a lot to be disappointed about here. First, nobody has ever travelled to Starbucks specifically to eat a sandwich, and this is because no sandwich made by Starbucks has ever been palatable. Second, in a world that has long since diversified beyond the Christmas sandwich, this just seems old hat. Third, this sandwich tastes exactly like every pre-packed chicken-and-stuffing sandwich you have ever bought from a petrol station in a fit of self-loathing. Please try harder, Starbucks. How nice is it? 2/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 3/5 Sainsbury’s Rudolph’s Christmas Feast sandwich (£2.50) Although the name of this sandwich might suggest that Sainsbury’s has completely lost the plot and started selling venison sarnies at Christmas, the happier truth is that this is a vegan festive sandwich. Served in a Christmassy star-shaped bun, it comes filled with a root-vegetable patty, along with carrot strips and carrot chutney. Not that you would know, of course, because the bread-to-filling ratio here is so catastrophically out of whack you don’t so much eat it as get suffocated by it. How nice is it? 3/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 2/5 Tesco Free From turkey and stuffing tortilla chips (£1) While everyone was distracted by sandwiches, the humble Christmas crisp has been quietly reaching its apex. These tortilla chips are everything you could possibly ask for. Are they crunchy? Yes. Are they moreish? Yes. Does their gluten-free nature represent the dawning of a more inclusive snacking landscape? Yes. Are they shaped like little Christmas trees? Probably at first, but they will be smashed into unrecognisable smithereens by the time you open a packet. Do they taste like turkey and stuffing? Well, no, not really. But, hey, you can’t win them all. How nice is it? 4/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 2/5 Tesco Finest crinkle-cut pigs in blankets crisps (90p) Here’s a question: do you like smoky bacon flavoured crisps? If you do, you should buy some of these. If you don’t like smoky bacon flavoured crisps, you shouldn’t buy these, because they are basically smoky bacon flavoured crisps. They are crisps that someone has chucked a load of pork-flavoured powder on, and that doesn’t seem particularly Christmassy to me. But does everything you eat have to be relentlessly festive? Can’t you just be happy eating some crisps for once? Honestly, you people. How nice is it? 3/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 2/5 Greggs festive bake (£1.60) This won’t surprise anybody who has ever seen me, but I love Greggs. A warm Greggs pastry slice in your hands on a cold winter’s morning is one of life’s great joys. As such, my expectations for its festive bake – chicken, stuffing and bacon in a sage-and-cranberry sauce – were through the roof. But those expectations were firmly dashed when I ate one. All the ingredients had been reduced to an unidentifiable mush inside the slice, and the sauce carried the faint taste of wax. Only buy this in an emergency. How nice is it? 2/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 3/5 Cornwall Hamper Store Christmas Cornish pasty (£18.99 for four) This, on the other hand, was an unexpected treat. It arrives at your house frozen, to be heated in your oven for 45 minutes, so you can eat it freshly baked. I’m a little worried about the filling, though. The pasty contains ham, turkey and stuffing, which is nothing like a traditional Cornish pasty. Nothing makes Cornish people angrier than a devil-may-care attitude towards Cornish pasty tradition. Anyway, it’s quite peppery. How nice is it? 3/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 3/5 Domino’s The Festive One pizza (£18.99) One of the big benefits of Domino’s pizza is that, no matter what you order, it all tastes the same. You could blindfold yourself and jab wildly at the Domino’s app, and you can reliably assume that whatever turns up at your home will taste just like every other Domino’s pizza you have ever ordered. As such, despite being topped with bacon, sausage and something called “turkey sage and onion”, the Festive One is just a generic pizza. You wouldn’t buy it to celebrate Christmas. You wouldn’t buy it to avoid Christmas. It just exists, like dust or clouds. How nice is it? 2/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 2/5 Costa pigs in blankets mac and cheese (£4) Costa sells mac and cheese boxes all year round, and they generally taste like something that gets slid underneath prison doors during budget cuts. But now that it is Christmas, Costa has unveiled its pigs in blankets mac and cheese, which is – brace yourself – regular mac and cheese, but with some cocktail sausages balanced on top. First, this isn’t remotely Christmassy. It’s the sort of thing that restaurants put on children’s menus for kids who don’t yet know how to chew. Second, eating it made me so miserable that my soul gave up and left my body. Thanks a lot, Costa. How nice is it? 1/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 1/5 Itsu Christmas gyoza (£3, ocado.com) We should hate Itsu for making these. They are gyoza filled with bacon, turkey, cranberry and sage, and therefore constitute several hundred simultaneous cultural appropriations. There is nothing remotely Japanese about these gyoza. I’m sure nobody in Japan celebrates Christmas by ramming measly little teaspoons of pureed turkey into dumplings. However, to my utter astonishment, these were a hit. They’re unbelievably Christmassy to eat, and I think I’ve figured out why. As a society, we have become obsessed with padding out our Christmas dinner ingredients with bread, pastry and who knows what else. Here, though, only the thinnest sliver of dough separates you from your turkey. The filling just explodes in your mouth. Delightful. How nice is it? 5/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 4/5 Heinz Christmas dinner Big Soup (£1.50) This, meanwhile, is a travesty. It’s a tinned soup that contains turkey, stuffing balls, potatoes, brussel sprouts and pigs in blankets, and, not to be indelicate, it looks like fresh sewage. It smells bad. I can’t accurately describe the mouthfeel because I have never had to swallow contraband human organs to sell on the black market. It tastes like punishment. Heinz, you invented the precise opposite of Christmas. It is genuinely impossible to eat this nightmare with even a trace of festivity in your body. Merry Christmas to nobody. How nice is it? -50/5 How much like Christmas dinner is it? 0/5Though fears of Covid-19 are spiking once again, this seems to be a comforting moment for the Labour party. After a disastrous few weeks for the ruling party, it seems as though politics is returning to “normal”: sleazy Tories are being sleazy, reneging on commitments to the “red wall”, and the opposition is sneaking ahead in the polls. But flashbacks to the mid-90s are, in reality, delusions. What most hurt the Tories then was that sleaze came to symbolise a decaying, patrician regime that, Labour argued, must give way to a new political generation. Johnson is a big, tempting and sometimes easy target. But our problems are not reducible to the moral failings of one individual. The current state of British politics – with an “incompetent” and “corrupt” administration at its centre – is symptomatic of a British state in which democratic politics is failing. To understand the depths of the problem, we can start by recognising that democracy isn’t just about voting. It names a much wider political and social system. People will be interested in politics – and more likely to see it as legitimate – if they think it cares about their interests. Large and active political parties circulate ideas, arguments and experiences between the centre and the periphery of power. So too do membership organisations: trade unions, business associations, consumer groups, campaign organisations, charities, churches. Through these, citizens identify the causes and interests they have in common and see them represented in their politics. This is not how British politics works any more. Parties do not closely engage with a mass membership, and are not attached to stable social interests. The Conservatives’ coalition is a protean ragbag of Thatcherite revenants, self-caricaturing traditionalists and anti-political culture warriors; Labour’s electoral strategy is to divest itself of obligations to members and of connections with clearly defined interests. Advocacy, charitable and campaign groups have become highly professionalised, their personnel sometimes taking on government positions. Public political engagement is intense but unstructured. Triggered by terrible events, and catalysed by social media, we swarm around issues – posting, petitioning and protesting. But, disconnected from civic institutions and with nowhere to go, energy dissipates rapidly, leaving only a bitter residue of resentment. In this “post-democracy”, governments give up the complex business of brokering between differing wants. Instead, a few people at the centre – advisers, lobbying consultants and public affairs professionals – make policy, leaving a void between people and politics, which governments try to bridge using tools of public opinion management and behavioural change. But this is not enough. And so, political loyalties – within parties, between voters and parties, and between citizens and government – come to rest on personalised promises of reward or punishment: the main reason to vote Conservative isn’t ideological, but because your constituency might win a prize. The political scientist Chris Hanretty found that being in a Conservative ultra-marginal made places more likely to receive money from the Towns Fund by 45 percentage points. We learned from the budget that if you want your town swimming pool refurbished, you shouldn’t campaign for your local council to get it done, but have the chancellor deliver it personally. Deeper down, people have learned that if you keep on good terms with the government you’ll drive in the VIP lane to government contracts (but be critical and you may get “cold shouldered”). Such a political culture changes what an MP is, from a representative of constituents to a professional conduit between private interests (blocs of voters, personal acquaintances, the highest bidder) and the state. This is the context in which we need to understand the recent corruption scandals. You may object: haven’t governments always acted like this in some way? What’s wrong if people really do get the swimming pool they need? But there is a world of difference between people organising to make demands (becoming part of a process through which interests are brokered, agreement reached) and a government dispensing courtly favours according to its immediate interests. “Clientelism” (receiving benefits in return for political support) is not citizenship. It widens the gap between people and their politics. Rather than meaningfully involve us in the democratic process, the government has only to know – from polling, market research and social media sentiment analysis – what to offer to enough social segments, in the right places, to remain in power. This means it becomes incapable of addressing long-term problems. It has no obligation to work with populations to address fundamental challenges (the climate crisis, inequality, infrastructural decay) and no incentive to overcome resistance from clients demanding that their self-interest be satisfied. Under such a regime, things don’t rapidly fall apart. Uncared for, they slowly become more threadbare. The public realm is reduced to an endless queue of ambulances for which no doctor waits. Furthermore, as is clear with the Johnson regime, this creates a fateful political dynamic. To remain in favour with its supporters (voters, donors, second employers) the government needs continuously to reward them. Whatever gets in the way of making ad hoc decisions – constitutional rules or independent overseers – is an obstacle to be overcome. Lots of regimes are clientelist because they are authoritarian and have no other support; ours is becoming more authoritarian because it is clientelist. As the constitutional expert Meg Russell observes, ignoring independent oversight is a hallmark of this government: marginalising the Commons; trying to overturn the parliamentary commissioner for standards; ignoring breaches of the ministerial code; weakening the electoral commission. These are not deviations but steps in a process of making it easier for centralised administration to direct resources to where political calculation deems it necessary. Today’s sleaze bears the stamp of a leader whose temperament is at odds with public service. But it is not out of tune with how our politics works now. Johnson is a creature of this degraded democracy: he is an exemplar of social-media celebrity politics supported by a fandom, and sellotaped into a network of personal favours and obligations. Labour’s leadership has promised a constitutional commission to be led by Gordon Brown and made positive noises about devolving power, yet ignored members’ overwhelming support for electoral reform (which would break the closed cartel of clientelist parliamentarism) and expressed hostility to sharing power. Doubtless these issues don’t poll well and the party thinks it wiser to demonstrate greater competence at giving out favours. But in so doing it misses a chance that its predecessors would have seized, to put itself at the centre of demands for a better democratic politics, fit for the 21st century. Alan Finlayson is professor of political and social theory at the University of East Anglia“There were almost tears in my eyes, bloody hell,” Diego Martínez says. “Friday night, the first game I’d been at with fans for 18 months. Brentford-Arsenal, back in the top division after 70-something years. Everyone singing Hey Jude, a cappella. Just the walk to the ground, the tube. The people. That’s where it started. Tottenham – Totnúm, no? – Chelsea, West Ham, Watford. Fulham, taking photos of it all. Those wooden seats, by the river. Wonderful. Everton, Liverpool, Man City, United …” Four months earlier, Martínez had taken Granada to Old Trafford to face Manchester United, leading them from the second division to a first appearance in Europe and reaching the quarter-finals of the Europa League. But this time was different: this time the stadium was full and, having decided to take a step back in the summer, now he sat in the stands not on the bench. What does a manager actually do when he’s not working? A question starts a conversation but doesn’t necessarily end it, and if there’s something that emerges it is not just him, it is us. And, the Spaniard insists, there is still something about English football. So, to the question that starts it all. It’s not wait by the phone and if there is no money there are more matches to watch than ever. The coaching staff are a team, drawn together and dependent upon him. Between them they distribute games to analyse and report on. There are players to watch, teams too, partly focused on a potential next phase, but Martínez says it’s more about “research, study: the chance to see the direction the game is going, to learn.” For Martínez, whose coaching career came via university and began at 25, that meant England. Not because he will work in the country necessarily, but because that is where trends emerge, somewhere to seek an education, to develop. “A level above the rest,” he says. Somewhere with a pull, too. “When I was a kid, I would go to my cousin’s to watch the Premier League because he had Canal Plus. I saw [David] Beckham from the halfway line at Wimbledon there. You think: ‘This is different, I have to experience it’.” So he did, travelling with his wife and five-year-old daughter, heading to England for “three months that were like a five-year Master’s degree”, first near London and then in Manchester to see how clubs and coaches work, how the game is played and lived. How it is expressed too, jotted down in a little notebook he carried everywhere. The choice of words says something about how a coach conceptualises the game and is a cultural manifestation too. “They cheer ‘yes’, not ‘goal’,” – “tackle” is an English word, and among the phrases that stick in his mind is: “Don’t over-play!” There is a reason some vocabulary doesn’t translate and it’s not purely linguistic. A discussion revolves around a question: when is attraction commitment? Most coaches attract opponents, drawing them in; at Manchester City, they commit, he notes. “Little details.” The generosity he outlines from others is striking, unexpectedly open: a willingness to share knowledge, something almost collegiate in it. The first lessons in language and culture came at Biggleswade at the ninth level of the pyramid, football in a pure form. Others came across the country, including at Watford – “they were very good with me and, madre mía, they have incredible resources; not just financial but the people, the ideas, the structure” – at Everton with Rafael Benítez, at City with Pep Guardiola and assistant coach Juanma Lillo. “Juanma is a phenomenon,” Martínez says. “He sees things differently, and can communicate it. Pep said of him: ‘Others see three, he sees 33 and it’s true’. With Pep people already know but maybe don’t appreciate him fully yet. In 15, 20 years people will look at him like we look at Johan Cruyff now. Geniuses are different but intelligence lies in adapting. Success doesn’t mean winning necessarily; it means leaving a mark. Pep had a huge impact on coaches in Germany, in Spain, now in England. “Rafa Benítez, Arsène Wenger, José Mourinho: they deserve such credit. They opened a path for the rest. You inspire to leave a mark. But you don’t go to preach, you go to be preached to. To educate yourself.” “It’s the context. [Jürgen] Klopp is perfect for Liverpool: there’s an alignment between his values and those of the club. The transition, the speed, the energy. City are so different. I loved watching their organised attack, their positional game. I told Pep: it’s like nothing I’ve seen, genuinely different. The quality of the passing, receiving on the far foot, the intelligence. I was at Liverpool-City and we forget that they’re humans: to be able to do what City did, to exercise that control in an environment like that, with all that pressure, is even more impressive. And then to see Liverpool able to turn that on its head, to see that vertigo. Pfff.” “Chelsea are a great team on television but live they’re incredible. You see those situations: a throw-in, a restart, and even with big teams you don’t see the relentlessness they have,” Martínez adds, thumping his fist on the table. “Bam, bam, bam. Every. Single. Move. They can do everything. You want to take possession, they can do that. They need to be more direct, they’re direct. Run the counter? They can run the counter. Dead balls. Everything. That speaks to how well worked they are.” But it is the fans that captured the imagination more than the football, the emotion. They say that memory is not about recalling what happened but how it made you feel. And for Martínez, who tells stories of a childhood collecting football stickers and being a ballboy at Celta, that’s certainly the case, constantly comes back to the atmosphere. From Spurs: “One of the best three stadiums in Europe, incredible”, to Watford-Wolves: “Even in the warm-up they’re going mad.” “The atmosphere there’s unique,” Martínez says. “I was fascinated by it. In the Premier League, the Championship. The guy from Middlesbrough whose club is everything. Owners come from foreign capital, sure, but have to adapt to that culture. That respect, the tradition, really left an impact. If you’re from there, maybe you don’t see it, but it’s special. “West Ham-Leicester on a Monday night. I was coming back by train. It was half past midnight, Bedford, and I was nearly home. There were loads of their fans there at the station, still two hours from home. Loads of them. And they had lost 4-1, eh. You let that soak in, immerse yourself in it. It’s so important a manager understands that.” “I went into this ‘church’ in Liverpool and asked for a half pint … well, I did, but you can’t ask for a half,” he continues, laughing. “I took photos of the murals on the houses. There’s a magic, a chemistry, something. These three women, 90 years old, who could barely get up the stairs going into the ground. The Hillsborough memorial. In Spain, those flowers would be wilting. At Everton, the centre-back wins a header and it’s ‘Aaargh!’, so loud. At [Manchester] United they whistled a VAR check: just get on with the game, even if it means a goal for the other team. It’s a different feeling, the whole thing.” “What I most like is that the fans compete, they live the game, participate. You go there to watch as a neutral and you can’t help being drawn in. It’s a different mental state. I was talking to Pep about the atmosphere. There’s a mystique, a charisma, a personality that we don’t really have elsewhere. You can’t explain it, can’t measure it, there is no data, but that’s what seduces you. It’s still there in England, and that needs to be protected.”Ever since Garry Kasparov lost his second chess match against IBM’s Deep Blue in 1997, the writing has been on the wall for humanity. Or so some like to think. Advances in artificial intelligence will lead – by some estimates, in only a few decades – to the development of superintelligent, sentient machines. Movies from The Terminator to The Matrix have portrayed this prospect as rather undesirable. But is this anything more than yet another sci-fi “Project Fear”? Some confusion is caused by two very different uses of the phrase artificial intelligence. The first sense is, essentially, a marketing one: anything computer software does that seems clever or usefully responsive – like Siri – is said to use “AI”. The second sense, from which the first borrows its glamour, points to a future that does not yet exist, of machines with superhuman intellects. That is sometimes called AGI, for artificial general intelligence. How do we get there from here, assuming we want to? Modern AI employs machine learning (or deep learning): rather than programming rules into the machine directly we allow it to learn by itself. In this way, AlphaZero, the chess-playing entity created by the British firm Deepmind (now part of Google), played millions of training matches against itself and then trounced its top competitor. More recently, Deepmind’s AlphaFold 2 was greeted as an important milestone in the biological field of “protein-folding”, or predicting the exact shapes of molecular structures, which might help to design better drugs. Machine learning works by training the machine on vast quantities of data – pictures for image-recognition systems, or terabytes of prose taken from the internet for bots that generate semi-plausible essays, such as GPT2. But datasets are not simply neutral repositories of information; they often encode human biases in unforeseen ways. Recently, Facebook’s news feed algorithm asked users who saw a news video featuring black men if they wanted to “keep seeing videos about primates”. So-called “AI” is already being used in several US states to predict whether candidates for parole will reoffend, with critics claiming that the data the algorithms are trained on reflects historical bias in policing. Computerised systems (as in aircraft autopilots) can be a boon to humans, so the flaws of existing “AI” aren’t in themselves arguments against the principle of designing intelligent systems to help us in fields such as medical diagnosis. The more challenging sociological problem is that adoption of algorithm-driven judgments is a tempting means of passing the buck, so that no blame attaches to the humans in charge – be they judges, doctors or tech entrepreneurs. Will robots take all the jobs? That very framing passes the buck because the real question is whether managers will fire all the humans. The existential problem, meanwhile, is this: if computers do eventually acquire some kind of god‑level self-aware intelligence – something that is explicitly in Deepmind’s mission statement, for one (“our long-term aim is to solve intelligence” and build an AGI) – will they still be as keen to be of service? If we build something so powerful, we had better be confident it will not turn on us. For the people seriously concerned about this, the argument goes that since this is a potentially extinction-level problem, we should devote resources now to combating it. The philosopher Nick Bostrom, who heads the Future of Humanity Institute at the University of Oxford, says that humans trying to build AI are “like children playing with a bomb”, and that the prospect of machine sentience is a greater threat to humanity than global heating. His 2014 book Superintelligence is seminal. A real AI, it suggests, might secretly manufacture nerve gas or nanobots to destroy its inferior, meat-based makers. Or it might just keep us in a planetary zoo while it gets on with whatever its real business is. AI wouldn’t have to be actively malicious to cause catastrophe. This is illustrated by Bostrom’s famous “paperclip problem”. Suppose you tell the AI to make paperclips. What could be more boring? Unfortunately, you forgot to tell it when to stop making paperclips. So it turns all the matter on Earth into paperclips, having first disabled its off switch because allowing itself to be turned off would stop it pursuing its noble goal of making paperclips. That’s an example of the general “problem of control”, subject of AI pioneer Stuart Russell’s excellent Human Compatible: AI and the Problem of Control, which argues that it is impossible to fully specify any goal we might give a superintelligent machine so as to prevent such disastrous misunderstandings. In his Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, meanwhile, the physicist Max Tegmark, co-founder of the Future of Life Institute (it’s cool to have a future-of-something institute these days), emphasises the problem of “value alignment” – how to ensure the machine’s values line up with ours. This too might be an insoluble problem, given that thousands of years of moral philosophy have not been sufficient for humanity to agree on what “our values” really are. Other observers, though, remain phlegmatic. In Novacene, the maverick scientist and Gaia theorist James Lovelock argues that humans should simply be joyful if we can usher in intelligent machines as the logical next stage of evolution, and then bow out gracefully once we have rendered ourselves obsolete. In her recent 12 Bytes, Jeanette Winterson is refreshingly optimistic, supposing that any future AI will be at least “unmotivated by the greed and land-grab, the status-seeking and the violence that characterises Homo sapiens”. As the computer scientist Drew McDermott suggested in a paper as long ago as 1976, perhaps after all we have less to fear from artificial intelligence than from natural stupidity. Further reading Human Compatible: AI and the Problem of Control by Stuart Russell (Penguin, £10.99) Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence by Max Tegmark (Penguin, £10.99) 12 Bytes: How We Got Here, Where We Might Go Next by Jeannette Winterson (Jonathan Cape, £16.99)The first single I ever bought There is a great temptation to lie here. But hand on heart, it was [beloved ITV puppet] Roland Rat Superstar’s novelty rap Rat Rapping. He was rapping about being a puppet of a rat. I remember thinking: “Wow, this will stand the test of time, this is worth spending £1.75 on,” or however much a single was in 1983. *** The best song to play at a party The coolest I have ever been was for six months in 2001, when friends and I ran a club night in a Dublin pub. I would play a 15-minute set that was really a palate cleanser: after all the cool Daft Punk remixes, I would put on Steely Dan, and everybody would go for a wee and get a drink. I think it performed an important job, like half time at a football match. *** The song I’ve streamed the most Werewolves of London – Warren Zevon. What I love about it is that it’s just a song about werewolves in London. I don’t think it’s a metaphor. It’s just about the pros and cons of living in a major centre with werewolves. For me it’s a vibe-lifter. *** The best song to have sex to The difficulty with picking a song to have sex to – and I’m not trying to brag here – is that most songs are three to five minutes long, unless you pick a 12-minute song, then you’re heading into the jazz realm. Can I put on an episode of Melvyn Bragg’s In Our Time, one of the really good ones? The one on the Industrial Revolution. *** The song I pretend to hate that I secretly like Some of the pop bands of the 90s are now seen as pretty good, but there’s one tune that has never been cool that I do absolutely love: Never Had a Dream Come True by S Club 7. I’ve learned to play it on the piano, look. [Plays it on the piano] I think it’s fair to say that they are not a cool band, but it’s actually a powerful song. The lyrics are really good. *** The song I want played at my funeral I think it would be an interesting experiment to play a song that no one could possibly cry at if they heard it. I think that song is It Wasn’t Me by Shaggy. Or else I would play an Ireland world cup song from 1990, when we were very good at football, called Give It a Lash Jack, which encouraged Jack Charlton to give it a lash. No one could possibly cry at that. *** My actual favourite song Flamenco Sketches by Miles Davis, the slow peaceful one on Kind of Blue. In the Voyager space launch in 1977, they put a record player and a record on it so that if aliens ever found it, it would say: “Please don’t destroy us, aliens. Look, here’s some beautiful stuff that we made.” Flamenco Sketches might be the most useful song that I can think of for that. If I was the DJ for the next spacecraft, I’d send it into space. Along for the Ride With David O’Doherty airs Mon, 10pm, Channel 4 and is available to stream on All 4.The BBC’s flagship morning news programme, Radio 4’s Today, was taken off air for nearly 30 minutes on Monday after an alarm interrupted the broadcast. Towards the end of the 7.30am news bulletin, as the newsreader was delivering a piece on a memorial for a police officer, listeners heard “attention please, please leave the building immediately, please leave the building immediately by the nearest exit”. The presenter Nick Robinson returned on air and said: “You may be able to hear we have a little alarm going on here … but shall we wait until someone looks vaguely panicky?” His fellow presenter, Martha Kearney, suggested they “carry on for a little bit” before a loud alarm sounded. She added: “Well, maybe it’s going to be quite hard to carry on with this alarm going on in the background.” “Quite dramatic,” she continued. “Hopefully it’s a false alarm … this did happen to me once when I was presenting Woman’s Hour and we did have to leave the building because there was a fire. That was at old Broadcasting House.” Robinson then said: “We do get these occasionally for alarms, normally they don’t go off in the studio, but this one is persisting so we’re going to go to a report and that will allow us to work out what is going on.” Robinson introduced a prerecorded report on Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial as the alarm continued in the background and then the live broadcast was taken off air until 7.55am. Kearney announced the show had returned: “As the world news fades down, Nick and I are back in the studio.” Robinson added: “Not only is the alarm over … that despite that noise you may have heard saying there was an emergency, as far as we could tell there wasn’t actually an emergency, we had to follow procedures and we did, and we were outside in the cold for a little while but we’re relieved to be back in the Today programme … we will now continue as before … normal service will resume.” Kearney then introduced the regular segment, Thought for the Day, and the normal broadcast returned.When the Rams sent what was left of their future assets to the Broncos a month ago to acquire Von Miller, they registered in the grandest of NFL experiments: What would it look like if a team truly went all in? What if they stopped worrying about tomorrow? The ideal outcome was clear. Miller would redefine the Rams’ defense, allowing them to create all kinds of pressure with a four-man defensive front. Pair that with Sean McVay, Matthew Stafford and an all-singing, all-dancing offense and you have a playoff-ready juggernaut. Or not. The Rams have now lost three games on the spin. They’ve cratered on defense, falling from fourth in defensive efficiency in Week 8 all the way down to 19th spot at the close of play on Sunday. Worse: The offense has fallen into a ditch. Over his entire career, Aaron Rodgers has thrown three pick-sixes. Matthew Stafford has thrown three in the last three weeks. Worse still: The whole tenor of the team is, well, funky. Since they acquired Miller at the trade deadline, they aren’t quick enough on defense; the stars unable to cover up for the lack of depth at linebacker and throughout the secondary. Up against an addled Packers’ offensive line on Sunday – one that was down its starting center, left guard, and onto its third-string left tackle – they failed to register consistent pressure, despite lining up with Aaron Donald, Leonard Floyd, and Miller. The Rams Experiment was as much about star-hunting on defense as anything else. With Donald, Miller and Jalen Ramsey, the Rams figured they’d tipped the defensive odds in their favor. Defense is not as stable – year to year or week to week – as offense. But if you can land three of the 10 most significant defenders of a generation, all still just about in their primes, your odds get better. An offense might be able to scheme one of those three out of a game, but not all of them – at least in theory. But good defense resides in the absence of spectacle. If offensive production is driven by its star-power – and it is – then defense is driven by the ability of the 11th-best man on the field. Good offenses will always, always find the weak link on defense. And right now, the Rams defense is running out on Sundays (and Mondays and Thursdays) with two or three subpar players on each and every snap. Over the course of the last three weeks, they’ve given up an average of 31 points a game. It’s just as grim on offense. The fun-and-gun early Stafford-McVay days have made way for a plodding, pedestrian attack, one being marshaled by the Real Matthew Stafford™. This is who Stafford has always been. No one should be shocked. A couple of times a year, he’ll win a game almost single-handed, thanks to his arm strength, decisiveness, and willingness to push the ball into tight windows. A couple of times a year, that same moxie means he’ll chuck a game away, by way of brutal turnovers. The Rams’ best hope coming into the year was that McVay’s play-calling and tactical acuity could limit some of Stafford’s variance, or at the least diminish some of its impacts. Early on, it worked. Recently, not so much. Stafford has proven that he can push the McVay offense to a level that Jared Goff or other Goff-adjacent quarterbacks could not. But as the season has progressed he has reverted to some of his worst instincts. He also happens to be beaten up. ESPN’s Dianna Russini reported pre-game that Stafford is “dealing with pain in his throwing arm, his elbow, a sore ankle, and chronic back pain.” It’s hard to measure the impact of those injuries. But it’s clear that something is up with the Rams offense beyond the injury to receiver Robert Woods. Stafford hasn’t been as slick as he was early in the year. The team’s run-game is non-existent. Everything takes an extra beat to unfold; the Rams don’t have the kind of offensive line talent that allows for that beat on a regular basis. If fancy metrics are your thing, the Rams rank 21st in passing EPA since Week 7, a measure of a team’s down-to-down efficiency. And therein lies the issue with an all-in strategy. You risk the whole house of cards falling down thanks to a receiver hurting his knee in practice, or your quarterback’s nagging back pain flaring up at the wrong time, or your soon-to-be 40-year-old left tackle starting to creak, or your much-ballyhooed defensive strategy failing to produce any results. In the doomsday scenario, all four hit at once. The Rams still have the makings of a team that could catch fire down the stretch. In a year without a batch of serious contenders, they have the talent to compete with anyone. But they have a bunch of issues to correct before the playoffs – and time is running out for them to find the right answers. Video of the week If you want a video that sums up what it means to play in the NFL, here you go: Yes, you saw that right. That’s Vita Vea’s tooth popping out of his head mid-game. Vea was soon strolling along the sideline, ready to play the very next snap. Bucs coach Bruce Arians described the atmosphere best, even if his numbers were a little off: “I don’t care. He’s got 30 others.” MVP of the week Joe Mixon, RB, Cincinnati Bengals. The Bengals handed Mixon the ball eight times on the team’s opening touchdown drive against the Steelers. It was a statement of intent. Cincy continued to find creative ways to get Mixon the ball on the ground and through the air. He finished the day with 163 all-purpose yards and two touchdowns on 32 touches. Thirty-two! It was over to the Steelers’ offense to keep pace. With a fossilized Ben Roethlisberger and an offensive system that isn’t tailored to create chunk yards, they had no chance. The Bengals ran out 41-10 winners. Stat of the week Five. That’s the number of rushing touchdowns by Niners receiver Deebo Samuel this season, more than Dalvin Cook, Christian McCaffrey, Aaron Jones, Alvin Kamara, David Montgomery and Saquon Barkley. He may well be the best offensive weapon in the NFL right now. Samuel is on pace to become the first player to total more than 1,500 receiving yards and 300 rushing yards in a season. With Jimmy Garoppolo at the helm, the Niners offense has been a tough watch. But Samuel brings an element of electricity to an otherwise stodgy unit. Quote of the week “I believe Bill Belichick has done his best coaching job this season, ever – in his entire career.” – Rex Ryan on Belichick, Mac Jones and the New England Patriots. The Patriots are playing the best all-around football of any team in the league. They hosed the Titans 36-13 on Sunday, flashing in all three phases of the game. It wasn’t perfect, but it rarely is with the Patriots these days. It’s about limiting mistakes, and then hoping that the defense and Mac Jones can make a few game-changing plays to seal a win. It was Belichick’s receivers who stepped up on Sunday, with both Kendrick Bourne and Jakobi Meyers hauling in otherworldly grabs to bail the offense out of some iffy down-and-distance situations. Beating the Titans keeps the Patriots in the race for the AFC’s No 1 seed. To do that with a rookie quarterback, in the same division as the loaded Bills, does indeed represent one of Belichick’s finest achievements. Elsewhere around the league -- The Dolphins picked up a sneakily important 33-10 win over the Panthers. All of a sudden, Miami are 5-7 with the Giants and Jets up next. Both games are at home. The team’s defense has been marvelous for the better part of a month, and Tua Tagovailoa and the offense have started to hit some sort of form. There’s a decent chance the Dolphins will head to New Orleans for Monday Night Football in a fortnight’s time at 7-7, right in the wildcard mix. It’s been that kind of season. -- Lamar Jackson pulled off some electrifying plays on Sunday Night Football but he also gave up four interceptions. The Browns couldn’t exploit those chances though as they went down to a 16-10 defeat. Baker Mayfield attracts plenty of criticism, but it was Cleveland’s usually excellent running game that let them down, averaging a little over two yards per rush. -- It was a rough day for Cam Newton and the Panthers. Carolina sent Newton to the bench in the fourth quarter with the game all but lost. Newton completed just five of his 21 pass attempts, tossing two interceptions and somewhere in the region of 10 did-he-really-throw-that efforts – a Newton staple. Newton has been lively since he returned to the Panthers, but this is one that he and the team will want to quickly forget. -- We need to talk about the Colts’ Darius Leonard. It’s rare that a middle linebacker serves as a walking turnover-creating machine. But Leonard forced another fumble recovery with a Peanut Tillman-style punchout against the Bucs. Since he entered the league in 2018, Leonard has 15 forced fumbles, which ranks second over that span only to TJ Watt (19), who has the handy advantage of being the league’s premier pass-rusher, opening up sack-fumble opportunities. Leonard has made forcing turnovers into an art form. -- - All is not well in Minnesota. Head coach Mike Zimmer and Kirk Cousins spent the last week squabbling about how aggressive the quarterback should be. Zimmer wanting his quarterback to ramp it up; Cousins sticking to the mantra of efficiency above all else. Then, in a one-score game, late in the fourth quarter, Cousins lined up behind the right guard to try to take a snap on fourth and goal. The Vikings were forced to take a timeout. When Cousins finally found himself lined up in the right spot, he took the snap and launched it over the head of Justin Jefferson on fourth down, sealing a 34-26 defeat to the Niners. The Vikings are now 5-6, with games against the Packers and Rams still on the schedule. -- It was a day to forget for Philly receiver Jalen Reagor. He dropped two potential touchdown passes in the final minute of the Eagles-Giants game. A touchdown would have been enough to lift the Eagles to a one-point victory. Instead, the Giants picked up the 13-7 win.The Adelaide bubble tea bar where two women were assaulted after one complained to her boss about unpaid wages has gone into liquidation allegedly owing $186,000 to 20 workers. A notice posted to the Australian Securities and Investments Commission announced FunTea, known as the Yuxuan Group Pty Ltd, went into liquidation on 19 November 2021 with Mark Lieberenz appointed as liquidator. During the winding up process, the company’s remaining assets will be sold to cover outstanding costs like unpaid wages. Workers are treated as priority creditors in this scenario but the sale of assets only raises enough to repay a portion of what’s allegedly owed – if anything at all. The move comes two months after the Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO) launched action against the company, and could effectively prevent recovery of alleged unpaid wages from the company’s owners. Allegations of underpayment at the chain first became public in February when video of a man slapping a female employee during a dispute about alleged unpaid wages went viral. The man, who was later convicted of assault, was not her boss or employed by the tea bar. According to documents filed in the federal court by FWO, the ombudsman alleged 20 workers, including the woman in the video, were paid as little as $10 an hour. The Guardian understands that the claim is being defended. Jacky Chen, an organiser with the SA Labour Info Hub, said the workers were “extremely frustrated” as they “had been waiting for a year now”. “The workers are extremely frustrated as they’ve fought so hard but still earned nothing,” Chen said. Edward Cavanough, director of policy with the McKell Institute, a progressive thinktank, said the situation was “predictable” and it was “another example of the scales being tipped to business instead of the worker”. “This is the risk with all wage theft cases,” Cavanough said. “The business that is [allegedly] culpable and responsible for doing the wrong thing has all of these options at their disposal to avoid their responsibilities. But the workers at the end of the day can’t get what they’re owed.” SA Unions secretary Dale Beasley said insecure workers such as those on migrant visas were vulnerable, as they were at risk of slipping into poverty or becoming homeless. “We need immediate and serious action on wage theft here in South Australia,” Beasley said, speaking generally. “We need expanded powers for our courts and tribunals to deal with phoenixing and sham contract arrangements, including power to pursue the individuals responsible. “And once and for all we need to make it a criminal offence for an employer to dishonestly, deliberately and systematically steal the wages of an employee.” In separate court proceedings in June, Lei “Gavin” Guo, 39, pleaded guilty to slapping the young woman in the face. Guo was convicted in August but released on a two-and-a-half year good behaviour bond by magistrate John Fahey, who said he was a “good man” whose standing in the community had suffered significantly since the incident. A select committee has been examining the issue of wage theft in South Australia and is expected to deliver its final report this week.One of my favourite poems is Auden’s Musée des Beaux Arts. In it, the poet writes of how the old masters recognised the “human position” of suffering: “how it takes place / While someone else is eating or opening a window or just walking dully along”. Auden summons the image of Bruegel’s Landscape With the Fall of Icarus, where the mythical drama is playing out in the background, while “everything turns away / Quite leisurely from the disaster”. This poem and the painting it describes seem like a useful model for thinking about Adam O’Riordan’s gentle and intimate first novel, The Falling Thread. The book opens in the white heat of the trenches: a barrage of shells approaches and Lieutenant Wright begins to count. “If he got to a thousand, he’d have made it.” Then the novel spools back in time to an earlier generation of the Wright family: it’s August, 1890, and we’re in a prosperous suburb of Manchester where Charles, the oldest of the Wright children, is mooning around the house, his eyes repeatedly drawn to Miss Greenhalgh, his sisters’ new governess. The two engage in a frantic fumble, a child is conceived, scandal barely averted. Meanwhile his sisters grow and change, with Tabitha becoming involved in a local charity for the underfed poor, while Eloise goes to art school and becomes a painter. Writing about plot rather misses the point of this book, though. As with Bruegel’s painting, it’s the incidental that is momentous here, the everyday given such intimate attention that it becomes extraordinary. O’Riordan’s descriptions are detailed to the point of excess, his language so finely judged as to be almost unreal. Reading this book feels like stepping through a hushed and ornate museum, or a model village whose simulacrum of real life is so perfect as to be unsettling. O’Riordan has researched the world of late-Victorian Manchester deeply, and that knowledge means that the narrative energy of the book comes not from the shop-worn machinations of plot but rather from the accretion of convincing detail, the gradual build-up of atmosphere. I wonder if this has something to do with being a teacher of creative writing, where style has long been privileged over plotting. O’Riordan was until recently the director of the esteemed Manchester Writing School and ran its MFA programme. We’ve heard a lot about the impact that creative writing classes are having on the publishing world – university courses churning out students whose style is homogenised, risk-averse, self-consciously literary. But I’m not sure anyone has considered what teaching these students does to the prose of their professors. The highly polished perfection of O’Riordan’s writing, the sense of an author taking almost unseemly pleasure in the Jamesian poise of his sentences – these feel like something that comes from teaching the same classes year after year, from climbing too far inside the machine of language. At the end of the novel, one of the characters sits in a moment of stillness in a place well-known since childhood. She “looked around the room and tried to fix it as it was, the clocks, the piano, the ammonites on the mantelpiece. It had begun to rain, lightly, at the window, on the rose stems trained beside the glass.” These words, which are more or less the last in the book, feel emblematic of the entire project – the loving, closeup description of things, the wish to “fix it as it was”. Then we race forward in time to the war, to Lieutenant Wright in the trenches, and it’s as if O’Riordan is showing us the kind of book he might have written, one with bombs and drama and thudding hearts, rather than this stately, intimate yet austere family saga which, for all its quietness, feels like a more important work of literature. • The Falling Thread by Adam O’Riordan is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA newspaper’s views evolve but its leader columns represent a palimpsest of its history, where layer upon layer of thought has been inscribed. So how does a publication such as the Guardian come to decide what it thinks about an issue? The newspaper’s leader column dates back 200 years, to its first edition, but it was a long time before it found its voice. For David McKie, the Guardian’s former deputy editor who ran the leader column for more than 20 years, the most formative period coincided with the decades leading up to the first world war, which shaped paper’s outlook into a familiar form. Through its leader column, the then editor, CP Scott, presented the paper’s view based on his liberal values and steered it towards the radical political left – backing home rule in Ireland, supporting organised labour and criticising British troops for war crimes in the Sudan. What the paper did between 1897 and 1902 nearly sank the Guardian. But it was rescued by what its London rivals failed to do. The crucial year was 1899. The paper led strident opposition to the Boer war, attacking rival “jingo papers” in editorials for backing conflict as if it were “a well-known method of restoring confidence, invigorating industry and stimulating trade”. It exposed British-run concentration camps where starvation was rife. The stance was at odds with much of public opinion and drove away large numbers of readers. But by 1902 Scott had been proved substantially right. McKie points out that his leader writers – Charles E Montague and Leonard T Hobhouse – became the paper’s driving force during the editor’s absences (he was also a Liberal MP). Montague, who married Scott’s daughter, was his chief leader writer and deputy. His guiding principle was to bring “all political action to the same tests as personal conduct”. Hobhouse took up journalism as a financially rewarding escape from Oxford academia. A pioneer of sociology, he recognised liberalism would need the sinews of the emerging Labour movement to stay in power. He cheerfully backed measures in the Guardian leader column that were, in his own words, “undoubtedly socialistic in character in the sense that all socialists except those who are for immediate barricades would accept them as an instalment of what they want”. Today, the Guardian is, of course, a very different paper. Its leader writers are no longer all white men and many have immigrant heritage. They are not all, as in Scott’s day, Oxford graduates in classics. A small group of leader writers meets and discusses the big issues of the day. Once a line is agreed on a subject, correspondents are consulted and once the article is written it is checked to ensure that the view expressed is one the paper would be comfortable with. Finally the editor-in-chief, or the deputy editor, gives the column the green light. The subjects up for debate today are also very different to those of 100 years ago. After the Boer war, UK politics became concerned with how to alleviate poverty at home while sustaining a global empire. By 1906 the Tories lost in a landslide election, a defeat put down to two issues: moral outrage over the government’s use of Chinese slaves in the South African gold mines (blamed on rapacious business owners at the cost of white workers) and potential cost of Conservative tariff protectionism for the poor. The Guardian leader column approved of the “free trade system” that the new Liberal government pursued as well as fresh restrictions on “slavish” labour. So began 10 years of Liberal dominance, supported by an emerging Labour parliamentary bloc. The Guardian sided with its political ally, the Liberal cabinet minister David Lloyd George, who was instrumental in the development of many of the reforms for which the paper’s leader column had advocated. From 1903 until 1914, the paper “had the experience, foreign almost to its genius and not perhaps altogether to its taste, of being with the majority, and … was the object of a great personal affection from the Liberal party”, said William Haslam Mills, a biographer of the paper’s first 100 years. But then came the war which split liberal opinion. These tensions played out in the Guardian between those advocating peace and those backing a fight with Germany. During the summer of 1914 Hobhouse, who by then had a seat on the Guardian board, wanted Britain to remain neutral. Scott lobbied Herbert Asquith’s Liberal cabinet for Britain to stay out. But the German invasion of Belgium shifted the mood – to the dismay of many drawn to the Guardian’s earlier pacifism. For Montague the war provided a test of his own sincerity. He had written the leader of 24 August 1914 which said “Europe must either smash Prussian Junkerdom or be smashed by it”. Less than four months later he had enlisted in the army (aged 47, it was only when he dyed his hair that the Royal Fusiliers took him in). Scott could not understand why he had joined up. Montague’s sister had a frank explanation: “he wants to kill a German.” The first world war changed Britain. There were great hopes that it would be altered in the Guardian’s favour. These were heightened when Scott became the only “unofficial” person to meet US president Woodrow Wilson when he came to Manchester in December 1918. But America withdrew from the world stage, leaving Britain to play for another 25 years the role of superpower that it could not ultimately sustain. By 1924 the Guardian leader line was that the British empire remained a “great affair” but it differentiated between parts of the imperium which were built by “common stock” – a loose confederation of white Anglophone races – with those which were not. While the former could stand alone, for the latter, particularly its Indian possessions, the Guardian thought there would be “difficult and painful steps” to an unknown destination. Montague had by then settled back into Guardian life and worried that he would not see a Liberal government again. He was right. The downfall of the party began in December 1916, when Asquith was outmanoeuvred in cabinet, forced to resign and succeeded as prime minister by Lloyd George as head of a Conservative-dominated government. Scott had backed Lloyd George when in 1918 he gave the vote to all men over the age of 21 and property-owning women over 30. But if voters were thankful, they did not show it, punishing a divided Liberal party and turning to the Conservatives and Labour. Lloyd George was Britain’s last Liberal prime minister. Scott despaired of the suspicion and distrust between Liberal and Labour leaders that kept the Tories in power. Bridging that divide remains a cause very much alive today within the paper. Until recently, election leader articles were the preserve of the editor-in-chief, who would consult a few colleagues and then write the piece. Now there is a meeting where all editorial staff put their views forward. And the editor no longer writes the leader, although they still have the last word. The other sensibilities from the time that endure today are Scott’s sympathy for the underdog, his scepticism of government propaganda and an understanding that it is “well to be frank; it is even better to be fair”. All these notions were forged, as McKie says, when “liberals and Labour first found a common home in the Guardian”.The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has prompted governments around the globe to take rapid action and reintroduce border restrictions in an attempt to stop it spreading from southern Africa. But the evidence from the two years since the coronavirus emerged suggest those efforts may not be entirely effective. Already, cases of the new variant have been found in the UK, Europe, Hong Kong and Australia. All of the cases were in people who had recently travelled from countries in southern Africa where the Omicron variant was reported last week. So how has Australia responded so far and what does it mean for international students and other visa holders planning to return from December? What has changed? On Saturday, the federal government reintroduced border restrictions on some countries in southern Africa where the Omicron variant has been detected. The countries are: South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Malawi and Mozambique. Anyone who has been in these countries and is not an Australian citizen, permanent resident, or their immediate family will not be able to enter Australia. Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family members arriving from these countries would need to go into “immediate supervised quarantine for 14 days subject to jurisdictional arrangements”. That also applies to anyone who had already arrived in Australia and has been in any of the nine African countries within the previous 14 days. The federal government announced on Monday night “these measures will be continued until 15 December” at least. In New South Wales, the government said returnees from those nine countries “must enter hotel quarantine for 14 days” whether they are vaccinated or not. What about arrivals from other countries? All other international arrivals to Victoria, NSW and the ACT must isolate for 72 hours and get tested as a precaution. This can be done at their place of residence or accommodation, rather than hotel quarantine. Victoria is also reportedly considering reintroducing 14-day quarantine for all international arrivals, although no announcements have been made. South Australia has reimposed some border restrictions. All international travellers and people arriving in SA from high-risk Australian locations will again be required to quarantine for 14 days. People arriving from lower-risk locations interstate must also have a coronavirus test within the 72 hours prior to arrival and must show proof of a negative result. Queensland, which still requires international arrivals to complete 14 days in hotel quarantine, said they will monitor news about the new variant, but have no plans to change reopening dates at this stage. Are further border restrictions being considered? The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has ruled out closing the international borders to citizens and has called for calm. Any further action taken is set to be discussed at a national cabinet in the next 48 hours. Health experts have also suggested that border closures would be unnecessary, while the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, warned against any “kneejerk” reactions. “Ultimately we need to open up to the world (and) we need to do so safely,” he told reporters on Monday. “We don’t need to have a kneejerk reaction, we need to have a proportionate and balanced response to the situation that’s in front of us. The responses should not be ‘let’s shut down’.” What does it means for international students and skilled migrants? From 1 December, fully vaccinated eligible visa holders were due to be able to enter Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption. But that’s now been delayed until at least 15 December. The eligible visa holders included skilled migrants and international students. Fully vaccinated international visitors from Japan and the South Korea were also set to return at the start of December. But on Monday, Morrison announced the national security committee would meet to discuss whether those changes would be delayed after the discovery of the Omicron variant. “On the basis of medical advice provided by the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, the national security committee has taken the necessary and temporary decision to pause the next step to safely reopen Australia to international skilled and student cohorts, as well as humanitarian, working holidaymaker and provisional family visa holders from 1 December until 15 December,” the prime minister said in a statement on Monday night. “The reopening to travellers from Japan and the Republic of Korea will also be paused until 15 December. “The temporary pause will ensure Australia can gather the information we need to better understand the Omicron variant, including the efficacy of the vaccine, the range of illness, including if it may generate more mild symptoms and the level of transmission.”Labor has criticised the Coalition for proposing a parliamentary sitting calendar for next year that includes just 10 sitting days before August if an election is called immediately after the budget. The release of the sparse sitting calendar comes as the government runs out of time to fulfil an election promise to establish a federal integrity commission, amid ongoing divisions within the party about the best model for a new anti-corruption body. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has been walking back the commitment, and told parliament on Monday the government’s “well drafted legislation” was already in the public domain. When asked in parliament if the prime minister was delaying legislation “to ensure that a national anti-corruption commission won’t be established this term”, Morrison for a second consecutive day attempted to blame Labor for the delay. “There is a 349-page legislation that the government has prepared in relation to the design of our proposal for a commonwealth integrity commission, and we have committed $150 million in the budget to support it,” Morrison said. “The government has a proposal for such a commission, the Member for Indi has a proposal, the Greens has a proposal, the Labor party have no proposal on this matter. “The government has set out legislation, which has been made available and has been carefully designed and consulted upon and the Labor party refuse to support it.” Progress on the government’s integrity commission has again stalled after the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, previously pledged to introduce a bill to parliament this year. After widespread consultations and pressure from within the Coalition to toughen up the government’s proposed model – released as an exposure draft in February – Cash made changes to the bill that are yet to be signed off by cabinet. She told Senate estimates last month the government was in the process of “finalising the legislation” based on the feedback received during consultation. “I have been considering the feedback through the consultation to further inform refinement of the exposure draft legislation before it is introduced to the parliament,” Cash said. “I am taking into account the feedback that has been received but ultimately it will be the decision for cabinet.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But despite Cash’s intention to introduce the bill this year, the communications minister, Paul Fletcher, said the government would only introduce the legislation if Labor was prepared to “work seriously” with it on the proposal. “[We] stand ready to proceed with the legislation should the Labor party indicate it wants to engage seriously on this matter, rather than engaging in the kinds of cheap political stunts that we have heard from the shadow attorney general and now the shadow minister,” Fletcher said. “We are getting on with engaging seriously with an important question of public policy and we stand ready to introduce this legislation as soon as the Labor party shows us that they are ready to work seriously on this, and work with us.” The Coalition’s failure to introduce a bill has led to simmering frustrations among MPs about the unfulfilled election pledge, culminating in Tasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossing the floor last week to back a federal integrity commission proposed by independent MP Helen Haines. Amid concern there is now inadequate time to legislate the anti-corruption commission before the election, the governments sitting calendar for 2022 released on Monday included just 10 sitting days before a likely May vote. The proposed sitting calendar release schedules seven sitting days in February, which includes four days of Senate estimates, and a three-day joint sitting in March, which proposes a budget on 29 March. If an election is called immediately after the budget – the approach that Scott Morrison has flagged is his preference – then sittings are unlikely to resume until August after a likely May election. Labor frontbencher Ed Husic said the proposed calendar was “more of a slouch than a sitting calendar” and criticised the government’s thin legislative agenda. “It’s all talk, no action and I’ve never seen, I have to say, a Liberal party so focused on winning and gaining power and then doing nothing with it when they get in,” Husic told the ABC. “And this sitting calendar is testament to that. They get back from the Christmas and January break, they have a bit of a yawn and a stretch and 10 days are over and we’re into an election campaign. I think most Australians would expect their parliament to sit longer and do more.”The private office of the Prince of Wales has dismissed as “fiction” claims in a new book that Prince Charles was the royal who speculated on the skin colour of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s future children. The American journalist and author Christopher Andersen, a former editor of the US celebrity news magazine People, alleges in the book that Charles made the comment on the day Harry and Meghan’s engagement was announced in November 2017. In the book, Brothers And Wives: Inside The Private Lives of William, Kate, Harry and Meghan, Andersen, 72, writes that the prince said to the Duchess of Cornwall: “I wonder what the children will look like?” When Camilla replied: “Well, absolutely gorgeous, I’m certain,” the book claims Charles went on to say: “I mean, what do you think their children’s complexion might be?” Clarence House, the Prince of Wales’ private office, responded on Monday with an emphatic denial of the version of events. A Clarence House spokesman said: “This is fiction and not worth further comment.” Harry and Meghan accused a member of the royal family – not the Queen or Duke of Edinburgh – of racism in shocking claims made during their Oprah Winfrey interview earlier this year. Meghan said that when she was pregnant with Archie, an unnamed member of the royal family raised “concerns and conversations about how dark his skin might be when he’s born”. Asked whether there were concerns that her child would be “too brown” and that would be a problem, the duchess said: “If that is the assumption you are making, that is a pretty safe one.” Pushed by Winfrey on who had those conversations, Meghan refused to say, adding: “I think that would be very damaging to them.” Harry refused to give further details, adding: “That conversation, I am never going to share. At the time it was awkward, I was a bit shocked.” Charles has arrived in Barbados ahead of a historic ceremony in which the country will swear in its first president and formally end the Queen’s role as its head of state. Andersen’s other works include unauthorised biographies of Madonna and Michael Jackson, and a range of other works on the British royals, including 2016’s Game of Crowns: Elizabeth, Camilla, Kate, and the Throne.The troubled sub-prime lender Amigo has said it will go bust unless it is allowed to resume lending and raise new equity under a proposed new rescue plan. Amigo said that in the six months to the end of September it had set aside £344m for customers who complained they were mis-sold loans that they could not afford. The lender, which grew in popularity after the demise of its rival Wonga in 2018, was banned from lending in May by the Financial Conduct Authority. Amigo has submitted a new rescue plan after the high court rejected the terms of its initial compensation scheme, which would have handed customers as little as 5% to 10% of any successful claim, and capped the pool at £35m and 15% of profits over the next four years. While details of the scheme were not made public, Gary Jennison, the Amigo chief executive, said the company had taken on board the view of an independent customer committee that it was recommended be set up by the high court judge. “The creditor committee made it clear they wanted a scheme that offers the certainty of a cash-based payment, delivered quickly, and this is reflected in the revised offer we are outlining here today,” said Jennison, of what it has termed the new business scheme. “It will offer a markedly better cash contribution compared with the original scheme developed a year ago.” The company added: “The sanctioning of a new scheme is increasingly urgent. Without an approved scheme, Amigo expects to have to file for administration or other insolvency process.” Amigo said the loan impairment rate had jumped from 14% to 22% of its gross loan book in the first six months of its financial year, compared with the same period last year, as more customers default as Covid repayment holidays expire. It had set aside a much lower figure of £159m for potential compensation for the six months to the end of September 2020. As a result of being banned from making new loans, customer numbers plummeted 45% year on year to 176,000, with revenues falling 39% to £56m in the first half of its financial year. The company did manage to make a £2.1m pretax profit, compared with a £62m loss in the six months to the end of September last year. Jennison warned that the new compensation scheme is dependent on Amigo being allowed to restart lending and a successful equity raise to refinance the business, a move that would see any shareholders who do not take part see their stakes significantly diluted. A second option has also been offered of a “managed wind-down of Amigo Loans”. “It is the board’s view that the new business scheme will provide redress creditors with more value and a more certain outcome,” the company said. “Both options will be submitted to the court for sanction at the same time. If the judge does not sanction the new business scheme, the judge will then be asked to sanction the wind-down scheme at the same hearing.” Amigo said that despite reporting a small profit for the period the company has significant net liabilities of £117.6m. “While the process has taken considerably longer than we had anticipated, it is critical that we get this right to achieve the fairest outcome for our customers and to satisfy the high court and our regulator that we have addressed their concerns,” said Jennison.Film Pinching together the lapels of his inadequate jacket against a freezing New York February, cat-losing folk singer Llewyn Davis (Oscar Isaac) trudges in slush-filled shoes back from a failed audition in Chicago, to fail a second time: his gig at the Gaslight Cafe becomes just a footnote to Bob Dylan’s appearance that same night. Joel and Ethan Coen’s Inside Llewyn Davis kept faith with its themes by underperforming at the box office but, like the songs Llewyn soulfully performs to an audience of practically no one, its tragicomic portrait of defeat retains a lovely, sad-eyed warmth, as a rare and absurdly comforting minor-key anthem for life’s also-rans. Jessica Kiang ••• Stage Memory repeatedly fails us. In Everything Not Saved, a tricksy performance by the brilliant Irish theatre company Malaprop, the unreliability of our minds is woven through surreal stories of false history. As the certainty of things remembered breaks down, so too does the show, its scenes almost pixelating in front of us. This isn’t a story of hope but rather a cynical – and at times painfully funny – look at the factual failings of our minds: how we are desperate to find patterns in things that don’t exist, place ourselves in events we didn’t see, and trust ourselves beyond doubt. Failure here is not an emotional entanglement but something we simply cannot avoid. Kate Wyver ••• Television Arguably the only TV show ever to combine snarky humour with practical moral philosophy lessons and make both work, Michael Schur’s afterlife comedy The Good Place explores that great fantasy of everyone who feels like a failure: the second chance (or should that be a never-ending infinity of second chances?). The quartet of main characters were, whether they realised it or not, all failures. By opening up eternity to them, the show did a redemptive and counterintuitive thing: it posited that there is always another opportunity to fail slightly better. It took the shame out of failure, suggested that it’s always relative, and argued that tiny, modest steps can have surprising outcomes. Phil Harrison ••• Books In Peter Heller’s latest novel, The Guide, fishing guide Jack is a broken man when he arrives to work at a boutique resort for the super-rich in the Colorado mountains. His best friend has died, and he blames himself; his mother died, and he blames himself. He doesn’t know where he’s going, or if he wants his life to go anywhere. But as Jack settles into his new role, he starts to ask questions about the fearsome security around this exclusive retreat, about why some of the clients don’t appear to be fishing at all, and about the scream he hears one night. This sequel to Heller’s equally brilliant The River is extraordinary: a unique blend of thriller, post-Covid dystopia and paean to the healing properties of nature, in which Jack slowly finds his way back to himself. Alison Flood ••• Art It wasn’t any lack of ability that made the young Tracey Emin miss out on a dancing career. It was a bunch of brutal young men who soured her moment at a heat of the British disco dancing championship. She loved dancing, she reveals in her devastating 1995 video Why I Never Became a Dancer, but was also living a dangerous life in decayed seaside Margate. The lads singled out her sexuality, chanting “Slag, slag, slag” as she danced. Her bid for fame ended in humiliation. But she made a new life as an artist and turned failure into this triumph, telling her bullies on the soundtrack: “Shane, Eddy, Tony, Doug, Richard … This one’s for you.” And she dances on. Jonathan JonesThroughout 2021, websites associated with far-right extremist groups and extremist-friendly platforms and hosts have suffered from data leaks and breaches that have exposed the inner workings of far-right groups, and the nature of the movement as a whole. The data has been exfiltrated in breaches engineered by so-called “ethical hackers” – often assisted by poor security practices from website administrators – and by activists who have penetrated websites in search of data and information. Experts and activists say that attacks on their online infrastructure is likely to continue to disrupt and hamper far-right groups and individuals and makes unmasking their activities far more likely – often resulting in law enforcement attention or loss of employment. Numerous far-right groups have suffered catastrophic data breaches this year, in perhaps a reflection of a lack of technical expertise among such activists. Jim Salter, a systems administrator and tech journalist, said: “Extremists, and extremist-friendly entities, have a noticeable shortage of even-tempered, thoughtful people doing even-tempered, thoughtful work at securing sites and managing personnel.” There are many examples. In the wake of the 6 January attacks, the Guardian reported on the leak from American Patriots III% website, which allowed the entire membership of the organization to be identified. In that case, poor website configuration had allowed savvy researchers to view and republish the information on the open web. In July, another organization affiliated with the Three Percenters, which monitoring organizations classify as an anti-government group or a component of the militia movement, had internal chats leaked which reportedly exhibited a “thirst for violence”. Then, in September, it emerged that the website of the anti-government group the Oath Keepers was comprehensively breached, with membership lists, emails and what appeared to be the entire content of their server suddenly put on public display. The data exfiltrated from that site was widely reported on, coming at a time when members of the organization were facing charges or on trial for their role in the attack on the US Capitol on 6 January. The Guardian reported that the breach showed that the group had enjoyed a surge in membership after the events of that day. Another neo-Confederate group with extremist connections, the Sons of Confederate Veterans, had its entire membership list exposed this year, after a self-described “hacktivist” provided the data to the Guardian. Although there were many such breaches and leaks this year, 2021 could be seen as the year in which a wave of anti-fascist cyber-activism crested. In recent years, extremist groups including Patriot Front and The Base have had internal communications revealed by infiltrators. Independent news organization Unicorn Riot has published dozens of chats from far-right groups leaked from Discord, a chat application created for gamers that came to be a platform favoured by extremists, including for the planning of the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville in 2017. The hacking is even more significant as recently mainstream social media and chat platforms like Facebook, YouTube and Twitter have – with varying degrees of enthusiasm – moved to exclude extremists from their platforms. Events like Unite the Right and the Capitol attack brought pressure to bear on platforms including Discord, which banned hundreds of extremist servers during 2021. The intermittent crackdowns have led some extremists to flock to so-called “alt-tech” platforms, which reproduce some of the functions of big tech sites while advertising themselves to the far right with “free speech” policies. But these platforms, too, have come under attack by hacktivists in 2021. In the days leading up to the Capitol riot, Parler, a Twitter-like site that had advertised itself as an online home for the Trumpist right, leaked account details, videos, posts and other materials. After the riot, Parler data was used to identify participants in the rally and others who had entered the Capitol building. Then, in March, Gab, a platform that had long played host to extremists who had been banned from other platforms, was also hacked. Gab had achieved notoriety for, among other things, being the venue where Robert Bowers announced his intention to attack the Tree of Life synagogue in October 2018. At the time of the breach, the Guardian reported that the data revealed the email addresses and other personal details of thousands of users, including Gab’s investors and verified accounts. It also showed direct messages between Gab CEO Andrew Torba and a QAnon influencer, Richard Cornero Jr, who came to prominence under the alias Neon Revolt. The hack was attributed to Gab’s introduction of security vulnerabilities into their own platform in their adaptation of an open source social media application for their own use. Then, in September, the domain name registrar and web hosting provider Epik had the entire contents of its home server repeatedly breached. Epik had offered services of last resort to groups like neo-Nazi podcasters, The Right Stuff; sites like QAnon hub and the extremist playground 8chan; and even, for a time, Gab itself. CEO Rob Monster built up his business by promising an anything goes platform for such groups. The Guardian’s inspection of the data reveals that Monster – who has worked as a broker of domain names – had also speculatively snapped up dozens of domains that invoked the code words and preoccupations of the QAnon movement. Megan Squire, senior fellow in data analytics at the Southern Poverty Law Center, agreed with Salter’s assessment of the level of technical talent on the far right when it comes to security online. She said: “A lot of the people who are actually qualified to do this work are not going to be willing to work with these people.” While “the hacktivist ethos is alive and well on the left”, Salter added, extremist-friendly hosts like Epik are unable to hire the personnel who might help them create a defensive capacity. She described Epik’s data design as poor. “I haven’t seen anything that bad in my entire career,” she said. Salter said that any talented technologists on the far right “tend to be clustered heavily around more offensive roles attacking others rather than defending – and far more importantly, day to day managing – their own infrastructure”. Given this deficit, and the surge of hacktivism on the left, breaches like those seen in the last year seem set to continue, she added.At one point in Stealing Chaplin, a sozzled huckster tries to pry open a Union Jack-draped coffin as Land of Hope and Glory rings out on the soundtrack. Maybe this somewhat amateurish but spunky low-budget crime film has hit on something: in the post-Brexit era, Brits are no longer stock movie villains; conmen and chancers are our natural fits now. The hustle here is in splendidly questionable taste: the casket is Charlie Chaplin’s, whom brother grifters Cal (Simon Phillips) and Terry (Doug Phillips) have disinterred in order to ransom his body so they can pay off the $30,000 they owe to Las Vegas gangsters. You’d be forgiven for being suspicious, but this is actually based on a true story – though the theft occurred in 1978 in Switzerland, where Chaplin is buried in real life. Director Paul Tanter juices it up into an Ocean’s 11-style caper complete with rinky-dink music playing over diner scenes as the brothers scheme and squabble. Police captain Goddard (Liliana Vargas) slowly cottons on to the fact that the shysters running a National Leprosy Day scam are also graverobbers, while a perplexing cabal of mobsters, bent cops and – why not? – the brothers’ landlady try to lay hands on the cadaver-cum-cash distributor for themselves. Best not poke around in this all-day-buffet of a plot too much. Stealing Chaplin’s acting and camerawork are also uneven, and the smooth-talking young brother chaperoning his lost-cause older sibling feels like a cliche. But the two Phillipses (no relation) spar so enjoyably – meting out their grievances in daft minutiae such as Terry’s insistence that tomatoes were once widely considered poisonous – that lingering in their company (and some scenes do linger) is an Elmore Leonard-esque pleasure. The gap-toothed Doug Phillips, who wrote the script, is the more eye-catching performer, with a kind of off-kilter forlornness. Despite the rough edges, Stealing Chaplin has an unflagging, garrulous confidence that whisks you along. • Stealing Chaplin is available on 6 December on digital platforms.The Scottish government has announced that six cases of Covid Omicron have been identified in Scotland, and in England, masks are set to become mandatory on public transport and in shops. In an attempt to reduce transmission, the government is looking to accelarate the booster rollout to under-40s. The World Health Organization has said the new variant poses a “very high” global risk and could have “severe consequences” in some areas around the world. If you have been affected by the new Omicron variant, we would like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Homesick The little scars on their faces are the names of their villages, put there when they were young in case they got lost. Their faces are maps which they carry with them when they set out across the world for their new lives. The scars look like the tracks of tears cried for their childhood as they move about their work in our northern hospitals. When they wake me in the night to give me my medication they shout my name and shine a light in my eyes. I wake, not knowing where I am. The nurses and I are homesick, crying to be taken home to our lost villages. Lines Off, the 2019 collection by Hugo Williams, explores among a variety of themes the poet’s experiences of kidney disease and dialysis, followed by a successful kidney transplant in 2014. “Lines off” is a stage direction, indicating when an actor’s words are to be spoken off-stage or off-camera. It’s a title that gestures towards the writer’s theatrical family connections, a rich autobiographical source he has often mined in poetry, but in the present context, it also symbolises the reverse of such intimacy. Illness seems to sideline the sufferer from the real “action” of their own existence. As patients we seem to become less visible to others and to ourselves. Yet this estrangement when examined in a poem can become a different and sharpened way of seeing. Williams’s characteristically laconic wit and casual tone are apparent in the poems of Lines Off, but the vision is at times more surreal, perhaps closer to that of the 20th-century poets of eastern and central Europe, such as Vasko Popa. Homesick begins with defamiliarisation. The faces of the NHS staff from overseas who are caring for the poet-patient (as for so many in “our northern hospitals” ) are viewed in a way that suggests a distorted, disorientated but heightened consciousness. The “little scars” the nurses’ faces bear are simultaneously the names of their villages of origin, put there during childhood “in case they get lost”. This is a dreamlike perception, smudging together distinctly different entities (scars, letters, adulthood, childhood). The narrator’s voice, favouring the present tense and, until the fifth, a single sentence per stanza, is consistently that of a child. From scars to maps to tear-tracks, the marks testify to uncertain beginnings and risky physical journeys. The nurses’ actual experience of emigration and homesickness, first evoked symbolically, and in a hallucinatory way, is more realistically perceived as the poem progresses, as if it followed a process of increasing wakefulness. The speaker’s vision gains clarity and empathy from the midpoint of stanza three, where the last two lines jolt into flatlining realism, still childlike in expression: “The scars look like the tracks of tears / cried for their childhood / as they move about their work / in our northern hospitals.” Although the perspective in the fourth stanza is more directly personal, it introduces a vivid connection between the patient’s experience and the harsher circumstances his carers may have escaped. The shouted name and the light shone into the eyes evoke police state tactics – border guards, night-time arrest, imprisonment, torture. The poet isn’t appropriating such experiences, nor suggesting that his own situation is anything worse than being unexpectedly awakened to receive his medication. But the reverberation is one of terror, however briefly registered, leading to the last stanza, where the earlier syntactical pattern is broken: “I wake, not knowing where I am. / The nurses and I are homesick, / crying to be taken home / to our lost villages”. The spare, single-line sentence at the beginning of the stanza and the shift in the last lines to a collective subject (“The nurses and I …”) are effortlessly judged. Homesick is playful and painful. It grapples, metaphorically at first, with images of home and identity, and then meets their loss head-on. All the participants become homesick children, crying for the safe childhood village, named and mapped in their very skin. That the experience can be recognised as shared may be its only comfort.Towards the end of the Queen’s Gambit, the Netflix show that helped to supercharge the new chess boom, Beth Harmon crushes a series of top male grandmasters before beating Vasily Borgov, the Russian world champion. Fiction, though, remains sharply separated from fact. As Magnus Carlsen was reminded before starting his world title defence in Dubai last week, there is not a single active woman’s player in the top 100 now that Hou Yifan of China, who is ranked 83rd, is focusing on academia. The lingering question: why? For Carlsen, the subject was “way too complicated” to answer in a few sentences, but suggested a number of reasons, particularly cultural, were to blame. Some, though, still believe it is down to biology. As recently as 2015 Nigel Short, vice-president of the world chess federation Fide, claimed “men are hardwired to be better chess players than women, adding: “You have to gracefully accept that.” That claim raises the eyebrows of the greatest female chess player, Judit Polgar, who was ranked as high as No 8 in the world and, amusingly, has a winning record against Short. “It is not down to biology,” she tells the Guardian. “It’s just as possible for a woman to become the best as any guy. But there are so many difficulties and social boundaries for women generally in society. That is what blocks it.” Polgar, who defeated 11 current or former world champions in either rapid or classical chess, including Garry Kasparov and Magnus Carlsen, before retiring in 2014, believes that an early start, encouraging girls to think big, and better teaching are crucial factors. “All champions and big players start to play chess and get familiar with the game at a pretty early age,” says the Hungarian grandmaster, who is now a commentator on the website Chess24. The development biologist Emma Hilton also dismisses the idea that the gap between men and women can be put down to genetics. A crucial point, she says, is that chess has an “extremely skewed starting pool” – with far more boys learning to play the game than girls. That, she says, “makes it extremely unlikely that we will see a female world champion”. The English international master Jovanka Houska believes this smaller pool has knock-on effects in other areas, particularly when it comes to being the only one or two girls in a group. “We have situations where the girls don’t feel very comfortable playing, whilst the boys can hang around, make friends and play amongst themselves and get better that way,” she says. Is sexism also a factor? “It is, sadly,” says Houska. “It’s mainly because there are so few women playing. And it’s reinforced by national federations who don’t publicise your achievements to help you with funding. When I look at the situation across Europe, I see a lot of top women players fighting their federations for basic things.” There is also a far darker side in all this. Last year the women’s Fide master Alexandra Botez, who is also the most popular female chess streamer, spoke of her shocking experiences in the sport and warned: “In chess so much predatory behaviour has been normalised.” In Botez’s view, it is far too common for men to use their age and position to go on the “hunt” for women and girls. “It has been going on for so long and no one blinks an eye,” she said. “The extent to which people never say anything and find things OK is pretty spooky.” Other women have echoed similar concerns to the Guardian but none of them wanted to go public. Yet there are encouraging signs, too. As Houska points out, it is far more common to see women chess players and commentators than only a few years ago. “It’s very important to have that visibility,” she says. “Because if girls have role models, they can start to adjust their expectations and aims.” The Fide president, Arkady Dvorkovich, also promises he is pushing hard to make the game more welcoming for women. He rattles off a list of changes he has made during his tenure, including more tournaments and increased prize money for women. The organisation has also designated 2022 as the “Year of Woman in Chess”, however Dvorkovich accepts more can be done to help women progress to the very top. “Around 13-14 years old we find that girls leave while boys continue to play in large numbers. We need to change that. Personally I would also like to see more women in the top 10. But chess is not just about professional play. We have more women across the game now, including Dana Reizniece-Ozola, the former finance minister of Latvia, who is our managing director.” Women’s chess also recently attracted its biggest sponsor – although the decision of Fide to partner with the breast enlargement company Motiva was described as “gross” and “misogynistic” by some. “We consulted with many chess players, 95% of them supported it,” says Dvorkovich. “We appreciate there are some components of this business that do not look that attractive. But what they’re doing also for health and wellbeing for women is very important. I know it’s a bit controversial, but there are more pluses.” Polgar also errs on the side of optimism, pointing out that attitudes among most men have shifted from an era when the legendary world champion Bobby Fischer used to dismiss women players as “terrible”, telling them to “keep strictly to the home”. “Nowadays most of the top players would not dare even to say – or even to think that way,” she says. “Fischer was the most ridiculous. And another world champion, Garry Kasparov, also said some things because he grew up in that kind of environment. “But when I came in the picture, and I was torturing Garry at the board, little by little he transformed his vision. So this is what I’m saying: many people think that people – or the community – cannot change. But it is possible.” A question for chess remains, however: is change happening fast enough?The harbour ripples like shot silk. The smell of fried fish drifting past lobster pots on the cold granite dock makes me nostalgic. I’ve been lured to Whitby in winter by Britain’s most scenic bus ride, and the chance to stay in a spa hotel with sustainable ambitions. And for a walk up the wild Esk Valley to the wilder North York Moors. The 50-mile bus journey from York to Whitby takes longer than the 200 speedy miles by train to York from London. But a ride on the 840 Coastliner bus, which goes past York station and arrives in Whitby 2½ hours later, is an end in itself. It is officially Britain’s most scenic bus route, having come top in a 2018 survey of thousands of travellers. The 840 rolls through hills and treacle-stoned Malton. At Kirby Misperton you can spy emus and antelopes as the bus passes Flamingo Land; in Thornton-le-Dale a roadside stream runs past thatched cottages and chocolate shops. But none of this prepares you for the climb past Dalby Forest on to the endless moors. A chirpy inflight commentary on the moorland section makes much of the cosy village of Goathland, where sheep are grazing by the road. It was the location for ITV’s Heartbeat and played Hogsmeade station in the Harry Potter films. The upbeat voiceover (which runs even after dark) also highlights the huge water-carved hollow known as the Hole of Horcum. Legend says a giant called Wade was arguing with his wife and grabbed a mighty fistful of earth to throw at her. I’ve ridden on and written about the Coastliner buses before, but today’s views are better than ever: blue sky over green hills and bronzed bracken freckled with late-autumn russet and gold. From the top deck, I can see for miles: across scattered villages to the glinting sea or over an ocean of heather to the Cleveland Hills, where distance fades into cloud. It’s nearly lunchtime when the bus arrives in Whitby so I have an early fish-and-chip lunch by the harbour. From late November, there will be an ice rink and Christmas market nearby, part of the Whitby Winter festival. Across the water, horses are grazing the grassy slopes below the abbey and above the piled-up houses of the red-roofed town. These details have not changed much since Bram Stoker’s day. The author of Dracula stayed in a guesthouse on Whitby’s Royal Crescent in 1890. He was working on a new novel, starring a character called (at the time) Count Wampyr. Stoker borrowed names from gravestones, library books and tales of a Russian ship wrecked here five years before his visit. His heroine, Mina Murray, who starts out as young teacher, notes in her diary: “Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes …” I join the other tourists climbing the steps towards the abbey and wander round clifftop St Mary’s church, which is crowded with Georgian box pews and twisty-columned galleries (free). “Please do not ask staff where Dracula’s grave is as there isn’t one,” says a notice on the door. The visitor centre in Whitby Abbey reopened in 2019 after a major revamp (£10/£6) ). The permanent exhibition maps the overlapping layers of Whitby’s culture, geology and history, encompassing jet and ammonites, paintings by JMW Turner and verses by local cowherd turned monk Caedmon, the first named English poet. From here, I hike three miles south along the undulating coast path, past the sea stack and octagonal lighthouse near Saltwick Bay. A sign points inland to Hawsker and the Hare and Hounds, from where bus X93 runs back to Whitby. There’s also a popular footpath and cycleway, the Cinder Track, on the course of the old railway to Scarborough. The track, through a tunnel of broad-leaved willows, passes Jo’s honesty-box tuckshop, selling marvellously sticky flapjacks for 50p, and Trailways cycle hire. The sun is setting as I cross the 13 towering brick arches of the Larpool Viaduct, another landmark that appears in Dracula. Mina’s diary reads: “The little river, the Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near the harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers …” Next day, I catch a train west from Whitby to the village of Danby and walk 10 miles back as far as Egton, following the Esk Valley Walk. Waymarked by leaping salmon symbols, the track climbs gently over Danby Beacon, with a 360-degree view across the North York Moors. There are dozens of ancient tumuli, and black grouse are churring in the heather. Down in the valley again, the route winds through riverside woods and meadows. My favourite stretch, along a steep-sided valley, follows part of the Coast to Coast walk that runs all the way from Cumbria. The steep, still-golden beechwoods have a late-autumn smell of wet leaves and woodsmoke. There’s an old watermill and ferns are sprouting from mossed trees beside the path. It’s easy to find shorter or longer variations of this walk, using village stations on the Esk Valley Railway. Trains run every couple of hours and there are pubs near many of the stations. The North York Moors visitor centre at Danby has a cafe and I stop at lunchtime in the Beck View tearoom in Lealholm for a toastie and homemade coffee cake. The Horseshoe Hotel next to the stepping stones over the river in Egton Bridge looks tempting, but it’s time to head back to my own hotel on the cliffs just north of Whitby. The swimming pool at Raithwaite Sandsend looks out into a dell of evergreen laurels and banks of fallen beech leaves. A grey wagtail hops around the cascade and a moorhen wanders through the waterweed. The gardens, with their wooded valley and green lake, are sprouting orchards and polytunnels as part of the hotel’s sustainability strategy. Gooseberry bushes and squash-laden vines straggle over raised beds, supplying the bar and restaurant. A forest garden, growing fruits, nuts, herbs and flowers, is next on the agenda, partly fuelled by vodka from UK firm Sapling that the Raithwaite’s guests have consumed. The company plants a tree for each bottle sold (generating the brilliant tagline “buy one, get one tree”). MasterChef semi-finalist Ollie Hunter began work here in 2021, around the same time as publishing his second cookbook, Join the Greener Revolution. The Raithwaite kitchens source four-fifths of their food from within 30 miles, are aiming for zero waste by the end of 2023, and list their veggie options at the top of the menu, where they are more likely to be chosen. The top main dish today is a perfectly cooked celeriac steak with smoked almonds and crispy kale. I follow it with ginger parkin in spiced syrup. Next day, there are mashed peas on toast for breakfast, with a hint of nutmeg and a chilli salsa. It makes me wonder why we needed avocados. There are fresh blackberries too, and yoghurt from an organic Yorkshire farm. Even the coasters are biodegradable, with seeds embedded so you can plant them. The little milk pots still seem to be plastic though. And, like most tourist destinations – especially rural ones – Raithwaite steers clear of addressing the motorised elephant in the room: visitor transport. Hourly bus X4 stops at the gates on the main road and, as I walk up the drive in the dark, owls are calling and answering in the woods and a small deer is stepping through the undergrowth. On my last morning, I stroll half a mile or so through woods and over a grassy headland to the nearby village of Sandsend. When the tide is low, you can walk from here to Whitby along the beach. Ahead of me the abbey is silhouetted against a wintry sunrise. There’s still time before my bus leaves to take a 20-minute boat trip (£4). We chug out through the curved jaws of the harbour into the open sea. The clifftop statue of Captain Cook, who worked on coal ships here before he joined the navy, is now shrouded in white cloud. The gulls chuckle and a wave-pitched buoy clangs like a church bell. It’s the perfect unheimlich weather to glimpse the gothic abbey ruins through the haar. Bram Stoker’s Mina describes grey days of drifting sea mists, lost horizons, and a rocking buoy “that sends in a mournful sound on the wind”. Back on land, I buy a sandwich from Botham’s bakery and a Winter Brack to take home. This seasonal version of Yorkshire tea loaf, best eaten with cheese, is spiced and stuffed with cherries (£4.50). The bus has tables upstairs, power and wifi. Riding over the drizzle-darkened moors, where the Hole of Horcum is a bowl of fog, I have a picnic and catch up on emails. Back in York, the Christmas market is just starting: 160,000 seasonal lights are strung across the city centre, and the medieval walls are floodlit. Accommodation and food were supplied at Raithwaite Sandsend (doubles from £121.50, room only) Rail travel was provided by Grand Central (singles from King’s Cross to York start from £13.30. Bus travel was provided by Transdev (day tickets on the Coastliner buses £17.50pp or £30 for a group) * The piece was amended on 6 December to reflect the fact that Raithwaite Hall is now calleed Raithwaite SandsendNissan is to invest almost 2tn yen (£13.2bn) into vehicle electrification over the next five years, including a key role for its plant in Sunderland, in its battle with rival traditional carmakers and specialists such as Tesla. The Japanese car manufacturer, which launched one of the world’s first mass market electric vehicles (EVs) with its Leaf model a decade ago, said it would introduce 23 “electrified” vehicle models by 2030, with 15 of them fully electric. The remainder would be hybrids. “The role of companies to address societal needs is increasingly heightened,” said the Nissan chief executive, Makoto Uchida. “We will drive the new age of electrification, advance technologies to reduce carbon footprint and pursue new business opportunities.” Ashwani Gupta, the Nissan chief operating officer, said Sunderland would play a central role in the company’s plans: “Europe will take the lead on electrification around the world for Nissan. In Europe, Sunderland is the one which will take the lead towards electrification.” The company has set itself EV sales targets of more than 75% in Europe, 55% in Japan and 40% in China by 2026. In the US the target will be 40% by 2030. Part of the plan included the previously announced £1bn investment in the UK that will help convert Nissan’s Sunderland operation into a hub for EV production. Nissan, which will be spending twice as much as it did in the previous decade on the EV market, said that the move formed part of a goal of becoming carbon neutral by 2050. “We want to transform Nissan to become a sustainable company that is truly needed by customers and society,” Uchida said. The company said that by 2030 half of all the models it makes will be powered by some form of electrification. At the Cop26 climate change summit held in Glasgow earlier this month, car manufacturers including Ford and General Motors committed to phasing out fossil fuel vehicles by 2040. “With our new ambition, we continue to take the lead in accelerating the natural shift to EVs through an attractive proposition by driving excitement, enabling adoption and creating a cleaner world,” Gupta said. Nissan said that as part of its plans it intends to hire 3,000 staff in advanced research and development globally while “continuing to upskill its current workforce”. The company is also seeking to reduce the cost of lithium ion batteries by 65% within eight years. It is also aiming to launch an all-solid-state battery-powered car by 2028. ASSBs give greater range and power, at lower costs. “We will advance our effort to democratise electrification,” Uchida said. Shares in Nissan fell more than 5% on Monday.Victims of sexual violence face further abuse and trauma as a result of the UK asylum process and are systematically let down by authorities, according to a report. The research found that gender-insensitive and sometimes inhumane asylum interviews, sexual harassment in unstable asylum accommodation and a lack of access to healthcare and psychological support were just some of the factors compounding the trauma of forced migrants in the UK. The study, conducted by the Sexual and Gender Based Violence against Refugees from Displacement to Arrival (Sereda) research team, is the largest piece of academic research of its kind and calls on the Home Office to integrate gender and trauma sensitivity into the asylum system. Prof Jenny Phillimore from the University of Birmingham led the study and said: “There’s a lot that we could do that costs nothing, or costs little, and would ensure we could treat women in a way that won’t scar them for the rest of their lives. “We’ve got a whole range of recommendations but ultimately we want a humane asylum system that doesn’t treat people differently because they are not citizens. We need an ethics of care.” Some of the recommendations include pre- and post-interview counselling, provision for independent advocates to sit in on interviews, single-gender asylum housing for uncoupled women, as well as special provision for LGBTQI people, and greater investment in psychological support services. The study involved extensive interviews between 2018 and 2020 with 68 forced migrants in the UK who were victims of sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), as well as 26 service providers working with survivors. Hane Leshaj was pregnant when she fled to the UK from Albania after escaping her violent husband and being rejected by her family. She spent nearly eight years in the asylum system, was forced to relocate eight times and in one accommodation was physically attacked by another resident. “It took 10 days for them to move me to a safe place. All these things affect your mental health and your wellbeing. I thought I would be safer,” said Leshaj, who works with Refugee Women Connect in Liverpool. “They treat everyone the same way. It should be different, especially for women and children. I’m not saying the process doesn’t affect men, but for women and children it’s worse. When you come they treat you like nothing.” Previous research found that out of 72 women who had sought asylum in the UK, 66% had experienced gender-related persecution in some form, including rape, sexual violence, forced prostitution and forced marriage, perpetrated by partners, family members, soldiers, police and prison guards. “This is happening on our shores. The women who are on those boats [crossing the Channel], the vast majority will have experienced SGBV [sexual and gender-based violence],” said Phillimore. “The reason a lot of them are women is because they’re escaping gender persecution. So the report is extremely pertinent at the moment with what’s going on in the Channel and the Afghan situation.” The Home Office said: “Those who suffer from domestic abuse are victims first and foremost, regardless of their immigration status, and we will give the help and support they need and deserve. Impacts on vulnerable people and equalities considerations are front and centre of our work. “We are introducing landmark reforms through the nationality and borders bill to provide protection to the most vulnerable. Our new bill is the only credible way to fix the broken asylum system, and at the heart of this plan is fairness and offering protection to vulnerable individuals.”British institutions must take responsibility for their history of benefiting from slavery, the curator of a new landmark exhibition of Caribbean-British art at Tate Britain has said. Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s – Now features artists working across film, photography, painting, sculpture and fashion. They include those of Caribbean heritage as well as those inspired by the Caribbean, such as Ronald Moody, Sonia Boyce, Claudette Johnson and Steve McQueen. David A Bailey, the exhibition’s curator and a member of the British Black Arts Movement – the radical political art movement founded in 1982 – said in many ways it explored Tate Britain’s own chequered past. The original Tate collection was funded in the late 19th century by the industrialist Sir Henry Tate, who made his fortune as a sugar refiner – a trade inextricably linked to slave labour in the Caribbean. “It’s trying to think about the question of the museum and its responsibilities in a 21st-century climate, particularly museums which have a very chequered history around patronage,” Bailey said. “That has now resurfaced itself around the question of post-slavery and the sugar industry, which is referred to in some of the works in the show. “For me, one of the things our institutions have to do is take responsibility around those questions, and think about what is the legacy of these elements in the future.” The exhibition begins with artists of the Windrush generation who came to Britain in the 1950s and explores the Caribbean Artists Movement, an informal group of creatives including Paul Dash and Althea McNish, whose tropical modernist textile designs were inspired by the Caribbean landscape. The rise of the Black power movement in Britain is shown in works such as Horace Ové’s photographs of Stokely Carmichael and Neil Kenlock’s Black Panther school bags. The exhibition also includes a new iteration of Michael McMillan’s The Front Room, a reconstruction of a fictional 1970s interior, evoking the role of home as a safe space for social gatherings at a time of widespread prejudice. Other works from the Black arts movement of the 1970s and 80s depict the social and political struggles faced by the Caribbean-British community. Isaac Julien’s Territories shows the conflict between carnival revellers and the police, while Denzil Forrester’s Death Walk pays tribute to Winston Rose who died in police custody, and Keith Piper’s photo-collage Go West Young Man connects Transatlantic slavery with the media’s demonisation of young Black men. These are themes society is still grappling with today, Bailey said. “Major European powers have a postcolonial history. Different generations emerge and those baggages get taken on and they resurface. That will never go away.” The exhibition also celebrates Caribbean-British culture, from reggae and dub to annual carnivals. It features artists who have more recently emerged on the scene, like fashion designer Grace Wales Bonner and photographer Liz Johnson Artur, who charts the development of the grime music scene. Bailey said the exhibition has been in the works since 2015, when Alex Farquharson, the director of Tate Britain, approached him. With conversations around anti-racism gaining momentum following the Black Lives Matter movement of 2020, and ongoing efforts to repatriate looted artefacts to their place of origin, now was the ideal time for this exhibition, he said. “It is a moment for our national spaces to think about what it is they’re trying to do.” He hoped the exhibition, co-curated by Farquharson, would attract new and diverse communities to Tate Britain, while normal visitors “will now see a different sensibility around British art. “The Tate bookshop is flooded with books from the period,” he added. “When we were going to university, we could name on one hand the amount of books [by Black writers and artists] that we could refer to. Now there are so many.” Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s – Now is on at Tate Britain in London from 1 December to 3 April 2022 • The headline of this article was amended on 29 November 2021. An earlier version incorrectly said that the exhibition explored the Tate’s links to the Caribbean slave trade.Getting stuck into the in-flight wine wasn’t an option for the 30 passengers flying overnight from South Africa to Rwanda. Crew members instead worked to keep the first-time air travellers placid and problem-free. The last thing anyone wanted was a 1.5-ton rhino on the rampage aboard a Boeing 747. “All the rhinos were slightly sedated to keep them calm and not aggressive or trying to get out of the crates,” said Jes Gruner, of conservation organisation African Parks, who oversaw the largest single rhino translocation in history this weekend. “The rhinos weren’t sedated on the plane in the sense they were totally lying down, as that’s bad for their sternums. But they were partly drugged, so they could still stand up and keep their bodily functions normal, but enough to keep them calm and stable.” The 30 white rhinos arrived at their new home, Akagera national park in eastern Rwanda, yesterday. It is hoped Akagera will become a new breeding stronghold to support the long-term survival of the species. Down to an estimated 18,000 animals across Africa, white rhinos are classified by the IUCN as near threatened, with numbers in decline largely due to poaching, driven by demand for their horns. “It’s absolutely vital to get white rhinos spread across the continent, where they have safe habitats, and not necessarily only where they used to be,” Gruner said. “We need to spread the risk. If some countries can’t get hold of the illegal wildlife trade, white rhinos and rhinos in general might be pushed to the brink of extinction. We have to do everything we can to address their safety.” Unlike critically endangered black rhinos, which previously roamed in Rwanda, white rhinos are a new introduction to the country. “We’re starting with 30, but this could grow – Akagera could be a home for easily 500 or 1,000 white rhino in the future,” Gruner said. “It could be a good genetic pool. We refer to it as an ‘animal bank’, where you can keep wildlife for the future movement of animals within the region, once we have a good, breeding, functional population in Akagera.” The rhinos – 19 females and 11 males, a mix of adults and subadults – were driven from Phinda private game reserve in South Africa’s Munyawana conservancy, flown from Durban to Kigali, then transported by road to Akagera, completing a 40-hour journey of more than 3,400km – a massive logistical undertaking that went ahead despite the new Covid variant announcements over the weekend. “This move is the first of its kind with so many animals from wild to wild,” said Gruner. “It’s been a huge task. We chartered an aircraft. There was over 60 tons of animals, crates and feed; a logistical operation that’s taken six months to get going, but at least three years to organise. We’ve had the rhinos in a quarantine area for two months. It’s also one of the longest trips ever done. This move sets the benchmark for future white rhino conservation.” Security was key. “We definitely didn’t promote where they were in quarantine in South Africa,” said Gruner. “They’ve been dehorned because, where they’re from, being dehorned is a deterrent to poachers. There was security for the animals along the way in South Africa, and in Rwanda, the government supported us hugely with national police escorts. We’ve had to uplift law enforcement within the national park, including monitoring. But we also want to show other countries and NGOs how this move can be done – if we can get that right, there is hope for white rhinos. So we won’t be silent about it.” The project is a collaboration between African Parks, the Rwandan government’s Rwanda Development Board and safari company &amp;Beyond, with funding from the Howard G Buffett Foundation. Akagera has been managed by African Parks and the Rwanda Development Board since 2010, with previous reintroductions of lions in 2015 and black rhinos in 2017 and 2019. “Akagera is the right spot,” said Gruner, explaining the choice of location. “There’s plenty of habitat around the continent, but not necessarily safe habitat. The government of Rwanda has shown their seriousness in conservation and protection in the last 15 to 20 years. It’s been proven – with the reintroduction of 18 black rhinos in 2017 and five more from zoos in Europe – that we can keep them safe. To date, no rhino has been poached, and the growth rate has been positive. That sets the mark for the white rhinos.” The white rhinos are the latest step in a plan to revive the national park. “Akagera was a large part of my youth, with my family spending time camping in the wilds through the 1970s,” said Ladis Ndahiriwe, park manager of Akagera. “Back then, Akagera was very wild, with over 300 lions. There were drastic changes in Akagera in the 1990s from the pressures of refugees coming back home after the genocide against the Tutsi. It was a time of great upheaval and pain. Akagera is almost unrecognisable today, with all key species numbers increasing. Before Covid, the park was 90% self-financing through tourism. The white rhinos arriving is a point of pride for us and for Rwanda. We’ve created a safe haven that can protect this species for the future.” Gruner said: “We look forward to the day when we have some white rhino calves in Rwanda – ‘first generation’ Rwandan white rhinos. The day they start multiplying in number, we know this has been a successful project.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresPriyanka was in her final year of a journalism course at Kingston University London when she had an idea for a new community initiative. “I was interning with the UN Association,” she says, “and one day I came across a homeless man who was reading a book to pass the time. It sparked an idea.” Soon after, she launched Spread the Word, an initiative to open mini libraries in homeless shelters. “I got press releases published in news outlets about what I was doing,” she says. In May 2014, Damiano was studying for an MA in documentary film at the London College of Communication when he stumbled across Priyanka’s project. “I’d been asked to make a film on any topic and decided on the issue of homelessness,” he says. After approaching some homeless men at a church, one of them gave him his number for an interview. “I didn’t have my phone on me so he scribbled it on the back of a magazine called the Pavement, which is published for the homeless community,” he says. “When I got home, I started to read it and that’s where I learned about the Spread the Word project.” He decided this could be an even more interesting topic for his documentary and so he wrote to Priyanka to set up an interview. She invited him to join her on a trip around London where she planned to photograph people reading books. “When he showed up he was quite quiet and was filming in the background,” she says. “About 30 minutes in, he said he had what he needed for that day and asked to set up an interview another time. We barely spoke but I thought he seemed nice and polite.” They met four more times for filming, though Damiano still saw the relationship as professional. “When I emailed her, I saw her photo, so I knew she was really pretty before we met,” he says. “I was so impressed that she had started such an amazing project. But I wanted to focus on getting my film done.” Despite this, Priyanka was keen to get to know him on a more personal level. “He was so funny and I began to wonder who he was outside the project. I started texting him in a flirty way to ask how he was and what he was doing,” she says. When he sent her a link to the finished documentary, Priyanka was worried she wouldn’t see him again, so she invited him out for a drink to celebrate. That turned into their first date, and they stayed at the pub together for hours. “We talked about India, where I’m from, and Italy, where Damiano moved from when he was 15,” says Priyanka. “At the end of the night he kissed me and we became a couple from then on.” Damiano got a job as a videographer near Oxford in 2015, while Priyanka completed her degree and started a journalism career. “He came back to London most weekends to see me. He definitely made a big effort,” she says. Damiano returned to London in 2016, and regularly spent time at Priyanka’s house where she was living with her parents. “My family loves him and he became one of us so quickly,” she says. The couple moved to Oval, south London, together in 2019 and now live there with their two cats. They became engaged last year and plan to marry in May 2022. Inspired by her work with the homeless community, Priyanka shifted careers, and now works in communications for non-profit organisations. Damiano is still impressed by the work she does and believes her determination drives him to do more. “As I got to know her I discovered she’s funny, loving and I can be my goofy self around her. I love the way her energy spills over me. She makes me believe more in myself.” Priyanka appreciates how laid-back her partner is. “I’m the complete opposite. But Damiano’s the most calming person in my life. He always brings me back down to earth,” she says. “He doesn’t care about social pressures and he does what he wants to do. When it’s the two of us alone, we have the best time and we’re always laughing.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.Chocolate and orange zest are two of the more complex flavours whose compatibility is simple. For lovers of Terry’s Dark Chocolate Orange, this is her richer, darker, more luxurious cousin, in tart form. I think it’s a star pudding. The key to the pastry is chilling it properly, and the key to the filling is chopping the chocolate finely and beating vigorously; if it seizes, add a little more milk and beat like mad. The addition of shaved candied orange as a decoration is a nod to the bright orange foil used by Terry’s, which is as much a part of (my) Christmas as Quality Street. You will need a 25cm tart tin, ideally one with a loose base. Dark chocolate and orange tart Prep 30 min Rest 2 hr Cook 15 min Serves 8-15 For the pastry 120g cold butter 250g plain flour 100g icing sugar Grated zest of 1 unwaxed orange 2 egg yolks For the filling 300g mascarpone 40g caster sugar Grated zest of 2 unwaxed oranges 400g dark chocolate, finely chopped 80g unsalted butter 100ml whole milk Candied orange, thinly sliced, to decorate (optional) Rub the butter into the flour with your fingertips until it resembles breadcrumbs, then mix in the icing sugar and orange zest. Add the egg yolks and bring everything together, very cautiously adding cold water by the tablespoon and only as needed, to make a firm dough. Wrap and chill for at least an hour. You have two options for lining the tart tin. Roll the pastry into a circle on greaseproof paper, invert into the tin and press into place; or cut the pastry into slices and jigsaw them into the tin, again pressing the pastry into place (especially the edges), then trim. (Use any scraps for thumb jam tarts.) Rest in the fridge for another hour. Prick the pastry all over with a fork and bake blind at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 for 14-16 minutes, until nicely golden and cooked through. Remove and leave to cool. Make the filling by warming the mascarpone, sugar and orange zest until the mix is almost, but not quite boiling, then pull off the heat, add the chopped chocolate and diced butter, and beat vigorously, until smooth. Add the milk, beat again, then pour the filling into the cooled tart case and leave to cool completely. You could, if you want, decorate with thinly sliced candied orange before cutting and serving. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match You need something to play on the orange here. That could be an orange liqueur such as Grand Marnier (widely available, 40%), which would be delicious, but if you’d prefer a dessert wine, a passito di Pantelleria from just off Sicilyor JM Fonseca Alambre Moscatel de Setubal 2012 (£7.99 a half-bottle Waitrose, 17.5%) would tick the boxes.Within hours of former congressman Beto O’Rourke announcing his intent to run for governor of Texas against incumbent Greg Abbott, the Republican party apparatus began tweeting about “Robert Francis O’Rourke.” It harkened back to the days the GOP referred to “Barack Hussein Obama”. But instead of suggesting to the American people that Obama might be some kind of foreigner, the recent GOP maneuver has the opposite goal: reminding voters of O’Rourke’s all-American, all Anglo pedigree. “Robert Francis O’Rourke thinks it is ‘dangerous’ for you to have a gun to defend yourself,” Abbott tweeted of the Democrat on his campaign account after the acquittal of murder suspect Kyle Rittenhouse in Wisconsin. “Texans know that self-defense is a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution. We won’t let dangerous progressive policies hijack your God-given rights.” It should be an interesting maneuver by Abbott who, pre-O’Rourke, was waging an aggressive anti-immigrant campaign that many view as anti-Hispanic. Now, with O’Rourke in the race, Abbott appears to be following the Ted Cruz campaign model of trying to appeal to Hispanic sentiment by accusing the Democratic challenger of cultural appropriation. To be sure, there is an element of anger that can arise among Hispanic voters who view politicians as cynically trying to appropriate elements of their culture for votes, particularly the tired attempts by candidates of appealing to Hispanics by saying a few broken lines in Spanish during stump speeches. I can recall many debates about cultural appropriation that I had with fellow Hispanics when O’Rourke was challenging Cruz for the US Senate in 2018. I always fell back on what I call “Guero’s phenomenon”, named after a popular Austin Mexican restaurant, favored by Bill Clinton. After his first meal there, the wait to get into that restaurant was upwards of three hours, something I experienced when out-of-town visitors asked to eat there when I lived in that city. What I noticed when we were finally seated was that the vast majority of the clientele at this Mexican restaurant was Anglo. The only Hispanics that I could see in the dining room were serving food and bussing tables. I had to ask: “Was this restaurant popular, in part, because it was a place to get decent Mexican food without Mexicans?” That’s the type of cultural appropriation that is always on many Hispanic radars. It’s akin to Abbott proudly boasting that his wife, Cecilia, is the state’s first Hispanic first lady in history. Yet, when he was attorney general seeking his first term as governor, he compared Hispanic south Texas to third world countries. And this year, as he takes advantage of Joe Biden’s immigration problem, his invasion-styled rhetoric is offensive to many Hispanics. So going after O’Rourke for being more in step with the Hispanic culture that dominates his home town of El Paso is an interesting twist in the political landscape that marks Texas, but it may be the most honest aspect of the state GOP mentality. As Hispanics move toward becoming the majority demographic in Texas, there are many whispers of Anglos maintaining their power by appealing to white sentiments. For the record, I first became aware of O’Rourke in 1983, when he was 11 years old. As a young reporter in El Paso, I covered his father, former El Paso county Judge Pat O’Rourke. The late county judge – an avid bicyclist who was killed by a car while cycling one morning – was as personable as his son is today. And like any parent, O’Rourke spoke often of Beto. Not Robert, not Bob, not any other name. Culturally, in a border town like El Paso, no one ever made an issue of a gringo using the nickname for the Spanish name Roberto. For Abbott and Texas Republicans to make an issue of that demonstrates how out of touch they are with bicultural, binational border communities where Spanish nicknames are the norm and where Anglos like O’Rourke can speak Spanish with the best of them. Cruz, whose father is Cuban, appears to be one of those. Immediately after O’Rourke secured the Democratic nomination for US Senate in 2018, Cruz made an issue of Beto’s nickname, posting an ad with a countryfied jingle that went in part, “I remember reading stories, liberal Robert wanted to fit in. So he changed his name to Beto and hid it with a grin.” The irony is that Cruz was guilty of the same thing, as a Boston Globe reporter pointed out that year in a tweet: “As long as we are talking about names...Ted Cruz was listed as ‘Rafael E. Cruz’ at the Harvard Latino Law Review, as ‘R. Ted Cruz’ at Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy, and ‘Rafael “Ted” Cruz’ in the yearbook.” Still, any debate over cultural appropriation during next year’s gubernatorial race will serve Abbott well and will test O’Rourke’s ability to stay on message, a Democratic party elder statesman who served in the Clinton administration told me recently. “This race is not about whether Beto can win; it’s about whether Abbott can lose,” he told me. Given the strict anti-abortion bill that Abbott oversaw, the freedom of choice on whether to use masks as the pandemic pushed up the body count, the transgender sports bill and the total failure in February of the state’s electrical grid, it benefits Abbott to talk about side issues such as cultural appropriation. But if O’Rourke can keep on message and remind the electorate of Abbott’s hard turn to the right over the last few years, Abbott may end up losing, the political adviser told me. The real challenge may not lie with O’Rourke staying on message, however. If Abbott and his $55m war chest can alter the direction of the debate during next year’s campaign, it provides O’Rourke with an opening. If Abbott’s cultural appropriation attack seems hollow while his attack on Hispanic migrants seeking political asylum grows more rhetorically potent, the issue of race and ethnicity moves to the forefront – with all the volatility and unpredictability that marked last month’s gubernatorial contest in Virginia. In the early days of his campaign, O’Rourke has not been shy about reminding voters that the get-tough-on-invading-immigrants rhetoric has already had tragic consequences. In El Paso in August of 2019, a gunman walked into a Walmart and opened fire on Hispanic targets, killing 23 and wounding 23 more. Abbott and Texas Republicans may need to think twice before questioning the cultural appropriateness of a rival candidate who grew up as a minority in the border region. Carlos Sanchez is director of public affairs for Hidalgo county, Texas. He was a journalist for 37 years and has worked at the Washington Post and Texas Monthly magazine, as well as eight other newsrooms. He can be reached at borderscribe@gmail.comAs the Covid-19 pandemic raged, New Zealanders and Australians developed the world’s highest levels of trust in scientists, newly released survey data has found – and those trust levels soared as the global crisis evolved. The Wellcome Global Monitor, conducted by Gallup, surveyed 119,000 people across 113 countries. It found 62% of the two countries’ citizens said they trusted scientists “a lot”, compared with a global average of 41%. While trust in scientists had increased around the world since 2018, the portion who said they trusted scientists a lot jumped 15 percentage points in Australia and New Zealand, compared with nine points elsewhere. In 2018, western Europe had had the highest levels of trust in scientists, but they were overtaken in the past two years. Particularly during the first year of the pandemic, Australia and New Zealand were lauded for the success of their zero-Covid strategies, which closely matched with public health experts’ advice. The survey – which grouped the two countries together, with no national breakdown – was completed before the recent Delta outbreaks, and reflects a strong sense that the two governments were in step with the science: they were by far the most likely to believe that their governments were making their decisions based on scientific advice. Sixty-two percent said their governments were basing decisions on science – compared with just 25% in North America, and 43% in western Europe. New Zealand and Australian governments were able to initially offer their citizens a much more cohesive-seeming response than some of those seen elsewhere – and people rewarded that with high levels of compliance and trust. One paper published in the American Psychologist journal studied a cohort of New Zealanders’ attitudes pre- and post-lockdown, and found those post-lockdown had higher trust in science, government, and each other. “Under the conditions of a strong and cohesive national response,” the researchers wrote, “people are likely to lean on and trust their politicians, scientists, police, and communities”. Dr Lara Greaves, co-author of the study and lecturer at University of Auckland, said: “Because we’ve had a relatively good Covid response, the scientists associated with it [have had] that reflected onto them as a profession, in a way that we wouldn’t have if we had had worse Covid response overall.” She said she was unsurprised by the result. Australia and New Zealand had been marked by more technocratic responses, and scientists had become high-profile figures or household names, often working in tandem with governments. That was “especially in the case of New Zealand, where the prime minister [Jacinda Ardern] and [director general of health] Ashley Bloomfield and others do cite scientists, and public health advice and regularly thank [scientists] and talk about our response being based on science.” Greaves said that while attitudes often return to baseline after a crisis, trust in scientists could endure at a higher level, as the pandemic had increased scientific literacy and appreciation in media and the population. “A silver lining of the pandemic has been that we have more public scientists … we’ve now got these scientists who are public figures in a way that we didn’t have before,” she said. The influence of those figures seems to come through in the data – while trust in the countries’ scientists was the highest in the world, trust in the more abstract “science” was 1% behind western Europe, at 58% versus 59%. Australia and New Zealand also had sky-high trust that their health workers were scientifically informed – 82%, versus 76% in North America and 74% in western Europe. They were most likely in the world to believe their friends and family were following scientific advice: 47% trusted friends and family to do so. The region where the Global Monitor documented the lowest levels of trust in scientists was sub-saharan Africa – down five points to 19%. The region with the biggest jump upward was east Asia, up from 33% to 49%. Western Europe was up seven points to 59%, and North America up 10 points to 54%.The Guide Peter Heller Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, £14.99, pp257 Peter Heller’s exceptionally good The Guide is set in a post-Covid world, one where “the first virus had mostly burned itself out and been vaccinated against, and other novel viruses had moved over the world and hit different countries more or less hard”. These days, “those who could afford it spent more and more time on retreat in the remotest places”, in this case an exclusive resort in the Colorado mountains, where the rich and the famous come to fish and decompress. Jack is a fishing guide – he’s also the protagonist of Heller’s wilderness thriller The River, but The Guide works as a standalone – and he’s here to work and to try to get away from two deaths that left him reeling. Kingfisher Lodge is one of the most beautiful places he’s ever been – Heller is incredibly good at writing about nature – but “something was off, as it had been at this place from the first moment he was shown his quarters”. The security fences seem designed to keep people in, rather than out; he hears a scream late at night; he finds a fishing boot, half buried in the scrub. As Jack digs into the mystery, with the help of his client, he discovers a frighteningly plausible nightmare. A Will to Kill RV Raman Pushkin Vertigo, £8.99, pp272 Investigator Harith Athreya is invited by the millionaire Bhaskar Fernandez to a party at his remote Greybrooke Manor, high in India’s Nilgiri Mountains. They’ve never met before, but Bhaskar – who has a large and complicated family – has recently written two conflicting wills. One is to be used if he dies by natural means; the other if he dies “unnaturally”. A Will to Kill is a slice of sheer pleasure: a locked-room mystery – because of course there is soon to be a death at Greybrooke Manor – which blends the feel of golden age classic crime with the modern world, while presenting a proper, thorny puzzle. There are Cluedo-esque maps of the manor and family trees to enjoy, as well as Athreya himself, the sort of brilliant detective who is a joy to watch piecing together the answers. As Raman writes, he’s already “cracked the triple murder at Qutub Minar last year, retrieved the stolen Nizam jewels the year before and proved that the British diplomat’s recent suicide was actually murder… his success rate is unmatched”. There are elements of the supernatural believed to be stalking Greybrooke Manor, but even when Athreya’s imagination seems “to perceive something baleful and ominous” in these foggy mountains, he “shrug[s] it off with a hiss of irritation”. Bravo. Skylark Alice O’Keeffe Coronet, £16.99, pp416 Inspired by the “spy cops” scandal, Skylark tells the story of how activist Skylark – young, idealistic and the veteran of many a protest – meets Dan, a newcomer to their group who, as readers know from the start, is actually an undercover police officer sent to infiltrate them. Opening in “old London, before the dawning of the sourdough age”, the novel goes on to trace their burgeoning relationship, Dan living a double life, Skylark giving him everything – although as she looks back on conversations, she sees beneath them “subterranean faultlines, great cracks and earthquake-ridden chasms running from their two small fragile human bodies right up to the highest echelons of the great capitalist-democratic institutions of the state”. O’Keeffe brings the world Skylark inhabits to vibrant life, painting the passions of her activists so vividly that the reader – and Dan himself – are drawn into their desire to change the world. But the consequences of Dan’s deception are always looming on the horizon, and as his superior officers start to realise quite how deeply he has embedded himself into the activists’ group, they start planning to withdraw him. His betrayal, when Skylark finally learns the truth, is devastating. Mercy David Baldacci Macmillan, £20, pp416 David Baldacci’s FBI agent Atlee Pine has been searching for her twin sister, Mercy, for decades, ever since, aged six, she was abducted from the bed next to her. In Mercy, the hunt is due to come to an end. Pine and her assistant Carol Blum are heading back to Georgia to “pick up a very, very cold trail”. As they trace what happened to Mercy – her imprisonment at the hands of an incalculably cruel couple; her escape; her subsequent disappearance – Mercy herself comes closer to discovering the truth about who she really is. “I know all families are dysfunctional, but mine seems to be the undisputed world champ in that competition,” says Pine as she also delves into the lies she has been told about her parents. It’s great to finally see who Mercy really is, and Baldacci dangles the lure of the sisters finally meeting with tantalising skill. Multilayered and brutal, this is a fitting conclusion to Pine’s quest – but hopefully not the last we’ll see of her. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy of The Guide, Skylark or Mercy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applySitting in a Ralphs parking lot overlooking the Pacific Coast Highway at 8am on a Friday, hot and sticky in an ageing wetsuit, I clicked on the link for Big:Leap, Los Angeles’ guaranteed income pilot and the largest program of its kind in the US. Applications for the program had opened that morning. Participants would be chosen by lottery and the criteria for eligibility were simple: applicants had to be over the age of 18, live in the city of Los Angeles, have one or more dependents, and be living in poverty according to the federal poverty guidelines – a somewhat outdated and controversial method of measuring poverty, but one which, in the absence of anything else, is still used widely. The project’s aim was straightforward, too: to study the effects of giving approximately 3,000 families $1,000 a month in cash with no strings attached. To a single parent who had lost two jobs in 2021, the opportunity to receive an additional thousand dollars a month tax-free in a city where the median rent for a one-bedroom apartment is $2,195 seemed like a lifeline. I thought I knew what to expect from the process. I had applied for several aid programs before – CalWorks, CalFresh, MediCal, onerous and detailed applications that delved into my bank accounts, utility bills, rental agreement, child support, income and assets (or lack of them), and they often involved numerous trips to offices to clear up glitches that had tied my hypothetical aid up in a bureaucratic system. During the pandemic, I applied for – and received – $17,500 of SBA money. That application took just minutes to complete. The approximately 80 questions that the Big:Leap application posed started predictably enough: What is your gender? How many children under the age of 18 do you have? They soon delved into the personal: How much bodily pain have you had during the past 4 weeks? Then the application took a nosedive into the deeply intimate: Have you experienced any of the actions listed below from any current or former partner or partners? Blame me for causing their violent behavior. Shook, pushed, grabbed or threw me. Tried to convince my family, children or friends that I am crazy or tried to turn them against me. Used or threatened to use a knife or gun or other weapon to harm me. Made me perform sex acts that I did not want to perform. The application took me 45 minutes, several F-bombs and one packet of Kleenex to complete. It’s the paradox of Big:Leap. The program aims to stop “controlling” people in poverty through policy by no longer dictating what recipients spend government assistance on. But to prove the project’s worth, researchers have developed a control program that felt frustrating and arduous – hurtful, even, at times. “That is proof that we have to get policy to stop forcing people in poverty to prove their need,” said Michael Tubbs, the former mayor of Stockton, California. Stockton in recent years ran a wildly successful two-year guaranteed income pilot, the Stockton Economic Empowerment Demonstration (Seed). The program achieved the results many politicians and researchers aiming to combat wealth inequality had hoped for: critics of the scheme had argued that untaxed, additional, no-strings income – in Stockton’s case, $500 a month for two years – would quash people’s work ethic and that the money would be spent irresponsibly. Extensive surveys ultimately revealed that the money improved the 125 participants’ job prospects, financial stability, mental and physical health, and overall wellbeing. Less than 1% of the money went towards alcohol and tobacco, researchers found. Since then, other major California cities have launched their own pilots. San Francisco announced its program in September 2020. Oakland followed suit in March. Chicago, Illinois, passed its guaranteed income program in October. The Stockton program had a similar structure to Big:Leap, using a control group and a trial group to draw its conclusions. But the only requirements for entry were being 18 or older and living in a neighborhood at or below the city’s median income. Potential applicants were invited to answer simple questionnaires online based on widely used measures (such as the Kessler-10 psychological distress scale) before being placed into the lottery. Curious about the reactions of other LA residents to the application questions, I went along to one of the walk-in centers across the city, most of which were in the district of Curren D Price, the city councilmember who had initiated the LA scheme. It’s a predominantly working class, Spanish-speaking neighborhood with one of the highest poverty rates in the city. At Price’s office, 16 computer terminals were set up in a room with three bilingual volunteers ready to assist walk-in applicants who might not have the literacy or technology to complete the application at home. A reporter for KCRW, Aaron Schrank, sat outside the room, holding a voice recorder. On Friday, when applications opened, there had been lines around the block. When I visited three days later, 13 of the terminals were occupied, and bored children clutching crayons wandered around while their parents patiently typed away. One woman completed the application in three hours. Another took two. Schrank told me that two people he’d interviewed early that morning had, like me, been confused and offended by the questions. Luis Riva, a former upholsterer, had told him: “They’re asking too many questions about my health. They’re asking questions that aren’t related to helping people with money. They’re asking other things like how is my health, how do I think, psychological stuff.” Bonnie Morales, who lost her father and then her job during the pandemic, complained: “They asked me about my partner, like if it was a girl or a boy. Like, what does that matter?… Why does it matter if I’m gay, a lesbian, bisexual, or trans? I just find those questions very fucking weird to me, you know … Ask me if I’m starving. Ask me if I can afford a bag of beans. Ask me that.” A volunteer, Porsha Anderson, acknowledged that many of the applicants had struggled with the questions. “They want to know, ‘Why are they asking me about domestic issues? What am I meant to say? What’s the answer I need to give to get the money?’” Dr Bo-Kyung Elizabeth Kim, an assistant professor at the University of Southern California Center on Education Policy, Equity and Governance who heads the local research overseers for Big:Leap, explained that the questionnaire includes core questions composed by researchers and questions added by the study sites. “Both researchers and their political partners are hoping to understand how and why money provided through the program may or may not improve the specific experience of families in poverty,” she said, as well as the challenges that poverty can bring about. The questions about intimate partner violence in the questionnaire were included by the city of Los Angeles, she said: “We suspect intimate partner violence is a widespread community issue based on police calls for domestic disturbances, but we actually do not have strong data on its prevalence as typically only physical violence is reported,” she noted. “Inclusion of those questions does help LA understand the prevalence of intimate partner violence among applicants, and helps the city determine if guaranteed income can actually help people move away from dangerous relationships.” The questions on the application were not compulsory, she added. (The disclaimer at the start of the application did state that the questions weren’t obligatory, but there was no way for an applicant to avoid them. Everyone had to click through the entire application before they could be submitted for entry into the lottery.) The Los Angeles mayor, Eric Garcetti, said that he, as a social scientist, wanted the LA program to have the biggest possible sample size and ask the deepest questions of that sample, to provide solid data for potential government policy aimed at combating poverty. The goal, he said, was to find solutions that allow people to exit poverty, not to simply survive it through cash, food, medical or tuition assistance. Garcetti said what had convinced him to commit to the pilot were “Angeleno cards” – basic debit cards containing a cash amount handed out to LA residents in need during the pandemic. The cards had the added benefit of allowing the city to track where that money was spent, Garcetti said. After he saw that most of the money was spent on basic necessities such as food, rent and utilities, he became committed to the idea of a guaranteed income scheme that could act as a bellwether of sorts for programs at a federal and state level, he said. The city has since set up a new department to handle Big:Leap and other “community wealth initiatives” aimed at combating poverty. The difference between traditional social services and the notion of a guaranteed income, Garcetti said, was “the trust that [the program] places in everyday people to make decisions for themselves”. “Our addiction to poverty costs us trillions of dollars. I believe that we can save money spent on criminal justice, on lost economic opportunity, through this scheme and offer that up as a value proposition to federal government,” he added. “We treat the poor like children who can’t do anything for themselves. We treat the rich like spoilt teenagers and let them get away with anything.” Poverty is disabling, and poverty is undignified. Seeking aid in the United States often still involves a double loss of privacy – first by divulging swathes of information that must be disclosed as proof of need: bank accounts, spending habits, rent, income, utilities etc, then by accepting aid that comes with strict caveats, an individual is forced to submit to the intrusive control of a government that does not trust poor people to make the right decisions for their own survival and wellbeing. Individual freedom comes with wealth. Wealth that is often accumulated generationally. Wealth that is often untaxed. Wealth that has bought a trust that the poor cannot afford. Guaranteed income programs are bravely attempting to find a solution to seemingly unresolvable problems. But the process to get there, at least in LA, is arduous. Perhaps one of the most telling questions on the Big:Leap application was “What does trust mean to you?” For Councilmember Price, trust means relying on the community for support. For Dr Kim, trust is something that should be given to those in poverty. “We’ve been so controlling of people in poverty,” she said. “They’re not in control of their own money. People know how to use their money – they just don’t have any. The idea of this project is just to give them some room.” When applications for the Big:Leap closed, more than 59,000 out of nearly 500,000 eligible Angelenos had applied. The pilot’s website had over 350,000 visits, and the city information line had taken 1,469 calls about the program. After arriving home from the Price’s offices, I pulled on what’s known in the catering world as “black bistro” and went to serve cocktails at a private party in a $32m home in Beverly Hills for $25 an hour. It struck me that the entire budget for the Big:Leap was $40 million. The yawning gap between the insanely wealthy and the horrifically poor had never felt so acute. This article was amended on 3 December 2021 to correct the number of participants in the Stockton program and the percentage of money spent on alcohol and tobacco. There were 125 participants, not 200, and less than 1% of the money was spent on those products, not 1%. It was further amended on 6 December 2021 to correct a description of the requirements to join Stockton’s program. An earlier version incorrectly stated that no survey was involved.I first spoke to Prophet Walker about a year ago, when I was pregnant with our third child and fresh off a Covid-precipitated six-month stint of living with my parents. Whether it was the kindergartner getting sick, or navigating a crushing deadline with a preschooler underfoot, or juggling dinnertime while eight months pregnant and unable to reach the mac ’n’ cheese that had been smeared on the floor unless I actually lay down on the floor – at which point I’d have needed a crane to right myself – I began to feel desperate for my parents’ extra sets of hands, and wondering how on earth we’d ever made it work without them. It took a pandemic for me to put my own living practices under the spotlight. Walker had been doing so for his entire life. He is now spearheading a movement to get people to recognize the myriad benefits of ditching that very American vision of two parents, two and a half kids and a white picket fence for the communal living that defined families for millennia. “I grew up poor, with all the hell that came along with that,” he told me over Zoom, out on his deck last February, pink flowers glowing almost psychedelically behind him. “The thing that kept my sanity was the community around me, and what struck me was that even living in those housing projects, there was real, legitimate joy. Belly laughs, you know?” Born and raised in the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles, he started a six-year prison sentence for assault and robbery when he was a teenager. Both experiences underscored not just the immense power, but also the necessity of community. As a young boy, he watched his closest friend get murdered and remembers how the entire block came out, gave him hugs, reminded him that he was going to be okay. “Then, at 16, I was incarcerated and again, in what one would assume would be a very dark place, I found a ton of community and people banding together.” His North Star? To make communal living more prevalent in a country where the nuclear family has long been mistakenly idealized. In 2017, after graduating with a degree from Loyola Marymount’s engineering school, working as a construction engineer, running (unsuccessfully) for state office and attending the 2015 State of the Union address as a guest of Michelle Obama, Walker teamed up with Joe Green, a Santa Monica-raised Harvard graduate who’s collaborated with tech glitterati like Mark Zuckerberg and Sean Parker of Napster fame. An odd couple if there ever was one, Walker and Green co-founded Treehouse, based in the Hollywood neighborhood of LA. It’s the first ever building in the city constructed from the ground up with the specific purpose of serving a communal audience and Walker envisions it as the first of a multi-national network of Treehouses that will redefine how we live. A grand vision, but an important one. Treehouse inhabitants enjoy weekly suppers, communal working space and the comfort that their co-residents share the five Treehouse core values: being kind, present, curious, responsible and candid. I intuitively understood the pull of co-housing for a young single person, the college-dorm-for-adults feel. What I selfishly wanted to know was: can you successfully construct community for young families, those members of society I believe are in desperate need of a literal village, but so often cut adrift from them in the modern world? And how, precisely, do you break that gargantuan task into a series of actionable directives? “When your kid is four years old, you might think they’re cute,” Walker told me, “but your neighbors might not. To come up with a viable community solution that appeals to families, you have to factor all that in.” He has a 16-year-old daughter, so he intimately recognizes the challenges of raising children in an isolated society. He also recognizes the challenges of raising a child in a co-housing community, at least not one designed specifically with families in mind. So he’s using the year-plus he spent living with his own teenage daughter in the first Treehouse to directly address its shortfalls in a new family-friendly Treehouse, currently being built in Leimert Park, which we discussed when I reached out to him recently. The first issue: they had designed the intra-unit communal spaces, like the kitchen shared between five roommates, with an eye toward minimizing friction – beautiful, but hard, wooden benches, for example, instead of comfy couches where you’d want to curl up and chat. Those were in the building-wide common areas. The upshot: there were few places for Walker and his daughter to chill out alone, together. Secondly, the soundproofing. The rooms at Treehouse are all soundproofed, something critical for individuals who may keep wildly different hours. Not so for families. “I couldn’t hear anything, which was a bit nerve-wracking,” he said. “I never left my door closed.” He was preaching to the choir. After our third child was born this summer, we moved into a larger apartment. Our preschooler used to sleep in our closet. That I could no longer hear her every snort and snuffle was so disorienting that my bedside table is now a sea of wires and monitors. But the biggest challenge, Walker says, is how to make families feel safe enough that their children can run around as the collective community watches out for them. “First we had The Sandlot,” he told me, – referencing the movie about a bunch of kids who in 1962 play baseball together in a neighborhood sandlot. No adult supervision. No worries. “Then the pendulum swung, we had the war on drugs, kids weren’t allowed outside.” Now we’re somewhere in between. To help the pendulum swing closer to Sandlot territory, the new Treehouse delineates groups of floors as “neighborhoods” – accessible only to residents on those floors with specific communal spaces. “The hope is that kids will get to play more freely, get to go outside, that it’ll be less contrived and parents will have a little more freedom in raising children together,” he said. The issue, as Walker sees it, isn’t the will. It’s the way. “From what I’ve heard in the zeitgeist, families are like, ‘we want to get a pod’, ‘we want to move into a building together’,” he said. “I think that always was bubbling on the surface, and the pandemic was the tipping point. But the reality of America is that it is not set up to support this ideology. America is set up with this idea of rugged individualism.” In very pragmatic terms, that means he has to fight not just societal inertia and norms, but also zoning laws that favor the nuclear family, banking rules about how lending works and much more. Now that the world is opening up again, he’s planning a trip to Germany, where government-backed shared housing models make it wildly easier to roll out Treehouse-like communities. It’ll be a learning exercise, a research-gathering trip, but also inspirational, an example of how America might serve families once the pendulum has swung its way toward a better spot. Here’s to hoping. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeGood morning. Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, said on Sunday the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections amid rising cases and stagnating vaccination rates. Early evidence suggests the heavily mutated variant poses a higher risk of reinfection than earlier variants and that it could also be more transmissible. Last night, shortly after the first Omicron cases in North America were confirmed in Canada, the White House said Biden met Fauci and other advisers on returning to Washington from holiday in Nantucket. Fauci said any fifth wave of cases “will really be dependent upon what we do in the next few weeks to a couple of months”. How are other countries reacting to the spread of Omicron? Israel is barring entry to all foreign nationals and Morocco is suspending all incoming flights for two weeks. Many countries, including Brazil, Canada, European Union states, Iran and the UK, have placed restrictions on travel from various southern African countries. Ghislaine Maxwell sex-trafficking trial expected to go before jury The trial of the British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell is expected to go before a jury in New York City on Monday, as opening statements follow finalization of the panel of 12 jurors and six alternates. Maxwell, 59, has pleaded not guilty on six counts related to her alleged involvement in the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of teen girls, some as young as 14. The indictment cites four accusers though it is believed more will take the stand. The charges include conspiracy to entice minors to travel to engage in illegal sex acts, enticement of a minor to travel to engage in illegal sex acts, conspiracy to transport minors with intent to engage in criminal sexual activity, transportation of a minor with intent to engage in criminal sexual activity, sex trafficking conspiracy, and sex trafficking of a minor. Epstein, a convicted paedophile, killed himself in a Manhattan federal jail in August 2019, while awaiting trial. Maxwell’s alleged crimes took place from 1994 to 2004, prosecutors have said. Authorities arrested the Briton, the daughter of the late press baron Robert Maxwell, on 2 July 2020 at an estate in the small New Hampshire town of Bradford. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty to all the charges against her and is expected to challenge claims she groomed underage girls. Michael Flynn apparently calls QAnon ‘total nonsense’ despite his links Michael Flynn, Donald Trump’s first national security adviser, appears to have called QAnon “total nonsense” and a “disinformation campaign” created by the CIA and the political left – despite his own extensive links to the conspiracy theory and seeming eagerness to serve as its hero. Flynn’s apparent statement was revealed by Lin Wood, a pro-Trump attorney and QAnon supporter once allied with the disgraced former general. QAnon followers believe in the existence of a secret cabal of pederastic cannibal satanists, dominated by Democrats, against whom Trump is fighting. Followers also believe John F Kennedy Jr is not dead and will soon return to lead them. Many recently congregated in Dallas, waiting for that to happen. The FBI considers QAnon a potential source of extremist violence. Trump has refused to disavow QAnon believers. Tucker Carlson, of Fox News, called them “gentle patriots”. Where was the statement made? Wood released a recording of what appeared to be a call between him and Flynn on Telegram, a social media and messaging app favored by far-right extremists. Is it real? The Guardian could not verify the authenticity of the recording. In other news … The fashion designer Virgil Abloh has died after suffering from cancer, it has been announced. The fashion maverick was creative head at Louis Vuitton and founder of Off-White. Gigi Hadid, Kendall Jenner and Justin Timberlake were among the stars paying tribute to the “once-in-a-generation creative mind”. An episode of the Simpsons in which the cartoon American family visit Tiananmen Square is absent from Disney’s streaming channel in Hong Kong, at a time when authorities are clamping down on dissent. The missing episode adds to concerns that mainland-style censorship is becoming the norm. The private office of the Prince of Wales has dismissed as “fiction” claims Prince Charles speculated on grandchildren’s skin colour. A new book claims that it was Charles who asked about the “complexion” of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s future children. Missouri Senate candidate is hoping Trump notices his neckwear as he seeks endorsement from the former president, which he believes still carries the ultimate weight. Billy Long, who wears a tie that Trump signed with a sharpie, said: “If he endorses in this race … it’s over.” Don’t miss this: Rita Moreno on West Side Story, dating Brando and joy at 90 She overcame abuse to break Hollywood, romanced Marlon Brando, dated Elvis to make him jealous and fought hard for civil rights. Now in her 10th decade, she is busier and happier than ever. She is one of only six women to have bagged the Egot (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony awards), alongside Helen Hayes, Audrey Hepburn, Barbra Streisand, Whoopi Goldberg and Liza Minnelli. Yet she has spent much of her career battling typecasting or simply not being cast at all. … or this: What will US’s future look like if abortion becomes a crime again? If Roe v Wade were to be overturned, at least 26 states hostile to abortion would outlaw abortion either immediately or as quickly as possible, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-choice research organization. Abortion advocates believe this would probably result in desperate people (who have the resources) seeking abortions in more liberal states where the procedure remains legal, such as Illinois or New York. In just one example, Louisiana has passed a “trigger-law” designed to outlaw abortion if Roe is overturned. A person from Louisiana seeking an abortion would need to reach Kansas to obtain one legally. Climate check: Nobel-winning stock market theory used to help save coral reefs A Nobel prize-winning economic theory used by investors is showing early signs of helping save threatened coral reefs, scientists say. Researchers at Australia’s University of Queensland used modern portfolio theory (MPT), a mathematical framework developed by the economist Harry Markowitz in the 1950s to help risk-averse investors maximise returns, to identify the 50 reefs or coral sanctuaries around the world that are most likely to survive the climate crisis and be able to repopulate other reefs, if other threats are absent. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: Canada digs deep into strategic reserves to cover maple syrup shortage Maple syrup producers have been forced to raid the world’s only stockpile of the highly valued sweet treat, as surging worldwide demand combined with an unusually short harvest season in 2021. The Federation of Quebec Maple Syrup Producers, sometimes referred to as the “Opec of maple syrup”, has released about 22m kg of syrup from its strategic reserve to cover a shortfall driven by a short and warm spring in 2021, NPR reported.Pieces of fabric of various vibrant shades fill the Naples studio where Paboy Bojang and his team of four are working around the clock to stitch together 250 cushions for their next customer, The Conran Shop. They are not long from dispatching their first orders to Selfridges and Paul Smith, and with requests for the distinctive cotton cushions with ruffled borders flooding in from around the world, they will be busy for months to come. Bojang, 29, is among the thousands of people to have landed on Italy’s shores during the last decade. He fled dictatorship in the Gambia, witnessed horror in Libya and survived a dangerous journey across the Mediterranean. He has found solace in southern Italy, in a city whose warm embrace has enabled him and other refugees to thrive despite an EU asylum system that is stacked against them. “The first year was hard, and in the second year when I got to know more people and made friends who cared for me, I started to fall in love with Naples,” Bojang said. “I feel inspired here.” His success has been nothing short of remarkable. Depressed and looking for something to do during Italy’s strict coronavirus lockdown in spring 2020, he started sewing. A few months later he posted an image of his first handmade cushion on Instagram. It was an immediate hit and, as messages filled his inbox, his homeware enterprise, In Casa by Paboy, was born. Today he employs three refugees to work alongside him making the cushions, which retail at €160, as well as a young Italian as a brand manager. “It wasn’t at all what I expected,” he said. “My dream now is to grow the company and employ more immigrants. I want to show people that we have talent, we have knowledge, we make beautiful things, we shouldn’t just be working on farms and badly paid.” Bojang was raised by his grandmother in his home town of Serrekunda, where he learned to sew at the age of 13 after being sent to work at a tailor’s shop run by an uncle. Still in his teens when his grandmother died, he left for Europe, crossing several countries by land, much of it desert, before arriving in Tripoli where he slept rough for 18 months. “I slept on the street, in garages, under cars … Libya was awful, I went through a lot of trauma there,” he said. Bojang paid human traffickers three times for a place on a boat to get to Europe. On the final attempt, he witnessed passengers being shot at by Libyan police as they tried to leave. “Sometimes it’s very hard to explain what I experienced in Libya, it was like a film,” Bojang said. “I have never seen such awful things in my life. They didn’t care who we were, it was as if we were animals.” Bojang was on a crammed, unsafe boat for almost two days before arriving on the Sicilian island of Lampedusa in 2015. From there he made his way to Naples, where for the first year he stayed in a squalid, overcrowded refugee centre on the outskirts of the city. He initially worked in a tile factory but lost his job after the far-right leader Matteo Salvini, as interior minister, enacted a law abolishing the humanitarian protection permit. The two-year permit, which was given to those ineligible for refugee status but who for various reasons could not be sent home, enabled people to find work and travel to another EU state for up to 90 days. Salvini’s move coincided with the closure of many refugee centres across Italy, leaving thousands homeless and jobless. Bojang’s life started to change when he met Sophia Seymour, a British journalist and documentary maker, outside Teranga, an Afrobeat nightclub in Naples run by refugees. Seymour offered him a room in her home, lent him her sewing machine and encouraged him to create. She guided him through setting up a business, although Bojang is still waiting for the renewal of his work permit and one that he hopes will allow him to travel for the launch of his products. “Every step of the immigration system makes getting on hard,” said Seymour, who co-directed Teranga, a documentary exploring the hopes and dreams of asylum seekers in Naples. “Starting with the long wait for documents to be able to work, which makes a lot of people depressed in the prime of their life. Then, if you want to set up alone, you need so many people to advise you. This all costs money … you need to rely on so many people to help you, and that means relying on luck and kindness.” Teranga was the launchpad for Mozeh Keita, 22, from the Gambia, and his band Dozer Gang, whose music has had thousands of listeners on Spotify and YouTube and has been played on UK radio. The fondness among Neapolitans for Keita, called Bobby by friends, is palpable as you walk through the city with him. Many stop to say hello or give him a high-five. He works as a cook to get by while the band prepares its next EP. “Music has always been my dream,” he said. “My lyrics describe how I’m living, the things I see, and how the system and world is going. Every day is a different story: some days you wake up feeling chilled, on others you feel anxious.” Keita said he was grateful to be in Naples, a city where he feels safe while much of the rest of Europe perceives migrants as a threat. He is conscious, however, that so many have died trying to reach Europe or remain stuck in the asylum system, unable to work legally or exploited by employers. “We have been lucky to make it through, but not everyone who comes does.” Mame Thiafour Ndiaye, originally from Senegal, has been living in Naples for more than 12 years. A music producer, he helps to promote groups such as Dozer Gang and One Voice. “It’s not easy to live off music, we all do other jobs,” he said. “But in Naples most people are welcoming, and so even if opportunities for immigrants are scarce, we have this tranquility.” Yankuba Fatty, 23, arrived in Italy by boat in 2017 and managed to get top marks in his exams to study medicine at the University of Naples, but was unable to join the course as his required permits had not arrived in time. He later set up an online language school and now teaches English at a private school in northern Italy while studying biotechnology. He said he was lucky to find “the right chemistry” in Naples, including an Italian lawyer who helped him set up his business. “But obviously others would say the complete opposite,” he said. “Some are unpaid, working long hours for employers who treat them badly.” Fatty is baffled by the European countries that turn their backs on refugees despite having the resources to help them. “People leave their countries not because they want to but because they absolutely have to,” he said. “They’re ready to work, study, integrate and improve the economy, but they can only do that if given the opportunity.” “I would say: open the doors, help these people, give them the opportunity to showcase themselves. They could improve your economy – these people are ready to work, they’re ready to study and integrate into society, but they can only do that if you give them the opportunity.” Over lunch at a Senegalese restaurant in Naples, Bojang reflected on his experience over the last few years. “I think people have to open their eyes … immigrants are not a threat. We all have aims, dreams, knowledge…, we are all humans. People say we come here to steal their jobs and their things. I say give people an opportunity, try to help them learn. “If you’re an immigrant without documents or a job, you could end up on the streets selling drugs,” he said. “All of us here have skills, we’ve all been to school – immigrants should be considered as people, as a resource.”At schools, a church and a branch of KFC, public health officials have been scrambling to track people infected by Omicron, in a stiff new test of the UK’s widely criticised £37bn test-and-trace programme. On Monday, new cases of the Covid “variant of concern” emerged in two London locations, bringing the running UK total to 11, and testing was launched at a school in West Bridgford in Nottinghamshire and at Larchwood primary school in Brentwood, where one class was sent home. Customers, staff and delivery drivers at the KFC in the Essex town’s high street last Friday afternoon were also urged to get tests, as were the congregation of the nearby Trinity church. The Essex case is linked to one in Nottingham and travel in southern Africa. Two separate cases were announced in Camden and Wandsworth in London, both with links to travel to South Africa, after a case was detected in Westminster, and four further cases have been found in Lanarkshire and two more in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde areas of Scotland. None of the Scottish cases have any travel history, said Scotland’s deputy first minister, John Swinney, suggesting community transmission is under way. The push to track the spread of the virus is casting renewed focus on the test-and-trace scheme, which Boris Johnson promised would be “world-beating”. Only half of the UK’s main laboratories used for community testing are currently capable of detecting the Omicron variant with a test that shows whether a key “S” gene is missing, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. The Essex director of public health, Dr Michael Gogarty, said on Monday that it took seven days to receive confirmation of its case after the person noticed symptoms and was tested on 20 November. They are said to be unwell, but not seriously. Illustrating how long the new variant has been in the UK, Gogarty said the Essex case caught it from another person, who in turn caught it from someone who arrived from southern Africa about two weeks ago. One factor making detection harder is that only a minority of people with Covid symptoms typically request a test – just 18%, according to a study by academics at King’s College London earlier this year. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of UKHSA, said on Monday it was “critical that anyone with Covid-19 symptoms isolates and gets a PCR test immediately”. It said it should take between 24 and 48 hours to get a PCR result and an additional 24 hours to determine whether it is likely they have Omicron. A final confirmation could take another two days, bringing the whole process to up to five days. Official data shows turnaround times for PCR tests have been getting worse in England. Only 68% of in-person test results were received within 24 hours in the latest week, down from 77% the previous week. UKHSA, which is overseeing testing and tracing Omicron cases, said all “close contacts of suspected and confirmed Omicron cases will have samples priority-tested for S-gene target failure and will also have whole-genome sequencing”. Suspected cases of the new variant will be routed to laboratories that could run the genetic tests, and it is “rapidly developing and rolling out a genotyping assay to give an early indication of a probable variant case” to labs that don’t yet have the capacity. Total UK PCR testing capacity has fallen from 900,000 a day in mid-October to just over 700,000 a day last week. It follows the suspension of testing at a lab run by Immensa after it emerged that 43,000 people may have been given incorrect negative PCR tests. However, before Omicron arrived, the system had capacity to process about 250,000 more tests a day than were needed. Asked about the preparedness of the test-and-trace system, one director of public health in the north of England said that while Omicron’s transmissibility in a highly vaccinated population remained unclear, “we are in pretty good shape”. From 4am on Tuesday passengers arriving in the UK will be required to take a PCR test by the end of their second day from entry and isolate until they receive a negative test. UKHSA said it was trying to find out how many private travel testing laboratories, relied upon to check all international arrivals, would be able to test for Omicron.It’s 2am and, for the past hour, I’ve been reliving an entire decade of my life. As far as I can tell, it was a phenomenally stupid decade. If my Facebook pictures are anything to go by, I spent all of uni honking my friends’ boobs and putting things on my head. I then spent my early- to mid-20s dressed stupidly, in the company of a lot of people I now can barely remember. My God, the Hat Phase. There I am in a fedora at Pride; skinnier and better-looking, but clearly having a hard time establishing my “look”. This is the longest I’ve spent on Facebook in about four years. Finally, I’ve decided to delete it. In my 30s, it’s started to stress me out that my profile still exists. Drunk pictures of me on display for people I haven’t thought about in a decade. Whatever teenage me saw worthy of a status update just out there, searchable, findable, obscured only by privacy settings that I don’t fully understand. It’s hard to say exactly what turned me off the platform in the first place, but I remember when it started to get a bit stinky. It was like it was going sour. It started to resemble a digital creche for boomers and people in pyramid schemes, run by the dead-eyed and passionless Mark Zuckerberg – an individual about as cool as a middle-aged geography teacher in a backwards cap, rapping about saying no to cigarettes. It was all just a bit depressing. Scrolling through Twitter, I at least feel something (usually searing rage). But Facebook seemed like an eternal 2010: indifferent, comfortable and twee. And the less time I spent on Facebook, the more notifications I seemed to get. I started to get notifications for everything. A girl I’d met in a toilet queue eight years ago was selling a drying rack. Someone I was at school with and didn’t particularly like was attending a prison-themed club night. And these things I needed to know, because Zuckerberg was palpably desperate for my attention. Perhaps even more so now with the “Meta” rebrand, and the dogged insistence of a move, en masse, to the “metaverse”. But the task at hand – now – is to remain on this godforsaken platform, until I’ve dragged and dropped every picture worth saving on to my desktop. I remember switching from Myspace to Facebook in around 2007, when I was 18. Facebook seemed a little more grown up. It was sleeker, and there was much less room for the kind of customisation that would result in sudden bedazzlement by a moving background and a blast of Mr Brightside. But with its “poke” function and this newfangled idea of posting your “status”, Facebook somehow managed to convince us all it was fun. I shared life-changing events on Facebook. I posted about new jobs and relationships. I came out on my “wall”. One of my last statuses was in 2017, when my mum died. And yet, when I look through the thousands of pictures of me on the platform, they’re full of people I struggle to name now. Even at birthday parties, people crop up who make me wonder if I’m looking at my life in an alternate universe. “Who the hell is that?” I keep on saying to myself. In part, this may be a glaring testament to just how bad I am at maintaining friendships. I’m one of the only people I know, for example, who has now lost touch with everyone they knew at university. It’s not all misspent time, of course. I find myself tearing up a bit at the photos of an Interrailing trip I went on with my uni housemates when I was 19. There we are, posing on a bridge in Budapest, and – on a hot day – standing right in the Louvre fountain. The inside jokes start flooding back. Facebook, I’m realising, encapsulates the “banter” that defined the era of 2007-2012 like almost nothing else. Which maybe isn’t surprising for a social media site that started off as a place for students to rate their female classmates’ attractiveness. When it went mainstream, it carried forward that founding philosophy of creepiness like the Olympic torch. In a time where your friends would tag you in pictures where you’re practically dying of alcohol poisoning, this was the last moment in which social media was more id than ego. It was Fomo-inducing, but rarely aspirational. Before clicking the final “delete” on my page, I scroll through my hidden messages – those from people I’m not friends with. One from a man I don’t know, from 2016, simply says: “bitch”. I briefly consider replying, before realising just how much of a depressing act that would be. There’s nothing left for me here, I think to myself, as I say goodbye to a digital decade. Eleanor Margolis is a columnist for the i newspaper and DivaRalf Rangnick has claimed Manchester United can still make a success of this season after being confirmed as the club’s interim manager. Rangnick has signed a deal to manage the team until the end of this season before taking on a consultancy role until 2024. He could be in charge for Arsenal’s visit on Thursday, subject to receiving a work permit. Michael Carrick, who has overseen a Champions League win at Villarreal and a draw at Chelsea since replacing Ole Gunnar Solskjær, will remain at the helm until Rangnick’s clearance. Solskjær’s backroom team – Carrick, assistant Mike Phelan, coach Kieran McKenna and the goalkeeping coach Richard Hartis – are expected to be retained, although the interim manager will bring in a small number of his own staff, including the video analyst Lars Kornetka. United considered several candidates to replace Solskjær on a short‑term basis but insist Rangnick, who signed a three-year contract as Lokomotiv Moscow’s head of sports and development in July, was their preferred choice. The 63-year-old former RB Leipzig, Schalke and Hoffenheim manager impressed in an interview last week with the football director, John Murtough, the technical director, Darren Fletcher, and the executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, particularly on how he would implement his style of play. United lie eighth, five points off fourth place and 12 behind the leaders, Chelsea. But despite this season’s toils Rangnick believes the squad can deliver vast improvement during his brief managerial stint. “I am excited to be joining Manchester United and focused on making this a successful season for the club,” he said. “The squad is full of talent and has a great balance of youth and experience. All my efforts for the next six months will be on helping these players fulfil their potential, both individually and, most importantly, as a team. Beyond that, I look forward to supporting the club’s longer-term goals on a consultancy basis.” United believe Rangnick’s experience in coaching and several leadership roles makes him ideally equipped to get the best out of their underachieving squad. Murtough, who spent time studying Rangnick at Leipzig in 2019, said: “Ralf is one of the most respected coaches and innovators in European football. “He was our No 1 candidate for interim manager, reflecting the invaluable leadership and technical skills he will bring from almost four decades of experience in management and coaching. Everyone at the club is looking forward to working with him during the season ahead, and then for a further two years in his advisory role.” Rangnick has not worked as a manager since holding the fort at Leipzig in the 2018-19 season while the club waited for Julian Nagelsmann. Paris Saint-Germain’s Mauricio Pochettino remains interested in taking the United job in the summer and would not be put off by Rangnick’s presence in a consultancy position.The story behind the production of the controversial Bernardo Bertolucci drama Last Tango in Paris, which starred Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider, is to become a TV series, it has been announced. Released in 1972, Last Tango became notorious for its graphic sex scenes and the treatment of Schneider, its 19-year-old female lead, by Bertolucci and Brando. In 2016, controversy was reignited after a three-year-old video of Bertolucci emerged discussing how he and Brando had not informed Schneider about the content of the film’s infamous rape scene. The airing of the admission led to an explosion of anger, including a tweet from Jessica Chastain saying: “To all the people that love this film – you’re watching a 19yr old get raped by a 48yr old man. The director planned her attack. I feel sick.” In an interview in 2007, Schneider said that while the sex was simulated, she had been “forced” to do the scene, which was not in the script, and that she “felt humiliated and to be honest … felt a little raped”. According to Deadline, the series will span the 18 months before, during and after the production of the film and will begin with Bertolucci travelling to Los Angeles in 1971 to convince a broken-down and bankrupt Brando to take the role. Directors Lisa Brühlmann (Killing Eve) and José Padilha (Narcos) have been named to take charge of filming. Brühlmann said: “The opportunity to dive into that world, into all these fascinating characters, and especially the possibility of giving Maria Schneider a voice, is really exciting.” Padilha said: “Tango tells the story of two men abusing a young and unexperienced woman, not for sex, but for the sake of art. They did it on camera, and the resulting scene made it into a major feature film, acclaimed by critics and audiences alike. The director and the actors basked in success, while Maria’s pain was neglected.”She is one of the world’s most acclaimed dancers, dazzling audiences with performances at the Bolshoi and the Royal Ballet. Now Natalia Osipova is fusing her centuries-old art form with the latest digital technology. Osipova, principal dancer at London’s Royal Ballet and has recently appeared as Giselle at the Royal Opera House, has created the world’s first non-fungible tokens (NFTs) for ballet that are being auctioned over the coming days. The dancer said she was “excited but a little nervous” at her step into the world of NFTs and cryptocurrencies, but “I like taking risks and this is my latest venture”. She added: “NFTs have shaken up the world of art, particularly over the last year, and I realised they could also broaden ballet’s appeal and reach.” NFTs are unique digital assets stored on a blockchain. An NFT can be copied, but there is only one original, and blockchain technology means the origin and ownership is definitively established. NFTs can be sold and traded among collectors. Osipova has performed three pieces, two from Giselle and one from the contemporary duet Left behind, which she dances with her fiance, Jason Kittelberger. Giselle, she said, was “my favourite classical role, beautiful and amazing”. Left Behind demonstrated more recent work combining “classical training in ballet with fluid contemporary dance and an emotional narrative”. Together the pieces form Natalia Osipova: Triptych, which is being auctioned by Bonhams between now and 10 December. The motive to create the NFTs was born during the Covid lockdowns. “I felt completely lost when I was unable to perform,” Osipova said. She decided to explore ways of connecting with audiences over a digital platform. She and Kittelberger also plan to form their own dance company. “We’re hoping to find some financial independence by selling NFTs to fund the company,” said Kittelberger. “We hope to [build a] bridge over to the crypto[currency] community because they’re the ones who are actually investing.” NFTs also create lasting artwork. Dancers’ careers are “really short”, said Osipova. “You stop about 40, maybe 45, sometimes earlier. I’m 35 now, and I can jump and my body looks good, and now is the time to record. Maybe in two years I can’t do the same thing. It’s sad but it’s true.” Sales of NFTs have surged this year in what is often described as a new gold rush. The digital artist Mike Winkelmann, better known as Beeple, made history in March by selling an NFT for $69.4m. The same month, the musician Grimes sold a collection of NFTs for almost $6m. Nyan Cat, a pixelated flying feline that became a YouTube meme sensation, sold as an NFT for $531,000 in February. Osipova began formal ballet training in Moscow when she was nine, and joined the Bolshoi when she was 18. In 2011 she resigned as a principal dancer, saying she needed “artistic freedom” and new challenges. She joined the Royal Ballet as a principal dancer in 2013. She said she hoped her NFTs would “pave the way for the next generation of dancers to connect with their supporters on this digital stage”. Dance was “the best language in the world” but the last two years had shown that “we need different platforms for people to see great art”, she said. Osipova and Kittelberger said their venture was a “gamble” as the market for ballet NFTs was unknown. The two short-form Giselle NFTs are expected to sell between £8,000 and £12,000 each, and the long-form Left Behind NFT is expected to reach between £30,000 and £50,000. Nima Sagharchi, Bonhams head of digital art, said the auction house was “proud to be a pioneer in the NFT field – having sold works by creators of digital art and a record-breaking Cristiano Ronaldo NFT trading card – and to offer yet another world’s first. “Through NFTs, we are able to crystallise unique performances, and own and collect what would otherwise be intangible.”Late on Friday, with only days to go until its 12th summit was due to commence, the World Trade Organization (WTO) announced that its most important meeting of the year couldn’t proceed. With alarm spreading about the Omicron Covid-19 variant, the WTO’s host country, Switzerland, closed its borders to southern Africa and introduced quarantine restrictions for visitors from Belgium, Israel and Hong Kong, where cases have been detected, making travel for many government delegations impossible. The summit, billed as critical for an institution in crisis, is now indefinitely postponed. The irony, not lost on many delegates from Africa, Asia and Latin America, is that global trade rules overseen by the WTO are actually at the heart of the dreadful situation the world is now confronting. Well over a year ago, India and South Africa called on the WTO to suspend part of an intellectual property agreement known as Trips, which allows pharmaceutical corporations to monopolise medical knowledge. Even though many Covid-19 vaccines and treatments were paid for from the public purse, Trips, the brainchild of a former big pharma executive, effectively means that the resulting medicines become the highly profitable property of a handful of the world’s biggest businesses. India and South Africa’s proposal is backed by pretty much every southern government. They are also joined, in a somewhat lacklustre manner, by the United States and a smattering of wealthy countries, who are at least prepared to countenance the need for radical action in the face of staggering levels of vaccine inequality. But the proposal is being blocked by Britain, Switzerland and the EU, defending big pharma and refusing to accept the need for change. These governments successfully grabbed as much of the limited supply of the vaccine doses as they could, achieved some of the highest vaccination rates in the world, and are now even throwing hundreds of thousands of doses in the bin. It’s no wonder that countries still struggling to vaccinate their frontline workers aren’t in the mood to be told “there’s really no problem, just wait a while longer”. The Omicron variant is the inevitable result of European strategy. Experts have been warning for months that failure to vaccinate most of the world is the best way to ensure the spread of new and potentially dangerous Covid-19 variants, some of which could undermine even the vaccines we have created. It is in this very real sense that none of us are safe until we’re all safe. But the WTO stands at the apex of a trade system which rules that nothing should get in the way of “the market”. An unhindered market is all we need, so the dogma goes, to get food to the hungry and medicine to the sick. Covid-19 is the proof that this is a fallacy. It has shown us that the market cannot solve a crisis. In fact, the market has ensured the rich and powerful get many times what they need while the poorest get virtually nothing. Meanwhile, two medicines alone – the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines – are making the companies behind them $1,000 (£749) per second in profit. Will Britain and other countries blocking the waiver learn their lesson now? Don’t hold your breath. If the WTO meeting had gone ahead, these countries would, in fact, have pushed a quite separate “solution” to the Covid-19 pandemic: more trade liberalisation and even more market freedoms. The measures they back include limiting export bans, lowering tariffs, promoting the deregulation and privatisation of services, and otherwise closing the space which countries have to respond to this or indeed future pandemics by making it harder for countries in the global south to nurture their own pharmaceutical industries. When the rules of the system have failed so badly, countries need more room to manoeuvre, not less. And while no one is arguing that export bans are the solution to a pandemic, in a context where rich countries are trying to grab vaccines from countries with much lower levels of protection, they can, unfortunately, be necessary. Just ask poorly vaccinated South Africa, which was forced to export Johnson &amp; Johnson doses to a heavily vaccinated Europe. Or India, which sent millions of AstraZeneca doses to Britain even when it faced a catastrophic upsurge of cases itself. If we want to recover from Covid-19, and approach the next pandemic better prepared, we need to share the knowhow behind essential medicines and build research, development and manufacturing capabilities around the world outside the control of big pharma. The WHO is trying to kick-start such a project in South Africa, reverse engineering Moderna’s vaccine so they can share it with the world. Far from helping these efforts, WTO rules are a major impediment. Across the board, whether on Covid-19 or agricultural policy, WTO rules have removed governments’ ability to protect their citizens, stretched supply chains to breaking point and undermined small producers. For many, the WTO’s legitimacy expired a long time ago. But the failure to agree a Trips waiver in the past 12 months is the final straw in the eyes of many African, Asian and Latin American governments. If the WTO fails to reform, they will simply have to begin doing things differently. The next steps should be clear. The WTO doesn’t need a physical meeting to recognise the disastrous failure of allowing the global marketplace to manage a pandemic. On Friday, President Biden spoke out again in favour of an intellectual property waiver, albeit one more limited than South Africa and India would like. Earlier in the day, Norway, a previous opponent of the proposal, said it was moving towards support. It’s time for free-market fundamentalists like Britain to move out of the way. If they don’t, the WTO’s time could finally be up. Nick Dearden is director of Global Justice NowCentring on a dystopian North America where Indigenous children are abducted and placed in state-run institutions to be brainwashed – a detail that recalls the shameful history of Canadian residential schools – this is a cautionary tale from Cree-Métis director Danis Goulet that has the commendable aim of reclaiming sci-fi tropes that recklessly appropriate the trauma of minority groups. But despite these lofty intentions and a wealth of Native American talent, the film follows a highly predictable path where the plight of Indigenous communities never amounts to anything more than simplified metaphors. Night Raiders follows the arduous journey of Niska (Elle-Máijá Tailfeathers), a Cree woman regretting her decision to give up her injured daughter Waseese (Brooklyn Letexier-Hart) to the authoritarian state. The film zigzags between lush forests and sterile cityscapes (where grey skies are darkened by swaths of surveilling drones). A chance encounter with a group of Indigenous vigilantes sweeps Niska into a rescue mission for children – her daughter among them – who are locked inside the ominous academy, where they are trained to be robotic instruments of state power. Much is made of communal solidarity and spirituality during the planning stages of this dangerous quest, but it only amplifies a glaring thinness in Niska and company’s characterisation; any sense of an inner life is eclipsed by pedestrian thriller plot points. Niska’s double displacement might have been a fertile area for investigation – she encounters systematic discrimination but can’t communicate in Cree with her newfound comrades. Yet all this remains sorely underdeveloped. Solid performances from Tailfeathers and Letexier-Hart can’t elevate a script that is neither effective as straight sci-fi nor a subversion of the genre. • Night Raiders is on digital platforms from 6 December.Richard Madeley has said dehydration may have been the cause of him having to leave I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! for a hospital visit. The TV presenter, 65, announced on Thursday he was departing the ITV reality show after being taken to hospital when he fell ill in the early hours of the morning. He was originally seen by an on-site medical team before being admitted to hospital as a precaution, after an episode in which he slid headfirst into a sewer of rotten fruit and vegetables. Speaking on Good Morning Britain on Monday, Madeley said: “I think what happened to me was I got dehydrated. I think that’s all it was. But dehydration, if anyone’s ever suffered from it, is actually quite disturbing. Basically I think I had been up for about 20 hours the day before. “And the day before that, we were having very long days and sleeping quite late, and we don’t have watches in there, but I don’t think I got to bed until about 4, 4.30 in the morning and I knew I was feeling thirsty and I’m quite bad at remembering to drink actually. And as I actually snuggled into my sleeping bag, it was freezing, I thought: ah, I haven’t had a big drink in a while, I’ll do it when I wake up.” Madeley said the next thing he knew he was “sitting there babbling”. “I was talking nonsense,” he said. “I basically woke up, I didn’t know where I was, what was going on and I could hardly string a sentence together. “As it turned out, it was harmless, there was nothing wrong. I went to the hospital, had all the tests you can imagine, got a 100% clean bill of health and they were happy for me to go back in.” By leaving the camp, Madeley broke the Covid “bubble” and therefore had to leave the castle. In his last challenge, called Castle Kitchen Nightmares, he had hunted for 10 hidden stars in a room “full of castle critters” as rotten food including fish guts and offal was dumped on him from above. After Madeley’s exit, the production fell victim to Storm Arwen, with the remaining celebrities removed from the castle at the weekend while work was carried out to get the production base in Wales running again after technical issues. ITV said the storm caused “significant damage” to the base. A statement from I’m A Celebrity said: “Whilst we get the production base back up and running after suffering technical issues due to the storm, we have removed the celebrities from the castle.” The quarantine conditions for the celebrities would be the same as they had before entering the castle, ITV added.Education unions have called on the government to extend mask-wearing beyond school communal areas and into secondary school classrooms. Following the emergence of the Omicron variant, the Department for Education now recommends the use of face coverings in schools in England for adults and children in Year 7 and above in shared spaces. We would like to hear from teachers about their views on the changes to England’s rules. Do you think mask rules should be extended into classrooms? What other changes would you like to see? When restrictions were in place before, what do you feel worked and what didn’t? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The actor Matthew McConaughey will not run for Texas governor, removing one potential obstacle from the path of Beto O’Rourke, the former Democratic congressman and candidate for Senate and president now seeking to defeat the Republican Greg Abbott. McConaughey, 52 and the star of Free State of Jones, Dallas Buyers Club (for which he won an Oscar), Magic Mike, many other movies and the HBO smash True Detective, had long been reported to be on the verge of running, possibly as an independent. He made the announcement that he would not in a short video posted to social media on Sunday night, two weeks before the deadline to declare. “Hey everybody,” he began, “McConaughey here. “For past two years, I’ve been working on the answer to the question of how I can be most useful in this life. Useful to myself, useful to my family and to the most amount of people. One category service I’ve been exploring is politics, considering a run for governor in Texas.” McConaughey then delivered a short homily about “sharing our share”, children as “our greatest asset”, service and leadership – whether as “a politician, a star quarterback, a mother, father, husband, wife, brother, friend, mentor or teacher”. But as for running for governor, he said: “As a simple kid born in the little town of Uvalde, Texas, it never occurred to me that I would one day be considered for political leadership. It’s a humbling and inspiring path to ponder. It is also a path that I’m choosing not to take at this moment.” Instead, McConaughey said, he would look to support “businesses and foundations that I believe are leaders, establishments that I believe are creating pathways for people to succeed in life, organizations that have a mission to serve and build trust and dream”. McConaughey has published a bestselling memoir-cum-self-help book, Greenlights, and will publish a sequel in December. Only last week, in an interview to promote his books, he teased the New York Times. Asked why he had not committed to run or said he would not, he said: “It’s a real dance. “Five years ago if you’d have said, ‘Matthew, I think you ought to run for governor of Texas,’ I wouldn’t have had the confidence to go, ‘Why’d you say so?’ What can you do and what can you not do? Do my gifts fit into being effective as a politician? Good question. Because I’m not historically a politico. I’m a folk-singing philosopher-poet who has a gift for storytelling, inspiration. But as the CEO of the state or a nation, you have to administrate. You have to set up laws.” Pressed, he told the paper “it would be untrue for me to go ‘I’m not’ until I say I’m not”. On Sunday, he said he was not. To O’Rourke, seeking to stop Abbott winning a third term, the decision may come as a relief. Though McConaughey’s policies or views were not clear, some thought would have had a good chance to win. Keir Murray, a Texas political consultant, told the Hollywood Reporter to be “a true outsider candidate, it’s actually advantageous”. But Murray also warned that though McConaughey had “a positive and favorable brand, as soon as you dip your toe in the political pool people start to hate you. “Does he want to change that brand and damage it? Because that’s inevitable.” Among Democrats, in an impression backed up by polling, many feared McConaughey as a vote-splitter in a contest offering an otherwise reasonable chance to take down Abbott. The Republican has presided over missteps in Covid policy and a power grid failure which cost lives during frigid February weather. Abbott is also a hardline conservative on issues including abortion and voting rights, signing draconian laws Democrats hope are out of synch with a changing state population. But though Texas has become less ruby Republican red, it has not yet delivered any big prizes to the blue side of the ledger. Signing off his video with a vigorous salute, McConaughey said: “To the politicians, to the leaders and servants out there, the leader and servant in each one of us, cheers to you. The freedom to be you, freedom to be me. And to our responsibility to be us. In the mean times, at all times and until next time: Just keep livin’.”Scams against elderly people are on the rise. Fraudsters have been targeting older people through pensions scams, insurance frauds and investment firm deceptions. These crimes can have devastating effects on elderly people – as well as the loss financially, they can undermine confidence and health. Have your parents or relatives been affected by scams? Perhaps it was through an online fraud or one of the many pension scams which are in operation at the moment? Tell us what happened, what the effect was on your loved ones and whether they got their money back. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Joe Root says he has been in touch with Azeem Rafiq since his former teammate detailed to MPs this month his experiences of discrimination at Yorkshire – but the England captain still maintains he never witnessed racist behaviour at the club. Rafiq admitted in front of a parliamentary select committee he was “hurt” by Root’s previous failure to recall the abuse he endured while at Headingley. He also said he found it “strange” he could not remember anything because he had been present on nights out when Gary Ballance, the former England player with whom Root once shared a flat, had called him the P-word. Speaking at England’s pre-Ashes base in Brisbane, Root revealed he has reached out to Rafiq since he spoke in parliament on 16 November: “We have exchanged a couple of messages since, quite recently actually and hopefully, when we finish this tour, we will get the opportunity to sit down and talk about this whole situation. About how we can move the game forward.” However, Root stood by his claim this month that he had never witnessed the racist behaviour towards Rafiq. “No, I stand by what I said,” he said. “I don’t recall those incidences. If they are an oversight on my part, then that’s an area we all have to learn from and I have to learn from.” Root then referenced his decision to call out the West Indies fast bowler Shannon Gabriel on the field for use of a homophobic slur during a Test in St Lucia in February 2019 as proof he takes seriously the issue of discrimination. “There have been other things that have happened since then, on the cricket field, where I feel like I have stepped in and called things out,” he said. “That comes from growth and learning and understanding and education. There is still further education I need to undergo to develop myself further – I think everyone does.” Root was less forthcoming on the use of “Kevin” in the England dressing room. Rafiq has alleged this was a pejorative term used by Ballance, who played his last international match in 2017, to describe all people of colour and was once widely used by England players. “That’s part of a live investigation and I’m currently not able to discuss matters on that,” he said. “But clearly that is a phrase that should never be used whether in the dressing room or any part of society.” Pressed on why he was unable to comment given the only investigation being conducted is by the England and Wales Cricket Board, he added: “I think that the ECB are going through an ongoing investigation, trying to find out more information about that. I don’t think I’m in a position to comment more about that.” England’s on-field preparations for an Ashes series that starts in Brisbane next week have been hit by poor weather in Queensland that wiped out all but 29 overs of their opening three-day tour match last week. More rain is forecast for the start of their final four-day warm-up match, which starts on Tuesday. Yet the storm clouds gathering off the field, namely the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant that has led to some Australian states tightening border restrictions, is also worrying England’s players. While many families – including Root’s – are already in Australia, those scheduled to join the squad in Melbourne before Christmas could be subject to harsh quarantine restrictions on arrival. “The families are integral to us, especially on the back of the amount of cricket we’ve played in these environments,” Root said. “As players, I think it is really important we remember we’re in the hands of Australian government and local governments. “There’s not much more we can do or say about it. We’ve got to trust the guys above us to do as much as they can for us and concentrate as much as we can on our cricket. But I think it is important we talk about these things. We don’t want to let them fester on individuals and try to make sure no one is letting it affect them.” There was also a scare last weekend when Ben Stokes, back for the Ashes after fracturing a finger and taking time out to safeguard his mental health last summer, feared he had broken an arm after being hit in the nets by the England batting coach, Jonathan Trott. “To see Ben get hit like that was obviously a scary moment,” Root said. “We all know how crucial he is within our squad but he seems to have come through it pretty well. He practised again today and we’ll keep assessing, making sure it doesn’t have a prolonged effect on him. It’s going to be really important he gets himself ready both physically and mentally for this series and to play a big part in it.”A gigantic 12-pointed star was installed on Monday on one of the main towers of the basilica of the Sagrada Família, Antoni Gaudí’s masterpiece that has been a work in progress since 1882. But the star is unlikely to brighten the mood of local residents whose lives have been blighted for years by the city’s biggest tourist attraction, which before the pandemic brought 60,000 visitors a day to the area. Residents associations accuse the religious foundation in charge of the basilica of highhandedness in its dealings with them, and Joan Itxaso and Salvador Barroso, spokespeople for two local groups, are unmoved by the latest addition to the Barcelona skyline. Barroso described the star, which weighs 5.5 tonnes and measures 7 metres from point to point, as “aesthetically horrible”. It will be illuminated from 8 December, the day Spain celebrates the immaculate conception, along with the tower’s 800 windows. However, their main anxiety is that the foundation will go ahead with its plan to build an enormous stairway leading up to the basilica’s as-yet-unfinished main entrance which, if fully realised, would entail demolishing three entire city blocks, dislodging about 1,000 families and businesses. Earlier this month, Itxaso’s association called for all work on the site to be stopped until future building plans had been hammered out in the tripartite meeting between residents, the foundation and the city council. Barroso’s group is taking legal action against the proposed stairway. Xavier Martínez, director-general of the foundation, said they were open to suggestions about the stairway but added that it was up to the city council to decide whether to include it in its new urban plan. The council has so far shied away from making a decision and, with elections little more than a year away, it may be reluctant to agree a plan that involves demolishing dozens of homes. Barroso claims the stairway was devised by Gaudí’s disciples after his death and was not part of the architect’s original plans which were destroyed by anarchists at the outbreak of the Spanish civil war. Prominent local architects say the recent work cannot be regarded as Gaudí’s, a view shared by Unesco, whose national heritage site listing only covers the part of the basilica completed during the architect’s lifetime. Martínez disagrees. “We have no doubt that what we are building is the work of Gaudí,” he said. Since work began 139 years ago, the Sagrada Família has become a byword for unfinished business and the 2026 completion date has been abandoned as a result of the pandemic. Martínez was not willing to speculate on a new completion date. He said it was only in 2010, the year the basilica was consecrated by Pope Benedict XVI, that they realised that thanks to tourism they might finally have the resources to complete the job, but that was before the pandemic. At its last press conference, in 2019, the foundation announced income for 2018 and 2019 of €80m (£67m) and €100m respectively, of which approximately €110m was earmarked for construction work. The remaining €70m was put aside “in case there should be a drop in visitor numbers”, the meeting was told. Consequently, eyebrows were raised when, at the start of the pandemic, the foundation announced that all work except for the María tower would be suspended until 2024 and most of the workforce was put on furlough until further notice. Martínez says the €70m “rainy day” fund has been needed to pay the part of the salaries not covered by the Covid furlough scheme as well as site security and other expenses, and that work cannot resume while visitor numbers remain only about a quarter of the 2019 figure. “Once a year they hold a press conference where they say how much income they’ve received and how they plan to spend it, but it is impossible to verify these figures because nothing is costed,” said Barroso. Under an agreement signed between the Spanish government and the Vatican in 1979, the foundation does not have to publish accounts or pay tax. It only has to declare income from the gift shop, while the income from visitors (4.7 million paying on average €15 a head in 2019) is treated as donations. “We submit our accounts to the [Catholic] church as we are obliged to by law, the lack of public access to the accounts isn’t up to me,” said Martínez, adding that he doubted that greater transparency would satisfy the critics. The church is not obliged to make its accounts public either. Meanwhile, the stairway issue remains unresolved. Martínez said they were happy to discuss issues with residents “and reach the best solution for everyone”, but that is easier said than done. “We have to find a solution that meets the needs of the city, not that of the foundation,” Itxaso said. Joan Josep Omella, the archbishop of Barcelona, described the installation atop the tower dedicated to the Virgin Mary as “an historic moment after a year of darkness and tireless struggle”.“I love the fact that God chooses the lowly ones,” Katie Taylor says quietly in a conversation that is very different from the punishing dialogue she produces in the ring. She might be the most loved sporting personality in Ireland and ranked the best pound-for-pound woman boxer in the world but Taylor retains her humility. She is in the midst of describing her maternal grandmother and how she and her family overcame impoverishment in Bray, not far from Dublin. “My granny had a tough life but she is such a fantastic woman. There’s not a bitter bone in her body. She grew up in poverty and we were the same. We wouldn’t have had a lot of money growing up. We were a very, very poor family living in the roughest area but God chose our family and did something with us. I have two brothers and one sister and we all became successful. But nobody would have looked at our family or our house and thought: ‘Success will come to them.’” A week on Saturday in Liverpool Taylor defends her undisputed world lightweight title against Firuza Sharipova. Taylor has won all 19 of her professional bouts and if, as expected, she beats Sharipova, it is likely she will move on to the most lucrative fight in the history of women’s boxing. Next year she should finally meet Amanda Serrano, the great Puerto Rican, in a contest which could earn both women in excess of $1m each. But, before discussing this possible landmark, Taylor is happy to concentrate on the success of her older siblings. Her brother Peter obtained a first-class degree in mathematical science at University College Dublin before completing his Master’s in theoretical physics at Cambridge. I had heard he was a Professor of Mathematics at Trinity. “He was at Trinity, yeah, but he’s a lecturer at DCU [Dublin City University] now,” Taylor says. “They’ve all done so well. My sister [Sarah] has a managerial job and my other brother Lee is working in business as well.” Taylor also won a place to study at UCD but, when she became Olympic champion at London 2012, her world changed forever. A shy, likable and intensely private woman had to accept the almost suffocating attention of a nation. It was unbearable at times and life did not run in a smooth upward curve. Four years later Taylor felt almost broken when she moved away from her father, her boxing mentor and trainer, after his relationship with her mother had ended. That decision caused immense pain. “It’s like a lifetime ago now,” she says, “but I felt like I was missing my right arm because I hadn’t boxed without my dad in the corner.” She was in such turmoil that, while her teammates in the 2016 Irish squad returned to their hotel, Taylor chose sometimes to sleep in her car. “I would have thought it was too close to the next training session to travel back an hour from the hotel to the training centre, so I slept in the car. It was probably not a great decision.” The pressure on her intensified and she went to the Rio Olympics as an overwhelming favourite to win gold again. But she lost a highly dubious decision in the quarter-finals. Taylor felt crushed. “Sometimes, when I go back to that moment and talk about it, I still get emotional,” Taylor says. “But I wouldn’t be in the position I am today if that hadn’t happened. So I feel things have worked out even better for me with that loss, even with how heart-breaking it was at the time. I dealt with the loss and the heartbreak and I came back a better fighter. I’ve matured a lot since then.” How is her relationship with her father now? “Things are fine. I obviously love my dad.” Taylor is much more comfortable talking about her grandmother and her mum as she reveals how they sustain her. “My granny is the most generous and soft-hearted person you could meet, and my mam is the exact same, and such a strong person. She’s the reason why we grew up believers in God and she brought us to church. I guess my parents would have been the biggest influence on my life growing up. But I am the person that I am today because of gran.” Does she still watch Taylor fight? “Yeah, she does. She’s 89, still going strong. She can’t travel now but her mind is so sharp and everyone in the family absolutely loves her. She’ll be watching me on television [against Sharipova]. She watches all my fights.” Taylor’s mum, Bridget, will be with her in Liverpool and they will pray together before she steps into the ring. “It’s always the same and that’s one of the most important parts of the preparation. She prays over me before every fight. It will be the same this fight. I actually don’t know how people get through difficult moments without God in their life. That’s my anchor, my rock and there are definitely times I cling on to the word of God. One of my favourite verses is in the Book of Romans and the gist of it is that whatever you’re going through there’s a defining moment you can actually use for your benefit. I believe that.” It is tempting to look ahead to the Serrano fight but Taylor is right to focus on Sharipova. “She had a big amateur background. I also know she has good technical skills because all the Kazakhstan fighters are like that. I’m preparing for a very tough fight because she’s very different to Jennifer Han [the cagey American Taylor beat in September]. Sharipova comes to fight where Han came to survive. It was very hard to make any big impact against Han because she was so defensive. But Sharipova is more aggressive so that makes for an exciting fight.” If she beats Sharipova and Serrano defeats Miriam Gutiérrez [the Spanish woman Taylor outpointed last November], the biggest contest in women’s boxing will finally happen. Taylor is backed by Eddie Hearn and the American streaming service Dazn while Serrano recently forged links with the influential YouTuber-turned fighter Jake Paul. Their combined financial muscle should ensure boxing history is made. Taylor makes it clear she is not motivated primarily by money but surely the fact that it could be a multi-million dollar purse would be a milestone for women’s boxing? “Absolutely. Money isn’t my main priority but it obviously is important because boxing is a very limited career. You really want to make the most money you can in a short space of time. Over the last few years women’s boxing has made huge progress in this area. When I first turned pro [five years ago this month] women fighters were making pennies compared to their male counterparts. So, if we reach $1m each, that would be huge for women’s boxing and another great milestone. It’s a fight that deserves that kind of money. It would be a mega-fight.” Serrano, who has lost only one of her 43 bouts, presents the most difficult challenge of Taylor’s career. “She’s obviously a fantastic fighter and a seven-division world champion. She’s been very consistent and she’s very experienced. That’s why this fight will be fantastic. It’s a genuine 50-50 contest.” Female fighters might not punch as hard as men do but Serrano is extremely dangerous. Taylor has also been caught up in two gruelling bouts with Delfine Persoon, whom she was fortunate to beat the first time in New York in June 2019, and a thrilling battle earlier this year against Natasha Jonas. “That first one against Persoon was my toughest fight. It was very, very close, back-and-forth for 10 rounds. It was an absolute war. The second toughest was Persoon again. That’s always a difficult style to fight against.” Did it take a long time to recover from those two bouts? “No. I’m a quick healer. I obviously had lumps and bumps on my head both times but after a few days I felt fine again. After those battles it’s nice to have a couple of weeks off to rest.” Taylor is an intelligent woman and she understands that the worst damage is hidden. Brain damage can take years to emerge but it’s the silent, malevolent threat facing all boxers. “Yeah, but I think the damage usually comes during sparring. That’s why it’s very important to have the right team around you to monitor your sparring. In the weeks leading up to a fight you can’t consistently be in heavy, tough spars because that’s where the damage is done. My team is very organised and makes sure we do hard training which is not always tough sparring.” Taylor is the superstar of women’s boxing but she is 35. Does she feel time closing in on her? “Yeah. I definitely realise you can’t do this forever. At the same time I don’t feel like I’m slowing down. I also have a group of honest people around me who would tell me when it is time to hang up the gloves because the fighter always wants to keep going. I have a great family as well who are going to be honest with me. But my desire hasn’t diminished at all. “I still love boxing. I still love getting up in the cold mornings and training. These days make the difference between winning and losing. It’s very easy to stay in bed and take a day off here and there. But I never cut any corners. That consistency makes a difference.” Canelo Álvarez, her male equivalent at the top of the pound-for-pound rankings, is one of Taylor’s current favourite boxers. The Mexican loves to market his ‘No Boxing, No Life’ mantra but Taylor says: “I’m not defined by that saying. I’m much more than a boxer and Canelo is as well. Boxing is a huge part of our lives but my identity won’t be wrapped up in the sport forever. Still, right now, I’m so excited having a dream and focusing on these fights. I want to make the very most of them because I’ve come such a long way.” Those impoverished days in Bray remain deep inside her but Taylor knows that the women in her family strengthen her most. “I definitely come from a strong line of great women. My gran and my mam most of all.” She laughs when I tell her that I like the fact such solidity means she has always been, simply, Katie Taylor and never Katie ‘The Terminator’ Taylor. “You’re giving me ideas now! When I was growing up I always pretended to be Rocky Marciano. I didn’t even know who Rocky Marciano was beyond the fact he was an undefeated fighter.” Taylor’s ambition is to retire, like Marciano did, as an unbeaten world champion. Her fame will grow during these last years but she seems determined to remain the same. “I’m always such a quiet person anyway,” she says with a wry little smile. “I always keep myself to myself and don’t reveal too much. It’s actually very easy to live a quiet life regardless of the spotlight on you. We are a very private and quiet family and that’s the way I like it.”A Christmas ham always takes me back to my granny’s in Wales, to her cosy kitchen where my father would carefully smear a local ham with Coleman’s mustard and brown sugar, then stud it with cloves. My mother would a boozy Cumberland sauce to go with it, and it was always a glorious feast. This glaze has a similar sweet and spicy flavour, with the fruity, mellow guajillo chillies adding rounded notes to the spiced pineapple. Carve into wafer-thin slices, which will feed many and ensure a luxurious sandwich filling long into the following week. Guajillo and pineapple adobo roast ham This makes a little extra pineapple adobo, but it lasts ages and is thoroughly delicious. Prep 15 min Cook 2 hr Serves 8 1 x 2kg smoked gammon off the bone 1 white onion, peeled 8 cloves 1 cinnamon stick A few bay leaves (optional) 500ml stout 3 tbsp olive oil Sea salt For the glaze 30g dried guajillo chillies (about 4-5) ½ tsp cumin seeds 5 cloves 400g pineapple flesh, roughly chopped 5 large garlic cloves, peeled 2 tsp ground cinnamon 1 tbsp cider vinegar 1-2 tsp chipotles en adobo 80g demerara sugar 125ml orange juice (I prefer freshly squeezed) Put the ham in large saucepan, cover with cold water and bring quickly to a boil. Once at simmering point, tip out the water – this process will rid the ham of its excess salt. Stud the onion with the cloves and add to the pan with the cinnamon, bay and stout. Fill the pan once more with cold water so that the ham is completely submerged, and bring to a boil. Simmer gently for 10 minutes for every 500g, plus an extra 15 minutes for good measure, then drain and leave to cool. Once cool, skin the joint, reserving the skin for crackling. Meanwhile, make the pineapple glaze. Wipe the guajillo chillies with a damp cloth, cut off the stems, then tear open the chillies and shake out the seeds, which can go in the compost. Put a heavy-based skillet or frying pan over a medium heat and, when hot, toast the chillies for about 20-30 seconds a side, until fragrant and beginning to darken. Be careful not to burn them or they will taste bitter. Transfer to a bowl, cover with hot water and soak for 15 minutes. Grind the cumin and cloves in a mortar or spice grinder. Drain the soaked chillies (discard the liquid) and put them in an upright blender with the ground spices, pineapple, garlic, cinnamon, vinegar, chipotles en adobo and sugar. Blitz a few times, then slowly add the orange juice a few tablespoons at a time and blitzing in between, until you have a wonderfully smooth paste. Heat the olive oil in a medium pan over a medium-high heat and, once hot, cook the sauce for a few minutes, pouring in 125ml cold water when it starts to splutter. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 20-25 minutes until nice and thick. Season with sea salt, then, if you prefer an extra-smooth glaze, strain through a fine sieve and leave to cool. An hour or so before you want to eat, heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. With a sharp knife, score the fat of the ham in a diamond pattern, taking care not to cut through to the flesh underneath, then spread with a thick layer of the glaze. Pour 100ml water into a roasting dish that’s large enough to hold the ham sitting up on a small trivet (to stop it sitting in the liquid), then roast for 10 minutes for every 500g, spreading the ham with more glaze halfway through. Once cooked, slice the ham as thinly as you can and serve with the remaining sauce to hand around – there will be plenty. And for later The guajillo pineapple glaze is amazing in a cold-cut sandwich, ladled over a cheesy jacket potato, and perfect on chargrilled celeriac steaks or wedges of hispi cabbage. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match Since this is cooked with stout, that’s what I’d drink with it (though I also think it would be good with a Coke). Wiper &amp; True’s Hard Shake Barrel-Aged Imperial Milk Stout (£48 for six 440ml cans wiperandtrue.com) should fit the bill, and would be a suitably special-occasion beer.While there has been improvement in disability representation in recent years, it’s still common to switch on the TV and only see non-disabled people. In the UK, 22% of people have a disability, yet disabled talent makes up just 7.8% of the people we see on screen and 5.2% behind the camera. The Guardian has spoken to a number of disabled professionals to hear what it’s really like to be disabled in British TV. Some are famous faces; others work behind the scenes. Here, five disabled people tell all. The presenter When you’re being used for entertainment as a disabled person, you feel no better than a freak in a circus show. When I started out in television, as a person with a visible disability, I was asked so many invasive questions. One director asked me if I had sex with my mobility aid. I have gone without food and water on location for fear of an accident when there are no disabled facilities. I have guzzled painkillers to keep up with the long hours and run myself into the ground with call times that never take into account that my body isn’t the same as everyone else’s. I was once passed up for a job, and when I was told about it, the executive said: “Not to worry, we will always need ‘wheelchairs’ on TV.” In the past, I’ve been asked to work for free, and yet the crew around me – all non-disabled men – weren’t. There’s no one to turn to when you feel discrimination; it is considered part of the job. It’s no secret that people like me are used to tick boxes. If someone has a meeting with us, even if that meeting doesn’t go anywhere, it counts towards a diversity and inclusion quota. Tokenism is rife. It’s very hard for your mental health. I see other minority groups being given air time and creating cutting-edge content, but disability is still poorly represented. I have only recently started to notice disabled people working around me, but rarely in roles of authority. TV has a responsibility to educate the wider public. But how can it when the people at the top have little to no lived experience of being disabled themselves? The producer I’ve had moments of despair in my job – the hundreds of times I’ve not been able to go to the toilet because I can’t find an accessible loo. It’s basic but it is never thought about. Often, when I meet someone for the first time they make snap judgments, from assuming I’m on work experience to never directly addressing questions at me. It’s not their fault, but it takes its toll and is exhausting. I have to work harder and faster than my non-disabled peers just to be considered an equal. I’m pretty sure I’m the only person with a visible disability working in my role in my industry. People rarely ask what support I may need, perhaps because they’re embarrassed or feel awkward. I have lost out on jobs because they are not accessible. The offices are upstairs with no lift, and they are not able or willing to move them downstairs. But I’ve also been offered opportunities that as a child I could never have dreamed of, and that is mainly down to getting to work with some brilliant people. People who will do whatever is needed to make my environment as accessible as it can be. The actor I’ve been acting in television for 25 years. I remember early in my career I was on an ITV series’ read-through that included a wheelchair-using actor, but it was on the third floor of an inaccessible building. No one mentioned it. When I tried to ask an assistant producer how he was going to attend, the wheelchair-user told me to be quiet. He didn’t want to be known as a troublemaker. It was a reflection of a cruel time. There have been great moments, too. In 2011, I got six weeks on a big Irish soap. I was equal, had respect, no one questioned anything about my impairment. I did the first ever kiss between a non-disabled and disabled character on Irish telly, and the whole thing was an oasis. Around the same time, some people I know had a meeting to pitch a Christmas drama about a wheelchair-user and their family. The TV exec turned it down. “No wheelchairs at Christmas,” they said. But we’re not treated like special aliens any more, or as if people are doing us a favour by putting us in their work. The advent of disability storylines actually written by disabled writers has inevitably meant great improvements. These days it genuinely feels that we belong there as much as anyone else. The performer Midway through my career, I got a coveted place on one of the main broadcaster’s diversity schemes. I was there as a disabled person and a gay person – a double whammy for the tick boxes. The “prize” was a paid entry-level job at a prestigious production company. My first placement was in the development team, comprising five young guys and one older bloke closer to my age. On my first day, after a reluctant “hello”, communication was kept to a minimum. That continued for the entire time. We were in an open-plan office, all sitting face to face along a two-metre desk. There was no ignoring me, the only wheelchair-using woman at the table. But they did ignore me. They rendered me invisible. I was never invited out for lunch or to the pub. I’d eat alone or with my PA, and my anxiety shot through the roof. The manager who’d placed me there suggested it was my responsibility to fit in better. After my year with that company, I urgently needed mental health treatment. It was the worst year of my life. Later, I found out why I was treated so badly. I had been allocated a place at the communal desk because it had easier access for my wheelchair. That space had belonged to the older bloke in the team, who wasn’t happy he’d had to give up “his” desk for a disabled newbie. He encouraged the others to shun me. I decided never to work in an office again. The director One of the reasons I started in television was because I never saw people like me. Little did I know I was setting myself up for a lifetime of frustration. I’ve worked in telly for more than 20 years and have seen my non-disabled peers surpass me at every turn. I spent my early years crisscrossing between disabled and mainstream television, often in tokenistic roles. In mainstream TV, I have to fight for every reasonable adjustment I need – and frequently lose. Once, I was given a desk space removed from the rest of the team, which meant I was often out of the loop. I asked why I wasn’t invited to senior external meetings and was told it was because there wasn’t room to house me. One well-meaning colleague asked if she could send my medical history round the team so they’d have a better understanding of how to work with me. We’ve had a senior-level person say the only reason we got a commission was because our programme was a public service and therefore it was their “duty”. Whenever disabled talent is mentioned they’re always too niche, too boring or don’t look “disabled enough”/look “too disabled”. There’s sexist and racial bias, too. Time and time again I’ve been passed up for jobs in favour of a white disabled male – often someone “less” disabled than me. It’s worse for disabled women of colour. For every television bully I meet, there are 20 others who will one day champion me and other disabled people up to senior levels. But I won’t lie: the waiting is hard and it erodes your self-worth. Over the past couple of years I’ve seen change coming, but it’s incessantly slow. Disabled people are starting to push back and say this isn’t good enough, and it feels like broadcasters are starting to listen. We need disabled people visible at every level: directing, commissioning, running, balancing the budgets and dazzling onscreen. When that happens, it will be magical.The energy crisis could cost each home in Great Britain an extra £120 to cover the expense of dozens of energy supplier collapses this winter, which would plunge hundreds of thousands of households into fuel poverty for the first time. Consumers in England, Scotland and Wales could be on the hook for a total of £3.2bn to cover the costs left behind by bust gas and electricity providers, on top of paying for record gas and electricity market prices, according to analysts at Investec. The bank warned of a “substantial” burden on households to provide a safety net for the customers of bust suppliers, including the largest to go under so far, Bulb Energy, which plunged into a special administration process last week. “The meltdown in the supply market is likely to see substantial additional costs land on every GB household, hardly welcome when fuel poverty is an issue, inflation is an issue, and commodity costs look set to push energy bills up,” the wealth management group Investec said. Energy bills had already climbed from an average of £1,138 a year to £1,277 a year from last month under the energy regulator’s price cap, which is used to limit price rises for 11 million homes that pay for a standard dual-fuel tariff by direct debit. The increase, which has raised concerns among fuel poverty campaigners that hundreds of thousands of additional households will be unable to pay their bills, is expected to be followed by an even steeper price in April. The End Fuel Poverty Coalition has estimated that rising gas markets could lead to a rise in the price cap of just over £117 a year. An extra increase of £120 a year to cover the cost of bust suppliers would mean a £237 rise, or an 18.6% increase in bills overall, which would push another 742,364 additional homes into fuel poverty. Martin Young, an analyst at Investec, said the process of pinpointing a total cost for the energy crisis was “akin to attempting to nail jelly to a wall” but the figure could rise as high as £3.2bn, which would most likely be “mutualised” across the market through energy bills. This sum includes the cost of handing customers to a new supplier that must then buy extra gas and electricity at current market rates, which are near record highs, and cover any unpaid policy costs left by the bust provider. The figure also includes the £1.7bn put up by the Treasury to pay for Bulb to continue supplying gas and electricity through the winter via a special administrator, which may be recouped from home energy bills once the company’s fate is decided. Simon Francis, the coordinator of the End Fuel Poverty Coalition, said: “This additional financial bombshell could not come at a worse time for households across the country. Yet another drain on household finances caused by energy markets is unacceptable. “The current system is broken and while long-term reforms are desperately needed, the government also needs to provide far more immediate support for people facing fuel poverty this winter.”The number of mortgages approved for UK house purchases fell to its lowest level in 16 months in October as the “distortive effect” of the stamp duty holiday came to an end. Figures from the Bank of England showed that 67,200 new homebuyer mortgages were approved during the month, down from 71,851 and well below the high of 104,547 recorded in November 2020. The Bank’s data also showed a sharp fall in the sums advanced to borrowers over the month, with net mortgage lending of £1.6bn in October, down from £9.3bn in September. However, the falls follow a frenzied few months in the UK property market where, according to figures from one firm, more than £500bn was spent on homes in the year to September. Stamp duty breaks across the UK led to a rush to buy, which, combined with changing priorities for buyers as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, brought forward sales and meant larger homes became more popular. “October’s decrease was driven by borrowing brought forward to September to take advantage of stamp duty land tax relief, before it was completely tapered off,” the Bank said. Remortgaging activity continued to rise in October as lenders vied for customers with ultra-cheap deals while speculation about an interest rate rise picked up. A total of 41,642 remortgages were approved during the month, compared with 32,745 in the same period last year. Lucian Cook, the head of residential research at the property firm Savills, said: “There is no great surprise to see a fall in the number of mortgage approvals in October, given the distortive effect of the end of the stamp duty holiday in September.” His research shows that in the year to the end of September, £513bn was spent in the UK housing market – the first time the figure has exceeded £500bn and £170bn more than pre-pandemic levels. “That reflected the unusual coming together of three key factors, the so-called race for space as people looked to trade up the housing ladder, the cheap cost of mortgage finance and the added impetus of a stamp duty holiday,” he said. “Activity in the more expensive price brackets continues to hold up strongly, so we expect to see higher than normal spend in 2022, though it’s difficult to see how spending next year can match the extraordinary levels of late across the market as a whole without such a mix of strong drivers.” Anthony Codling, a housing analyst and chief executive of the property firm Twindig, said the Bank’s figures for mortgage approvals were “comforting” and suggested that the housing market was returning to normal after the stamp duty break. “At 67,199, mortgage approvals in October were 2.7% ahead of their 10-year average, suggesting that the housing market is a long way away from the cliff edge,” he said.Transport operators, unions and passenger groups have backed the return of mandatory mask-wearing on buses and trains in England, but raised concerns about enforcement. Passengers will need to wear masks on public transport across the country from Tuesday under measures to combat the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, bringing England back into line with the rest of the UK. Face coverings were made obligatory on public transport in England in June 2020, with fixed penalties of £100 for non-wearers. The new rules reinstate these penalties. After the legal requirement ended last July, ministers said masks were “expected” in crowded transport settings. Transport for London said coverings remained compulsory for travel, but there was little deterrent against not wearing them. The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) said most cases of non-compliance across all settings were resolved by staff in the first instance. It said businesses and local authorities needed to remind the public of the rules, and enforcement should not necessarily mean police involvement. Unions, however, said the government needed to ensure there was credible enforcement and that bus drivers and rail staff were not asked to force passengers to wear masks. The Confederation of Passenger Transport, which represents the bus and coach industry, said operators would be communicating to passengers that masks were now a legal requirement again, and “reminding them of their responsibility to comply with this change of approach, which the police will enforce”. “As they have throughout the pandemic, we expect passengers will work with operators to ensure passengers can travel safely,” it said. A spokesperson for the Rail Delivery Group, which represents the rail industry, said: “While we know the vast majority of people will want to do the right thing, we’ll be working with British Transport Police who will encourage and enforce the measures.” There has been a significant drop in compliance even on transport networks such as TfL despite mask-wearing remaining a condition of carriage. London TravelWatch said research showed other people wearing face coverings was a key factor in making people feel safe about using buses, trains and the tube. Emma Gibson, director of the independent watchdog, said: “Making them a requirement on all public transport again will be reassuring for many people but it will have to be properly enforced to give out the signal that the rules have changed.” Unions said they backed the measures for public health, but were telling their members only the operator and police were responsible for making people comply. Unite’s national officer for passenger transport, Bobby Morton, said: “The government’s previous inconsistent messaging on face mask wearing is almost certainly going to result in a high degree of non-compliance. Unite’s advice to bus drivers is clear: it is not their role to enforce mask wearing, their responsibility is to safely drive and operate the bus.” The general secretary of the RMT, Mick Lynch, said there were “major issues about enforcement – and its our members left in the frontline with angry passengers who refuse to comply. The government must make the resources available to properly police this”. Owen Weatherill, of the NPCC, said forces would continue to enforce Covid rules where necessary. “We will support transport and retail staff in ensuring people wear face coverings in line with the regulations,” he said. “We will work closely with businesses and will continue to respond to incidents where individuals are violent or abusive towards staff or members of the public.” He said forces would increase officer visibility where possible near transport hubs: “If officers encounter individuals not wearing a face covering on public transport or in shops, they will engage with them, explain the risks and encourage them to comply with the new rules.” Police issued 626 fixed penalty notices to people in England and Wales for not wearing masks on public transport during the 12 to 13 months when doing so mandatory, and 3,123 fines in other settings. The majority were issued to white men, with police action peaking in February this year. The impending rule change, announced by Boris Johnson on Saturday but yet to be officially clarified, will bring England’s rules back in line with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, where wearing masks on public transport has remained mandatory.Secret talks between the Premier League and the EFL have been held to discuss removing the controversial parachute payments system, with alternatives set to be put to top-flight clubs for consideration. Discussions have been ongoing throughout the Covid period about how better to organise financial redistribution. Whereas the EFL has targeted parachute payments as a major problem, the Premier League had remained defiant in support of the current system – citing the £1.5bn it transfers down the leagues over a three-year period. That position has changed, with a number of alternative proposals developed and debated among executives. The pressure is to make those changes a reality. Parachute payments are given to clubs relegated from the Premier League to cushion the blow of revenue lost from leaving the top flight. The EFL argues this creates competitive distortion, with other clubs spending money they do not have to keep up. One of the recommendations in the Crouch review, published last week, stated that the Premier League and EFL should come up with a solution to the parachute payments problem by the end of the year, with outside voices then brought in to advise on change if no solution can be agreed. Although the discussions are understood to be advanced, ideas have not been presented to Premier League clubs or the EFL board. On Monday the Premier League board agreed to hold an emergency shareholders’ meeting this week to discuss the Crouch review. Under the terms of the domestic TV deal approved by government this year, parachute payments are to remain in place for another three years. On Friday Richard Masters, the Premier League’s chief executive, suggested a softening of his tone on parachute payments. “If there is a way of uniting the clubs in our league and the clubs in the Championship with a new proposal,” he told the BBC, “we should drive for that and we’re happy to work at pace on that project.” New ideas are likely to be divisive among Premier League shareholders, with parachute payments forming a safety net for clubs committed to big spending in the top flight. Several Premier League executives have spoken out about the Crouch review, with the vice-chairman of West Ham, Karren Brady, vocally defending the parachute payment system. Arguing that clubs would go bankrupt without the money, she wrote in the Sun that Tracey Crouch had “fallen into a do-gooder trap” by proposing reform. “Maybe Tracey and [EFL chair Rick] Parry confuse competition with fairness,” she wrote. Brady has been joined by Aston Villa’s CEO, Christian Purslow, and Crystal Palace’s chairman, Steve Parish, in speaking out against the Crouch review, part of an upwardly mobile group of clubs who hold an increasing sway in the league since the failed European Super League plot among the ‘big six’ clubs. On Monday Parish warned against the implementation of an independent regulator for football, the key recommendation of the Crouch review. Debating the point with Gary Neville on Twitter, Parish said: “Regulators are there so that governments can control markets or companies within a framework they set and can alter. Regulators are instruments of government and they are independant [sic] only up to enforcing the current remit which can be changed at any time by a new act of parliament. So Football will be – under this plan controlled by government.”Angela Merkel has left Germans wondering how well they really know the chancellor who has governed them for 16 years, after picking a song by the punk rocker Nina Hagen as the soundtrack for her military leaving ceremony. Merkel, whose Social Democrat successor, Olaf Scholz, is expected to be sworn in as chancellor next week, will be given a customary military farewell in the courtyard outside the defence ministry on Thursday evening. The Großer Zapfenstreich ceremony will be more low-key than usual because of coronavirus restrictions, with only 200 guests in attendance. Like her predecessors, Merkel has been allowed to request three songs to be performed by a marching band during the military tattoo. But whereas Gerhard Schröder and Helmut Kohl picked conventionally bombastic musical fare for the occasion – Frank Sinatra’s My Way and Ludwig van Beethoven’s Ode to Joy, among others – some of Merkel’s picks hint at uncharted hinterland. Großer Gott, wir loben Dich (Holy God, we praise thy name) is a popular Christian hymn from the 18th century, a nod to her upbringing as the daughter of a Protestant pastor and the religious identity of her party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). Her second choice, Hildegard Knef’s Für mich soll’s rote Rosen regnen (It should rain red roses for me), a wistful song about teenage ambition and juvenile arrogance, already suggests an ironic twinkle in the eye, however. “I was suppose to conform, make do,” the lyrics go. “Oh, I can’t conform, I can’t make do, I always want to win too.” But the pick that had commentators searching for subtext and hidden messages is Nina Hagen’s Du hast den Farbfilm vergessen (You forgot the colour film). First recorded in 1974 in a conventional schlager style, the song was a hit in the East German pop charts before Hagen emigrated to the other side of the iron curtain, where she immersed herself in London subcultures and became West Germany’s pre-eminent punk figure of the 1980s. But even to embrace her East German identity is a move uncharacteristic of the Merkel her country has known during most of her 16 years in power, when she rarely brought her eastern upbringing to the fore. The song, whose lyrics were written by Kurt Demmler, is an angry lament that admonishes Hagen’s boyfriend Michael for having only taken a black and white film on their holiday to Hiddensee island. As a result, she wails, “no one will believe how beautiful it was here”. Though not censored by the state, the song was understood by its admirers at the time as a covert criticism of the socialist republic and its grey and drab everyday, where colour films were a rare commodity. Some commentators have speculated whether the outgoing chancellor may have seen a more modern meaning in Hagen’s song: a howl of frustration with men neglecting to do their job properly could also be designed as a parting shot from Merkel to her male colleagues.An outpouring of emotion at FC Köln is always taken with a pinch of salt by the rest of German football. It’s boom or bust, on top of the world or on hands and knees on the floor. This was the former, with local boy and goalscorer Mark Uth telling Sky at full time he’d be lobbying Steffen Baumgart for “two days off and a beer,” a request that was swiftly validated. “If he’s asking for it,” said Baumgart, “he’ll definitely get it.” Yet even in the glow of derby day victory over Borussia Mönchengladbach this felt like something a little different. Seeing the coach be so accommodating wasn’t the greatest surprise. Normally stoic on the touchline in his trademark flat cap – even when top scorer Anthony Modeste whips it from his head and attempts to instigate a samba with him – Baumgart had willingly approached the Südkurve and (literally) tipped his hat to the supporters. The occasion called for it and since arriving in the Cathedral City, Baumgart has very rarely misjudged the temperature. After an afternoon in which his Köln team showed exactly how well they have absorbed their coach’s credo, there was more than the result to celebrate, even if that is well worth making the most of. In the recent past of this fixture Effzeh wins have been rarities and mischievously snatched from under the noses of their betters – February’s victory at Borussia-Park was a smash-and-grab and the last game they won for two and a half months, while the previous derby win almost three years before had been pilfered by a Simon Terodde winner deep into stoppage time. Yes, this was very different. There was the energy, snap and enterprise – not just sticking together and hanging on – that’s been there for the majority of the season and, if the football gods had been slightly kinder might have yielded a few more points than the above-par total that Köln already have. They had their setbacks, such as no concrete reward for their early excellent play and the loss of inspirational captain Jonas Hector to injury early in the second half. Even after taking the lead via Dejan Ljubicic – and what an emphatic first goal for the club it was – Baumgart’s team flirted with disappointment. When the in-form Jonas Hoffmann struck a stylish equaliser with 16 minutes left – Gladbach had hit the woodwork twice by this point – there looked like being only one winner. Yet Effzeh dug deep and found a response. When Uth picked up a surprisingly wayward pass from Florian Neuhaus just outside the Gladbach area, he needed no second bidding to drill in a shot that smacked the inside of the post on its way in, giving Yann Sommer no chance. The substitutes behind the goal, equally, required no invitation to pile on to the pitch and mob their man. It was hard for anyone not of a Gladbach persuasion not to feel good for Uth. Here on loan in 2020, he had been a rare beacon of hope in a freefalling team and would have loved to stay and help Köln recover, but there weren’t the funds to prise him permanently from Schalke. So he returned to a club that didn’t want him to be tarred with the brush of an inevitable relegation at the imploding Königsblauen. That did at least pave the way, eventually, for an affordable return to Cologne. Uth’s impact had Baumgart’s touch on it, though, with both the former and Sebastian Andersson going on as substitutes to score, along with Ondrej Duda, in Effzeh’s closing-stage flurry which earned them a 4-1 win and left the visitors in a spin – everything is coming off for the boss right now. With debutant goalkeeper Marvin Schwäbe stepping up and lending a big hand, it is no wonder the locals are eating out of Baumgart’s hand. Uth, naturally, had a final word for those supporters. “When the Südtribüne is dancing, laughing, singing, drinking, there’s no better feeling for us as players. We’re unbeaten at home because we are a force together with the fans.” This time, under Baumgart’s steady hand, they may even continue to be so. Talking points • Borussia Dortmund enjoyed a sliver of light after a miserable European week in which they were eliminated from the Champions League at Sporting though having been pleased to see Wolfsburg on the horizon, it must have seemed like a genuinely terrible few days was in store when they went a goal down in the second minute to opponents that never beat them and a striker, Wout Weghorst, who never scores against them. No matter – Dortmund reacted strongly with Emre Can and Donyell Malen goals before Erling Haaland made a quicker-than-expected return as substitute to clinch the win. His return is a huge boost ahead of next Saturday’s Klassiker with Bayern, whom they trail by just a point. • BVB briefly leapfrogged Bayern at the summit as the champions hosted Arminia Bielefeld in Saturday’s late game but experienced a closer call than expected in retaking Bundesliga leadership, with Leroy Sané’s spectacular winning goal arriving in the last 20 minutes with frustration building. The main topic after the game, however, continued to be the raucous general meeting in which shareholders loudly heckled the board for shutting down dissent against Qatar Airways’ sponsorship of the club. “We will learn from it [the reaction],” said Oliver Kahn, not entirely convincingly. • Leipzig experienced the opposite of Dortmund when, having extracted a much-needed result from a trip to Club Brugge in some style in the Champions League, were brought crashing back down to earth in an empty Red Bull Arena (due to Saxony’s health restrictions) against Leverkusen. With no support, no Jesse Marsch – quarantining – and a much-depleted defence, the home side were led a merry dance orchestrated by Florian Wirtz, with the teen scoring a sublime opener to set Gerardo Seoane’s side on the way to a fully deserved win. • Greuther Fürth took the lead at home for the first time this season in what turned out to be a nine-goal thriller with Hoffenheim. Unfortunately they only scored three of them, and Ilhas Bebou’s hat-trick leaves the Kleeblätter with just a single point going into December. To rub salt into the wounds their former long-serving left-back, and now Germany international, David Raum chipped in a pair of assists for the visitors having received a great reception before kick-off. • The cruellest blow for Hertha, with Michael Gregoritsch heading a 97th-minute equaliser for Augsburg at Olympiastadion, proved a decisive one. On Monday morning they fired Pal Dardai – and less predictably announced Tayfun Korkut as his replacement at the same time, a coach with a (let’s be nice) mixed Bundesliga record who hasn’t coached anyone in over three years, and he is tasked with steering the Berliners away from a precarious position just a point above the drop zone. • After becoming the last side to be beaten in this season’s Bundesliga, Freiburg have now lost three in a row, going down 2-1 at Bochum. They had played well and led but ultimately became the latest team undone by Milos Pantovic, who scored from way, way out for the second straight home game for the improving hosts.Name: The perfect job. Status: Perfect. Appearance: Mythological. I don’t need to read this, because I already like my job. Yes, but is it perfect? Well, no, nothing is perfect. That’s where you’re wrong. A study commissioned by Raja Workplace, which supplies industrial and business equipment, has revealed the exact credentials that make a job perfect. Would you like me to run through them? Yes please. OK, the perfect job has a 26-hour week. That’s a four-day work week of six-and-a-half hour days, excluding breaks. Wouldn’t that be incredible? You’d finally be able to achieve something like a work-life balance. Great! What else? Apparently the perfect job has a £44,000 salary. That’s almost £13,000 higher than the UK national average. Count me in! Workers with the perfect job also have free cups of tea and a comfy chair. Wouldn’t that be nice? A lovely stream of endless tea is a sign that your employer values you. This does sound lovely. The perfect job is also situated 17 minutes from your house. No thanks. I’ve got used to working from home now. No, you don’t understand. You have to work in an office that’s 17 minutes from your house. You have to. Oh! Here’s something else: the perfect job has an office with a lovely view. Now that I work from home, I get to look out over a park. And I don’t have to spend money commuting. What’s wrong with you, you dummy? Come to the office. Come on! It’s lovely here. What if we gave you your birthday off? People also love that, according to the survey. I’m not a child. We all talk about you behind your back, you know. What? Boris Johnson was right. We all gossip about anyone who isn’t in the office all the time. Yuck. It’s just banter. Workers love banter. In fact, they’ve said that their ideal boss is someone they can go for a pint with. That sounds like a dangerous erosion of professional boundaries. Come on. Come out for a pint with us. We’re a lot of fun! Actually, now I think of it, I don’t really like my job. Covid has made millions of people reassess their professional lives, and I think I should join them. I quit! Have a pint with us, anyway. You’re sure this isn’t a trap to get me back into the office? Sure. Come on, it’s just one drink. OK. Wait, is that a net in your hands? Yes! We’ve got you now! Get to the office and work! Work until you drop! Do say: “The perfect job has a 26-hour week.” Don’t say: “Hooray! This means I have two perfect jobs.”African music perhaps has no greater ambassador than Afrobeats superstar Wizkid. The most-streamed Nigerian musician in the world sold out the O2 arena in just 12 minutes: when he walks on stage, his backdrop visual of candle flames pales in comparison to the constellation of phone torches that welcome him to London. “Joro!” he sings – a contraction of the Yoruba term “joromi”, meaning “come, let’s enjoy”. Taking every opportunity to gyrate his hips and wave his arms, you get the sense that if Wizkid’s first love is music, his second is dancing. His stage presence is sexy and provocative, his presence intensified by a distinct lack of fireworks. The core of the set is just Wizkid supported by DJ Tunez. They rattle through his classics in a medley – No Lele, Back to the Matter, Tease Me, Don’t Dull, Pakurumo – that spiritually transforms the arena into a Nigerian hall party: the tempo is unrelentingly rapid, the bouncy rhythms and lyrics setting the entire arena jumping. Tunez introduces it as a throwback set for the “day one fans in the building”, not the “Essence warriors” – a tongue-in-cheek reference to the tension between balancing Wizkid’s early work with the newer tracks that have made him a huge star. That said, they blow through these songs with such speed, they can’t help but feel slightly wasted. A pause comes when Wizkid holds a minute of silence for the late fashion designer Virgil Abloh, news of whose death broke just hours before the performance. (Abloh had previously designed a special Made in Lagos fit for Wizkid from his Off-White brand.) He continues the tribute with Smile and Blessed: these tracks which honour love, affection and the glory of living take on a resonance reminiscent of Nigerian bereavement practices that celebrate life as a framework for processing loss. Wizkid’s O2 headlining set, however, is primarily a victory lap – and one that comes with a strong supporting cast. “London, I came with my friends tonight,” he says, introducing the first of many guests: the city’s own Ella Mai adds stunning vocals to Piece of Me, from his 2020 album Made in Lagos. He affirms Black Britain’s cultural importance to his music when he reveals Skepta, who adds pace and swag to Longtime and Energy. The latter is easily the night’s most enthralling performance, with 20,000 people singing “bad energy stay far away” with gusto. But it’s Nigerian breakout star Tems who steals the night – gloriously strutting on for an enchanting performance of Essence, which has the crowd cooing in delight at the dovetailing of her and Wizkid’s elegant vocals. One final surprise guest leaves an unavoidable stain on the joy that came before. Wizkid hypes up the next act as the first international artist to show him love and celebrates this moment as his “first London performance in 10 years”, then brings on R&amp;B star Chris Brown. There are clear pockets of silence among the portions of the crowd well aware that this 10-year absence was due to Brown’s ban on entering the UK after assaulting his then-girlfriend Rihanna in 2009. (He has faced subsequent allegations of violence against women and others.) Unlike Kanye West’s recent performances with Marilyn Manson (accused of rape and sexual violence, which he denies) and rapper DaBaby (unrepentant after making homophobic remarks), it seems that Wizkid brings Brown on stage out of genuine affection rather than any attempt to shock. Either way, Brown’s appearance on Go Crazy is raspy and lacking. That aberration over, Wizkid restores the night’s triumphant air with a sermon-like performance of Ojuelegba, gracefully singing “they know my story” and swaggering through confetti with imperial spirit. The closing song is accompanied by aerial shots of Lagos that show its markets, yellow buses and sandy beaches. Celebrating his origins and honouring the difficulties of ascending as an African artist, it underscores that while he’s happy to bask in the international acclaim, there’s no place like home. Wizkid: Made in Lagos tour is at O2, London, 29 November, 1 December.Boris Johnson has been urged to introduce far tougher travel restrictions on travellers from abroad by the first ministers of Scotland and Wales, as six new cases of the Omnicron variant emerged in Scotland. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister of Scotland, and Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, also urged Johnson to host an urgent meeting of Cobra, the UK government’s emergency planning committee, to agree a common approach. Sturgeon said she and Drakeford believed there was a clear need to increase quarantine times and precautionary testing for new arrivals to prevent the variant getting a hold in the UK. Speaking at an emergency briefing in Edinburgh, Sturgeon said all travellers from abroad should quarantine for eight days and undergo a PCR test on the eighth day, as well as on day two, as is already required. “The emergence of Omicron poses a potential threat to the UK. It is clear that the strain is already here and that it appears highly transmissible,” Sturgeon and Drakeford told the prime minister in a joint letter. “We need to work collectively – and effectively – as four nations to take all reasonable steps to control the ingress of the virus to the country and then to limit its spread. “We are clear that a four nations approach to issues such as border restrictions is the most effective approach. This requires that a meeting of the Cobra committee be held as soon as possible.” The Welsh and Scottish appeal was rejected by Downing Street. A No 10 spokesperson said imposing tougher testing and quarantine rules would have a “detrimental effect on the travel industry”, and was not justified. Downing Street also ruled out organising a Cobra briefing to address the request, and said the UK government still believed the current measures to combat the Omicron variant were proportionate. Six cases emerged overnight in Scotland, in Lanarkshire and the greater Glasgow area, tripling the number so far detected in the UK. Sturgeon confirmed there was evidence those cases were caught in the community since in a few of those cases, the patients had not been overseas or in contact with a recent traveller overseas. She said so far there were grounds for optimism that the Omicron variant did not lead to more severe symptoms but it was too early to be certain: detailed genomic and epidemiological investigations into its virulence and impacts were under way. So far, no deaths connected to Omicron have been reported, said Scotland’s chief medical officer, Dr Gregor Smith, and there was no evidence linking the Scottish outbreak to the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, which ended two weeks ago. Earlier, Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, said officials would undertake enhanced contact tracing to try to track down the origin of the outbreak, and identify other people the six had been in contact with. The junior UK health minister Edward Argar told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the news was not unexpected. He said: “We’ve been clear since we first knew about this new variant that we would expect to see the number of cases rise, and I think what we’re seeing in Scotland reflects that. That’s in the nature of the virus.” New restrictions are being imposed this week in an attempt to limit the spread of the variant, first identified in South Africa, which scientists fear could be highly transmissible and might evade some vaccine protections. Ten southern African countries have been placed on the travel red list, while England has reimposed mandatory mask use for public transport, shops, and for secondary school pupils in communal areas, to begin from Tuesday. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said masks should be used more generally when people were mixing indoors, arguing that Boris Johnson’s repeated avoidance of wearing a mask had made encouragement and enforcement more difficult. Rayner also repeated Labour’s calls for a resumption of the previous system of people needing a negative Covid test before, rather than two days after, being allowed to travel to the UK. Argar reiterated comments on Sunday by Sajid Javid, the health secretary, that ministers were hopeful that what he called “swift, precautionary steps” would mean no extra measures would be needed to combat the new variant. Asked if the government might tighten up the rules even further in the next three weeks, the period in which the new restrictions are in force, Argar told Sky News: “It’s not something I’m anticipating.” He said he was “looking forward to a Christmas spent with family and friends”.Anna Beddow is another one of our amazing colleagues who found her way into software development in a very unconventional way. She originally studied English Literature at Sheffield University before working at a mobile advertising company where she began collaborating with inhouse developers and took an interest in their work. Anna then went straight to a Makers Academy developer bootcamp and later became a junior developer at a company specialising in a city exploration app. What brought you to the Guardian and how has it been? While browsing Guardian Jobs an advert came up at the Guardian looking for a React developer. I was working specifically with React Native at the time and I was also a lifelong Guardian reader so I thought this might be a perfect fit. The way the job description highlighted the collaborative nature of the role was also a great draw for me. I started last year as a client-side developer, working with front-end technologies to build the interface and its functionality; basically whatever the user sees when they access the website. I am currently working in the liveblogs team, but will be moving on to journalism soon. My manager makes sure I’m properly introduced into the new team and that I have the opportunity to familiarise myself with different colleagues as well as new tech. What are you working on right now and what does a typical day look like for you? At the moment I’m working on building the liveblogs in the new rendering platforms, moving them into Typescript from Scala. Hopefully what that means is it should all look the same to our readers, but run faster and allow us to make edits and improvements to them more quickly and easily. I recently started doing compressed hours which means that I work between 8.30am-6pm Monday to Thursday and take Fridays off. After an initial trial period, I found that it had vastly improved my work life balance. So, When I start my day it’s pretty quiet and I use that time to get some reading and admin done. By about 10am the Guardian starts to come alive and I get to do the usual daily ceremonials like standup with my team before it’s onto tickets (eg. bug fixing or design changes). Luckily for me, I don’t tend to have too many meetings so it’s very much ‘head down’ work for the rest of the day. Of the meetings, I do attend I enjoy the demos the most. We do a lot of demo-ing at the Guardian and it’s always great to see what other teams are working on. It’s also a great opportunity to explain our work technically, as well non-technically, when we’re doing it to a broader audience of non-developers. How has it been working remotely? In terms of feeling welcomed, it’s been great. People were jumping in right off the bat to introduce themselves, as well as to offer help if I needed any. It’s a trait I’ve noticed at the Guardian where everyone is just very keen to help wherever they can. It’s definitely something I’m trying to pay forward now with the new starters that we have. Communication has also remained clear with regular team check-ins throughout the day. There are also loads of different chat channels that cover everything from the main issues of the department to food, cats and people’s favourite playlists. If I ever have a question about anything I can always drop it in the right channel and get an answer almost instantly. However, I am also looking forward to seeing my colleagues in person more often, as well as getting a sense of the office which is always a nice tangible reminder that I work for the Guardian. What have you enjoyed the most since you’ve joined? The emphasis on learning is a really big part of why I enjoy my work here. In the engineering department, we have 10% time where we get a day every fortnight for self improvement and personal development. I’m also part of a few meetings that discuss new technologies such as the client-side infrastructure sessions and front-end sessions. The Guardian also has a great mentorship scheme. My mentor is another, more experienced, developer who offers career guidance, plus we meet regularly when I’m particularly stuck on something or just to explore different aspects of the language that I’m working on and do little challenges together. Again, I hope I can pay that forward soon by becoming a mentor myself when I’m ready. What would encourage someone to apply to the Guardian? I think the Guardian is really trying to create an open, safe and diverse environment for us to work in and I really appreciate that. This ranges from something as broad as being exposed to more diverse colleagues within the department and organisation, to something as small as feeling like you can contribute in a meeting and be heard. Also all these learning opportunities and creative outlets and activities within the department are a really good way to build someone’s confidence and get them noticed and acknowledged without having to be the metaphorical ‘loudest voice in the room’. Development of digital products is central to the Guardian. You could be building the products that showcase our progressive and independent journalism, crafting the tools that journalists use to write their stories, developing the services that allow those stories to be distributed across the globe, or safeguarding our financial future. If you’re interested in joining our product and engineering team, please visit the Guardian News &amp; Media careers page.After losing 4-0 to Chelsea, Juventus’s week only went downhill. Tuesday’s Champions League drubbing was followed up by another loss at home to Atalanta on Saturday. In-between, the club’s offices were raided by police, who seized documents relating to player transfers and financial accounts. A statement from the Turin prosecutor Anna Maria Loreto explained on Friday that these searches were part of a wide-reaching investigation. The present focus, she explained, was to assess whether Juventus, a publicly listed company, had issued false communications to investors and invoices for non-existent transactions. But Loreto noted that further matters were also under scrutiny, including services offered by agents and intermediaries. This weekend’s events were foreshadowed in September by Juventus’s annual financial report, which included a note stating that the Italian market regulator, Consob, had opened an investigation into the club’s revenue from player trading. They and the public prosecutor have both been acting in part on information provided by Covisoc, a commission set up by the Italian Football Federation to monitor teams’ finances. The creative methods deployed by clubs to ensure “plusvalenze” – capital gains – on the balance sheet have been a talking point in Italy’s sporting press for years, with the valuation of players in part-exchange deals often raising eyebrows. When Juventus signed Arthur from Barcelona last summer, they agreed a fee of €72m, but that was offset by Miralem Pjanic moving in the opposite direction for €60m. Only €12m would change hands (excluding performance-related bonuses) but both clubs could record healthy plusvalenze for the players they had sold. That transfer was hardly unique in its structure. Juventus were, however, involved in 42 out of 62 deals highlighted by Covisoc in October as worthy of further scrutiny, covering a three-year window from 2019 to 2021. Intercepted phone calls involving members of the club’s senior management opened further avenues of inquiry for the public prosecutor. Six past and present Juventus directors are reported to be under investigation, including the president, Andrea Agnelli, and Fabio Paratici, now managing director of football at Tottenham. No charges have been issued thus far. A statement released by Juventus on Friday said that they were cooperating fully with prosecutors and Consob, adding that the club “believes to have acted in compliance with the laws and regulations governing the preparation of financial reports, in accordance with accounting principles and in line with the international practice in the football industry and market conditions.” If anyone at Juventus hoped that a football match might provide a welcome distraction from such matters, then they would be disappointed. Juventus had not lost at home to Atalanta since 1989, but they were sunk on Saturday by a well-taken goal from Duván Zapata. In some senses you could say that they had shown improvement on Tuesday’s mauling by Chelsea. To analyse the game in bland terms, we can observe that they had seven shots on target to their opponents’ one, had a higher xG and held a greater share of possession. Going deeper, you might reflect that Massimiliano Allegri’s initial tactic of inviting Atalanta forward down the flanks and exploiting the spaces behind their wing-backs was at times quite successful. Federico Chiesa ought to have scored when Weston McKennie released him with a cross-field ball during the first-half. The American himself could have done better when Leonardo Bonucci played him through in the second. And, of course, Paulo Dybala did hit the woodwork. Again. The Argentinian has struck the frame as many times as he has the net in this campaign. Juventus have played worse against Atalanta in the last 32 years and won. But isn’t that just the point? The Old Lady always used to find a way even on her off-days, digging an injury-time goal out of nowhere and slapping a #finoallafine (until the end) hashtag on it to make us believe that such outcomes were inevitable. Allegri has always been an arch-pragmatist, winning five league titles and going to two Champions League finals during his previous stint at the club without ever imposing a philosophy or ideal as to how the game should be played. But he was, undeniably, creative, adapting his formation year on year to fit a constantly-changing cast of players. Since returning this summer, he appears at a loss, unable to make sense of a chaotically assembled squad. Observing the midfield muddle of mismatched parts – from Arthur to the former free-agent “bargains” Adrien Rabiot and Aaron Ramsey – it is tempting to ask whether there ought not to have been a little bit more thought given to team-building over those blessed plusvalenze. Nobody should be surprised that Cristiano Ronaldo’s departure left a void – he scored 81 times in three league seasons. The argument that he was holding the club back was not rooted in short-term results but a belief that a team who had got no closer to winning the Champions League with him needed at some point to give up on the hope of a quick fix and get back to coherent long-term planning. Even so, it is troubling for Juventus that not one of the players who were supposedly being overshadowed by him has been able to shine now in his absence. Dybala’s three goals make him joint-top scorer alongside Leonardo Bonucci, a centre-back. Chiesa, a swaggering presence for Italy at the Euros, has scored once and has now picked up an injury that will keep him out till after Christmas. Allegri no longer even seems to know what to do with Álvaro Morata, who had played some of the best football of his career during their previous stint together in Turin. His loss of possession in the build-up to Zapata’s strike felt emblematic, a striker whose greatest asset has always been his forward running and ability to stretch the pitch caught on the halfway line with his back to goal. Defeat opened up a seven-point gap from Juventus to Atalanta in fourth. The Bianconeri are six points worse off than they were at the corresponding point last season. Their opponents have improved by three despite selling their best centre-back, Cristian Romero, in the summer and replacing him with a Juventus reserve, Merih Demiral, on loan. “There’s a formidable plusvalenza which inflates the value of footballers in a lawful way,” wrote Luigi Garlando in Sunday’s Gazzetta Sportiva. “It’s called playing football.”Scientific advisers are bracing themselves for hundreds of UK cases of the Omicron Covid variant to be confirmed in the next week or so, the Guardian has learned. Some of them may predate the earliest cases of Omicron found in South Africa last week but could still be linked to travellers returning from the country, it is understood. Evidence of community transmission also emerged on Monday. Omicron, which is believed to be more transmissible than dominant Covid-19 variants and has the potential to evade vaccines, was first reported to the World Health Organization from South Africa on 24 November. The UK is one of the world’s busiest air transport hubs and, like South Africa, has a large genomics sector to determine the variants involved in infections – increasing the probability both of importing and detecting cases. On Saturday, two UK cases were announced, rising to three on Sunday – all in people linked to travel to southern Africa. On Monday morning, six new cases involving the Omicron variant had been identified in Scotland and this time some had no travel history. The finding has raised concerns Omicron may already be circulating in the community in the UK. Scientists had previously stressed that while flight bans could delay the importation of Omicron, the variant would nonetheless arrive. It was hoped such measures would buy time and let more people get their booster jabs. Now the Guardian understands that scientific advisers are bracing themselves for the possibility of several hundred cases of the Omicron variant being detected within days. Other scientists said the spread was difficult to estimate. Prof Michael Tildesley, an expert in the mathematical modelling of infectious disease at the University of Warwick and a member of the modelling group Spi-M that advises the government, said: “It is worth remembering, though, that there is a lag between individuals being infected and cases being reported, so at the point that cases are detected, it is likely that there are more infections in the community.” Tildesley added that at this point contact tracing could help to detect how many more cases there might be in the population. “But there is still uncertainty regarding how transmissible this new variant is, how effective the vaccines might be and how severe infection is with Omicron.” Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh who also contributes to Spi-M, said the discovery of two clusters of cases in Scotland – in Lanarkshire and Greater Glasgow – with no obvious links to each other or to travel, suggested at least two separate instances of importation. “For the moment, we do have to assume there is further community circulations,” he said, adding it would not be surprising to find tens of cases at the moment. “Of course [if] it does spread rapidly, as initial reports from [South Africa] suggest it can, then it wouldn’t take long for it to go into the hundreds,” said Kao, adding that if the doubling time for cases was similar to the Delta variant, then 25 cases of Omicron now could mean 100 cases in 10 days’ time. “At that point, it would be more a matter of slowing, rather than eradicating Omicron in Scotland. Even then, it would probably only be temporary.” But Kao said travel restrictions might still bring benefits, potentially reducing the number of outbreaks and, at least for now, helping stamp them out. “However that is not at all guaranteed, and so, as always, more efforts to reduce spread now, may have big epidemiological benefits later,” he said. “Any measures we put in now may of course, prove unwarranted if in fact, the Omicron variant proves to be sufficiently benign that overall levels of severe infection and hospitalisation stay manageable – but we probably won’t know for several weeks.” Some experts have called for robust action, including advice to work from home. Stephen Reicher, a member of the behavioural science advisory group Spi-B, and a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, said: “With Omicron, even if it turns out to be less serious than we feared, we need to put basic protections in place.”New research into the fashion industry’s complex global supply chains shows that a number of large fashion brands are at risk of contributing to deforestation in the Amazon rainforest, based on their connections to tanneries and other companies involved in the production of leather and leather goods. The report, released Monday, analyzed nearly 500,000 rows of customs data and found that brands such as Coach, LVMH, Prada, H&amp;M, Zara, Adidas, Nike, New Balance, Teva, UGG and Fendi have multiple connections to an industry that props up Amazon deforestation. More than 50 brands have multiple supply-chain links to the largest Brazilian leather exporter, JBS, which is known to engage in Amazon deforestation. JBS recently made a commitment to achieve zero deforestation across its global supply chain by 2035, something environmental groups have called insufficient. The study was conducted by Stand.earth, a supply chain research firm. The findings are surprising, in part because a number of the brands surveyed have recently announced policies to untangle themselves from actors along the supply chain that contribute to deforestation. “With a third of companies surveyed having some kind of policy in place, [you’d expect] that would have an impact on deforestation,” said Greg Higgs, one of the researchers involved in the report. “The rate of deforestation is increasing, so the policies have no material effect.” The researchers hope to one day expand to other industries that rely heavily on leather, like the automotive sector. In 2019 and 2020, Brazil faced criticism from world leaders for not doing more to protect the forest from raging wildfires. Deforestation in the critical ecosystem continues at an alarming rate. Research has shown that the cattle industry is the single largest driver of deforestation of the Amazon rainforest and the fashion industry is animportant cog in the leather exportation machine. In fact, projections show that in order to keep supplying consumers with wallets, handbags and shoes, the fashion industry must slaughter 430m cows annually by 2025. Their analysis does not prove a direct link between each fashion brand and Amazon deforestation; instead, researchers found connections that increase the probability of any individual garment coming from cattle ranching in the Amazon, an industry described as the No 1 culprit of deforestation in the area. The report identified fashion brands that participate in the Leather Working Group or other voluntary commitments, but highlight that the Leather Working Group evaluates tanneries only on their ability to trace leather back to slaughterhouses, not back to farms. “The goal is to develop a clear plan [for the fashion industry] to close the loopholes,” said Jungwon Kim, vice-president of strategy of Slow Factory, the climate justice non-profit that collaborated on the report. Of the 84 companies analyzed by the report, 23 had explicit policies on deforestation. The researchers believe those 23 companies are “likely” violating their own policies, based on their findings. The fashion house LVMH, for example, was found to have a high risk of connections to Amazon deforestation – despite the fact that earlier this year the brand pledged to protect the vulnerable region with Unesco. Sônia Guajajara, executive coordinator of the Brazilian Indigenous Peoples’ Alliance (APIB), said brands have “the moral responsibility, the influence and the economic resources” to stop working with suppliers contributing to deforestation in the Amazon today, “not in 10 years, not in 2025”. The effect of recent wildfires in the Amazon has had devastating consequences for Indigenous groups, who say president Jair Bolsonaro forcibly removed Indigenous peoples to make way for agriculture, mining and other development activities. Angeline Robertson, an investigative researcher who worked on the study, told the Guardian she hopes the fashion industry will take cues from their analysis and “work in their own self-interest”. “In this time of climate emergency, if the fashion industry wants to be relevant, this is the opportunity,” she said. Céline Semaan, chief executive and co-founder of Slow Factory, said brands should not use this as an opportunity to contribute to deforestation elsewhere, such as Guatemala or Mexico, but invest in and explore alternatives that are not extractive. With lab-grown alternatives on the rise, a future where your favorite bag or sneakers don’t come at the expense of the Amazon rainforest is possible. “At the end of the day, we have to find other solutions and other alternative leathers that are not animal-based and that are not plastic-based,” said Semaan. “With the resources that fashion companies have, there’s really no excuse.”MPs should face a complete ban on working as paid consultants and ministers should be more open about any potential conflicts of interest, parliament’s internal standards watchdog has proposed among a series of new anti-sleaze rules. Other recommendations in the report from the Commons standards committee include an obligation for MPs to have a written contract for any outside work, available for inspection if needed, and which would spell out that they cannot lobby on behalf of the employer. Another idea, which the committee said would need cross-party support to implement, would be to limit how much time MPs can spend on outside jobs or other interests, and how much they can earn from them. It acknowledged, however, that it was difficult to see how this might work in practice. The report also suggests updates to the MPs’ code of conduct to include a ban on members subjecting someone else to “unreasonable and excessive personal attack”, whether in the Commons or by any other means, including social media. The proposals, agreed unanimously by the cross-party group of MPs and seven co-opted lay members on the committee, are now open to consultation, with the hope that a final version will be put to a Commons vote by Easter. The committee had been preparing its report before the recent controversy about parliamentary standards as the government tried to protect Owen Paterson. The independent parliamentary commissioner for standards found that Paterson, then a Tory backbencher who has since resigned, had repeatedly broken lobbying rules, a decision endorsed by the standards committee. In an effort to save Paterson from punishment, Boris Johnson secured a Commons vote to overturn the verdict and replace the standards committee with a new bodywith a built-in Conservative majority. The plan was abandoned a day later after an outcry. Paterson’s supporters alleged he had not had a chance for a full appeal. This was not the case, but the committee’s report recommends a senior judicial figure be brought in to examine the current disciplinary system to ensure it is fair. The prime minister has already suggested both a ban on MPs working as consultants and measures to prevent them from neglecting constituents because of outside work, but a Guardian analysis suggested the proposal would affect fewer than 10 MPs. Labour has proposed notably tougher rules, including a ban on almost all second jobs for MPs, and a new, independent watchdog for potential conflicts of interest. The committee’s report says a consultancy ban should cover “parliamentary advice, consultancy or strategy services”. It also suggests contracts for other second jobs should include a clause preventing such activity, and should be shown to the standards commissioner if needed during an investigation. The standards committee would also set out in detail which types of work would be barred, the hope being that enforced contracts would pre-empt many conflicts of interest. Under a proposed “safe harbour” provision designed to encourage MPs to seek advice, they would not be found to have breached rules if they had acted in accordance with official advice. The committee also suggests amending rules whereby ministers can declare gifts and hospitality in a ministerial register of interests, which is separate to the MPs’ register, is updated much less often and is harder to search. All such gifts should go in the MPs’ register, the report says. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who chairs the standards committee, said: “These aren’t the final proposals we’re putting to the house. This report is the committee’s informed view on what changes we need to tighten up the rules and crack down on conflicts of interests following a detailed evidence-led inquiry. “We will consult and hear wider views on what we’ve published today before putting a final report to the house for a decision in the new year. If approved, these robust proposals will empower the standards system in parliament to better hold MPs who break the rules to account.”The government has announced travel measures to tackle the new Omicron coronavirus variant. From 4am on November 30, anyone who enters the UK must take a PCR test by the end of the second day after arrival and self-isolate until they have received a negative result. Prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the measures at a press conference at the weekend, just weeks after international travel rules were eased to allow cheaper lateral flow tests. There have also been changes to the red list, with 10 countries now included, which means arrivals from South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia will have to quarantine for 10 days. These are the key questions and answers for travellers: What should you do if you arrive in England after 4am on 30 November? (See separate section for red list country arrivals) If you are fully vaccinated you must: complete a passenger locator form – to be completed in the 48 hours before you arrive in England self-isolate take a PCR test before the end of day 2 after you arrive (lateral flow tests will not be accepted). You cannot use an NHS test for this. You must use a private test provider. It is worth noting that the PCR tests don’t need to be taken on the second day after your return from overseas – they can be taken at the airport immediately after you land. The period of self-isolation ends if your PCR test result is negative. What are the rules if you’re not fully vaccinated? If unvaccinated, you will also need to take a pre-departure test up to 72 hours before travelling home. Furthermore, you must still take a PCR test for your day two test, and another on day eight, and self-isolate for 10 days. How do I get a PCR test for my ‘day two’? There is a government list of approved providers; prices for these tests range from £20 to £399. Book your test in advance while on your trip to avoid a longer quarantine period and remember to put your confirmation code when the test is booked on your Passenger Locator Form in order to travel back to the UK. What happens once you have taken your test? Arrivals to the UK must self-isolate until they receive the result of their day two PCR test. If negative, fully vaccinated travellers can end their self-isolation. If positive, they must isolate for 10 days and register their result with the NHS. Red list countries Different rules apply if you have been in a red list country in the 10 days before you arrive in England. Regardless of your vaccination status, if you’re returning to the UK from a red list country, you will need to: Take a Covid-19 test (antigen test, LAMP test or PCR test) in the three days before you return. If your test result is positive, you must not travel. You must follow local rules and guidance for positive coronavirus cases. Complete a Passenger Locator Form in the 48 hours before you return. Pre-book a mandatory 11-night quarantine hotel package, which will include two PCR tests, taken on day two and day eight, and add the details to your Passenger Locator Form. Travelling with children For those travelling with children, the testing requirements are: In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, children aged four and under do not need to take any tests on their return to the UK. Children aged 5-17 only need to take a day two test (lateral flow or PCR). In Scotland: children aged 10 and under do not need to take any tests on their return. Children aged 11-17 only need to take a day two test (lateral flow or PCR). Have any other countries imposed new rules? From Saturday night, Switzerland mandated 10 days of quarantine for all new arrivals, in effect ruining skiing holidays in the Swiss Alps until further notice. Travel firms are also wrestling with Spain’s ban on non-vaccinated arrivals that will affect British holidaymakers from Wednesday 1 December. This will apply until at least 31 December, and is a change from the previous requirement that allowed unvaccinated travellers to show proof of a negative Covid test result. Israel was also expected to announce a ban on foreign visitors for a fortnight, which could come into effect from Monday. Portugal has reimposed restrictions, meaning that anyone who enters the country must show a negative test certificate on arrival. This will come into effect on December 1.From questions over mandates to concerns over global distribution, “vaccine” has been the clear word of the year, according to dictionary publisher Merriam-Webster. The choice of word of 2021 was a seemingly obvious one for the US publisher, which said searches for “vaccine” on its website increased by 601% compared with last year, amid a broad rollout of vaccinations for Covid-19. The change from the pre-pandemic days of 2019 is even more stark, said the dictionary maker, with searches for the word soaring by 1,048%. Debate about the distribution of vaccines, mandates for their use and their efficacy have driven the increase, the company said. “This was a word that was extremely high in our data every single day in 2021,” said Peter Sokolowski, Merriam-Webster’s editor-at-large, to the Associated Press. “It really represents two different stories. One is the science story, which is this remarkable speed with which the vaccines were developed. But there’s also the debates regarding policy, politics and political affiliation. It’s one word that carries these two huge stories.” The new word of the year, released as the world reacts to the discovery of the Omicron variant in southern Africa, follows something of a theme: Merriam-Webster’s choice for 2020 was, unsurprisingly, “pandemic”. Earlier this month, lexicographers at the Oxford English Dictionary chose “vax” as their word of the year, due to an explosion in the use of related terms such as “vaxxed” and “anti-vaxxer”. The word “vax” was first recorded in English in 1799, with “vaccinate” and “vaccination” first appearing a year later. All of these words find their root in the Latin word “vacca”, which means cow. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, this is because the English scientist Edward Jenner discovered that cowpox, a mild infection that occurs in cows, can help protect people from smallpox.Fourteen months after Bryony Frost lodged a formal complaint with the British Horseracing Authority that she had been bullied and harassed by her fellow rider, Robbie Dunne, the regulator’s independent disciplinary panel will finally convene on Tuesday in London to consider the evidence against him. It is a case with no obvious precedent, which sets one member of the weighing room’s apparently tight-knit community against another. It has also been plagued by delays and leaks, including a release of the 120‑page report by BHA investigators into Frost’s claims to the Sunday Times, which prompted the authority to refer itself to the information commissioner. The Professional Jockeys’ Association even suggested last month that the whole case should be abandoned, “however unsatisfactory that is”. That was never going to happen, but an uneasy sense of a process that might lurch out of control at any moment has surrounded the case for many months. It will still hang in the air throughout the hearing. If you switch on a bright light in a room for the first time in years, you can never be entirely sure what you might find in the shadows. Dunne, who denied the allegations in the report, is the focus of Frost’s complaint, but the ultimate scope of this week’s case goes far beyond what did or did not happen on three days at the races last summer. The weighing room’s cherished policy of self-regulation and the authority’s competence as racing’s regulator will also face the fiercest of scrutiny. With so much at stake, it is little surprise the three-strong panel hearing the case will be chaired by Brian Barker QC, a former recorder of London and appeal court judge, and also the chair of the sport’s judicial panel. He will be assisted by HH James O’Mahony, also a former judge, and Alison Royston, who has ridden since childhood and is a former head of administration for the Premier League. It seems fair to assume they will approach the evidence and the case like any other, regardless of extensive coverage in the build-up that has included comments by current and former jockeys to support of the long-established but unwritten rule that what happens in the weighing room stays in the weighing room. But we already know from the leaks to the Sunday Times that the BHA’s investigators sensed a definite reluctance by other riders – ie, potential witnesses – to speak fully about what occurred between Frost and Dunne. The BHA already faces criticism for the length of time it has taken to get the case to a hearing, as well as questions about the embarrassing leaks and the sudden departure of Chris Watts, its head of integrity assurance and the leader of the investigation into Frost’s complaint, a few months ago. The overarching question will be whether racing’s rules and procedures for protecting its participants from bullying and harassment in the workplace are fit for purpose. The simple fact that a complaint by a rider has made it this far could be viewed as a sign the BHA takes its responsibilities seriously. But whether this particular case is upheld or rejected by its independent disciplinary panel, the evidence that will be presented over the course of the hearing may well suggest there is still much more to be done.Russia’s state gas company has reported record earnings for the third quarter of the year after profiting from a global gas crisis that has ignited historic energy market highs across Europe. Gazprom, the world’s largest gas producer, said it expected even higher profits for the final months of the year as its customers in Europe brace for a winter energy crisis and record high costs. Its better-than-expected financial results included a net income of 581.8bn rubles (£5.86bn) from July to September compared with a net loss a year ago after the average gas price it earned from buyers in Europe increased to $313.40 per 1,000 cubic metres from $117.2 in 2020. Famil Sadygov, Gazprom’s deputy chairman of the management committee, said: “Given the current dynamics, we are expecting even more impressive results in the fourth quarter.” The Kremlin-backed company has come under fierce criticism in recent months for failing to ramp up gas exports to Europe, despite record high market prices across the continent on the back of a global supply crunch. Europe’s largest gas supplier has exported about one-fifth less gas than in previous years, leading critics to suggest that the company may be trying to manipulate the market by keeping prices high or gain political leverage in its plan to build Nord Stream 2, a controversial gas pipeline project to Germany. The company has said that it has met all its contractural obligations to customers in Europe. The record high gas prices have already forced the shutdown of some factories to avoid the financial toll, and households and businesses are expected to face record high bills and even blackouts if winter temperatures are colder than expected. Meanwhile, rising oil prices have inflated pump prices for motorists and may contribute to further inflation across the economy. Global Witness, a human rights campaign group, has claimed that the world’s biggest oil and gas companies have enjoyed a 24% profit increase compared with pre-pandemic levels, to a total of $65bn, as a result of the energy crisis, which could force thousands of citizens into poverty. Jonathan Gant, a senior campaigner at Global Witness, said households have already found it hard to pay bills and are being “forced to make the stark choice between heating and eating”. He said: “Meanwhile, the largest fossil fuel companies that are driving the climate crisis are lining their pockets. All too often, people have little say over what energy they use to warm their homes and cook their meals, compounding the unfairness in the rise in gas prices.”In the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues For the last Harry Potter anniversary I can remember, the setter known locally as Brendan created the charming symmetry of, on the same day, a Potter-themed cryptic in the Times and a Potter-themed American-style puzzle in the New York paper of the same name, and described the process at the NYT’s Wordplay blog. No such luck for this anniversary, though we do have a typically smart royal-themed prize puzzle from Brendan for which the annotated solution is now available, and the wizard features in this clue from Imogen … 15d See the end of Harry Potter prepared for printing plate (10) [definition: printing plate] [wordplay: anagram (“prepared”) of SEE, the last letter (“end”) of HARRY &amp; POTTER] [anagram of SEEYPOTTER] … for STEREOTYPE. In memoriam Farewell to cryptic setter and sometime composer Stephen Sondheim. I’m currently enjoying the cryptic puzzles he set for New York magazine in the late 1960s and hope to report back presently on Sondheim’s puzzles and puzzles about Sondheim. Paper-free On the subject of American-style puzzles, I urge you to go to the Washington Post immediately and click on The Haunted House, as the link is about to expire. This part of the post is where we share recommendations of puzzles to be found outside the usual places; while it’s called “paper-free”, the best thing to do this time is to press “Print” on the first puzzle, which will generate a two-page pdf with a multipart puzzle that is as much fun as I’ve had this year. In fact, I started the year by recommending another Sunday puzzle by the same constructor, Evan Birnholz, and it’s worth noting that the paper’s daily mini (and weekly meta) seems to have survived its three-month trial. Latter patter There’s some numeric jiggery-pokery going on in Crucible’s latest puzzle, among such pleasing clues … 11a A little nipper trapped between poles (7) [definition: a little] [wordplay: biting creature (“nipper”) inside (“trapped between”) abbrevs for north and south (“poles”)] [MIDGE inside SN] … as this one for SMIDGEN. Do you, like me, enjoy recipes that use terms such as SMIDGEN (or SMIDGEON, as Wodehouse spelled it), allowing the grownup cook to use his or her skill and judgment? Do you, like me, feel a little sad when you see a claim that a word “means” something simply because some person or corporation has tried to define it in some way? If either answer is a yes, I recommend you avoid American recipe sites, as there is a danger that they will sooner or later purport to inform you that when a recipe calls for a SMIDGEN, you need to invest in a special spoon that contains 1⁄32 of a teaspoon. The subject of our next challenge can be found in the same nested set. Apparently measuring exactly two smidgens, or a quarter of a tad: reader, how would you clue PINCH? Cluing competition Many thanks for your clues for INCH. What a word, allowing for many delightful definitions, including “Newlaplandes”, “Elected gutless cartoonish creep” and Steveran’s sly “Small part of Scotland Yard division”, and familiar enough that we could handle Tony Collman’s “Section of the FT”? The audacity award was hotly contested, and goes to Combinatorialist for the egg-headed “Twin primes advance incrementally”. The runners-up are HairApparent’s terse “Wind dropping with distance” and Joey_Joe_Joe’s apposite “Amount of rain chronicled using this measure”; the winner is Catarella’s grimly topical “Leaders of industrialised nations hope to restrict carbon – scarcely progress”. Kludos to Catarella. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds, and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To is from one of us, cluing competition stalwart Welly Wearer. Puzzling elsewhere We’ve mentioned Zooms and Twitches and even books but I’m almost certain we haven’t yet had a “live action/tabletop puzzle game, identifying locations through clues, revealing your route as you solve them”, so let’s fix that: Clue of the fortnight By my count we have now had two puzzles from Bobcat, both in the Financial Times. The more recent one has clues like this one … 1d I’m afraid Newton’s in trouble for submission (8) [definition: submission] [wordplay: expression meaning “I’m afraid” &amp; abbrev. for scientific unit Newton, both contained by (“in”) synonym for “trouble”] [EEK &amp; N, both inside MESS] … for MEEKNESS, so I look forward to more of this ilk. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.Faux ruffled hair. Solemn tone. Boris Johnson’s emergency address this weekend about the new Omicron variant felt like a return to the old days of the pandemic. The measures announced, though, were hardly significant: for example, introducing mandatory masks in shops and on public transport only brings England in line with what the other home nations have long been doing, and hospitality venues such as pubs and restaurants aren’t included in the new rules. This is far removed from the long discussed “plan B” – including working from home guidance and Covid passports – that some leading medics have been calling on ministers to implement for more than a month, but that is being resisted by Tory backbenchers. Perhaps most worryingly, protections for those most at risk from the virus, such as older and disabled people, were not even mentioned. There is no government advice as yet on how clinically vulnerable people are meant to live throughout the winter. Previously, 3.7 million clinically vulnerable people in England were asked to shield in their homes, and were given some government support to do so. Now they are effectively on their own, left to navigate having to go into the office, or meet friends at Christmas in a pub with no masking rules. Even before the discovery of the new variant, people with underlying health conditions were being widely ignored, despite case numbers remaining high. Months after the official shielding programme ended, Office for National Statistics data from October showed almost one in four clinically extremely vulnerable (CEV) people were still shielding, while 68% were leaving the house but taking extra precautions. Many CEV people tell me they’re bracing against the cold and only socialising outdoors, while others aren’t seeing loved ones at all. As one young man with cerebral palsy and asthma, who is not leaving his flat other than for vaccine appointments, told me: “I feel like a hamster on a wheel. If anything, the isolation of shielding is getting more entrenched than ever before by the rest of the population returning to ‘normal’.” Ministers have only made matters worse. Over the past few months, the government has removed many measures that would have helped clinically vulnerable people. In England, the legal requirement to wear a mask ended as far back as July, apart from in healthcare settings and care homes. Once furlough ended in October, clinically vulnerable people had fewer options to shield themselves. Many were sent back to packed offices or public-facing roles, without the legal right to work from home or still be paid if they couldn’t. Since August, close contacts of people in England who test positive for Covid haven’t had to self-isolate if they have been double-vaccinated. The government appears to have little interest in either preventing or tracking non-hospitalised Covid cases – a strategy that is dangerous to even vaccinated clinically vulnerable people in the UK, who must try to avoid contracting Covid in a population where 1 million people currently have the virus. The government clearly believes vaccines – and the booster programme in particular – can form its main line of defence, but while the rollout is providing huge relief, it is not a silver bullet. More than 100,000 extremely vulnerable people are yet to have their third jab after confusion over who is eligible. Medication or certain health problems mean two in five people who have impaired immune systems have a “low or undetectable” antibody response after being double vaccinated, meaning they in particular require a “vaccine plus” strategy – such as masks and increased distancing – to feel safer. The consequences of all this can’t be ignored: millions of people with underlying health conditions are being shut out from public life. The government’s new strategy is a step in the right direction, but to get through the winter and protect clinically vulnerable people we need to take further low-cost measures. Reintroducing “work from home if you can” guidance would have the biggest individual impact on reducing Covid transmission, according to scientists. There also needs to be greater support for workers who need to self-isolate. Statutory sick pay isn’t sufficient for people to pay their bills, while many insecure workers say they’re afraid they won’t be given hours in the future if they take time off to isolate. Unless the government provides better support, employees will turn up sick, increase transmission and infect vulnerable colleagues. There needs to be more focus on ventilation and regular lateral flow tests, particularly in schools and large venues. It makes little sense to bring back masks in shops, but not offices. But the real issue will likely be inspiring compliance. It is natural for pandemic fatigue to be setting in, and the government’s contradictory messaging has only compounded this. The same prime minister who was photographed without a mask in hospital now expects to command public trust on mandating them in Asda. There needs to be an emergency public health campaign, particularly over the high effectiveness of masks in reducing transmission. The public acted with solidarity early in the pandemic because the message was that measures would protect not only ourselves but others – there should be no reason why we can’t rediscover that sense of community. The government’s framing around “saving Christmas” suggests anyone who asks for more Covid measures now is the Grinch. But this is surely backwards thinking. As Hans Kluge, the World Health Organization’s regional director for Europe, puts it: Applied “correctly and consistently”, preventive measures “allow us to go on with our lives, not the opposite”. With rising cases in Europe resulting in new lockdowns, and the NHS facing its regular winter crisis, it’s long been in all of our interests to reduce transmission. It is a stain on Johnson’s government that it took the emergence of a new variant to spur the preventive action we already needed. Ministers have a duty to do more to protect the public this winter – and that includes clinically vulnerable people. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled PeopleSometimes it is easy to forget that there is more to Timo Werner’s game than comedy misses, doomed dribbles and an inability to stay onside. Labelling the forward a dud would be an exaggeration. Werner has his uses in certain scenarios and, for true devotees, there will always be that decoy run in Porto – the moment when Turbo Timo zipped from right to left, pulling Manchester City’s defence out of shape, and made the space for Mason Mount to send Kai Havertz through to score Chelsea’s winner in the Champions League final. You had to appreciate the unselfishness. On the one hand Werner had been at his most infuriating earlier in the evening, bungling a series of inviting opportunities to give Chelsea the lead. On the other, look at what he does without the ball. Look at the scurrying, the pressing, the boundless enthusiasm; only then will you develop a true appreciation of Werner’s value to Thomas Tuchel, who is yet to give up hope of making it work for his luckless £47.5m forward. Tuchel is still trying to find the answer and Chelsea’s manager is not alone in willing his fellow German to succeed. Supporters like Werner, who has become a cult hero at Stamford Bridge, because he is all heart. They admire his ceaseless optimism in the face of adversity. They loved that the 25-year-old kept going after having a goal harshly ruled out against Southampton last month – the 16th time he has been denied by officialdom since he moved to England in 2020 – and got his reward by scoring the vital second goal in a 3-1 win. The problem, though, is that the other stuff is hard to ignore. There are rough edges to Werner’s game and the sense he is not cut out for the Premier League grew when he toiled during Chelsea’s 1-1 draw with Manchester United, who effectively negated the former RB Leipzig forward by denying him space to run behind and reasoning he was never going to hurt them by getting on the end of a cross. “Poor,” was Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s summation of Werner’s performance. The former Chelsea striker, who was in the Sky Sports studio, was unimpressed with his work on and off the ball and was critical of a bad miss in the second half. “You’re a No 9,” Hasselbaink said. “You’re going to be judged on the opportunities that you get and what you do with it. It was not good enough. He keeps on missing big chances.” The profligacy will not have escaped Tuchel’s attention. He had seen positive signs in training and Werner had come off the bench to score a tap-in during Chelsea’s 4-0 win against Juventus. It seemed like a good moment to give Werner a chance to play up front. He had been finishing well in training and, with neither Havertz nor Romelu Lukaku ready to start, Tuchel decided to place his faith in him. It did not work out. Werner was easily shackled by United’s reserve centre-backs, Victor Lindelöf and Eric Bailly, and he never looked like scoring. His movement was off, his dribbling lacked conviction, he struggled to link the play and there was little surprise when he spurned his clearest chance, volleying wide when he should have hit the target. Ultimately it was hard to shake off the sense that Werner will never be a long-term solution through the middle for Chelsea. Although Tuchel defended him after the game, pointing out that he lacked sharpness after coming back from a hamstring injury, his patience has limits. This cannot go on indefinitely. Prolific in the Bundesliga, Werner has seven league goals since moving to England and there are times when he simply looks out of place at Chelsea, particularly as they have veered away from counterattacking football this season and become more of a possession team. That shift makes it even harder for Tuchel. Werner’s biggest asset is his speed on the break. Given space, he can surge forward and roll balls across for others to finish. As an inside-left forward, he can be effective. He thrived in that role for Leipzig, playing off a big target man, and he could yet strike up an understanding with Lukaku. Yet Werner is not a subtle creator. If teams sit back against Chelsea, it is hard to make a case for him starting in attacking midfield when Tuchel also has Mount, Havertz, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Christian Pulisic and Hakim Ziyech. The challenge has changed. Chelsea are the hunted, not the hunters this season. They are top of the league and, with opponents showing Tuchel’s team more respect, Werner is running out of time to prove he can rise to the challenge of breaking down a stubborn defence.On 20 October, in a joint sitting of parliament, Mia Mottley, the prime minister of Barbados, described the removal of Queen Elizabeth as the head of state and the decision to become a republic as a “seminal moment” in our country’s history. We have reached the day that this becomes a reality, as Barbados embarks on its new path, cutting the umbilical cord that bound it to its former colonial master, the United Kingdom. It begins on Monday evening, when Dame Sandra Mason will be installed as the first president of Barbados. That event, at which public participation will be extremely limited due to Covid protocols, but which will be beamed across the internet, will have the Prince of Wales in attendance as representative of the Queen. That decision has itself stirred emotions. Some Barbadians will protest at his presence. Others suggest that now may be a good time to raise the issue of reparations with Charles. In any case, this day has been a long time coming. It was on 14 May 1625 that the first English ship reached the island under the command of Captain John Powell, who claimed it on behalf of James I. It was from that time, 396 years ago, that “Los Barbados” (the bearded ones) became an English colony. It acquired its name from the Portuguese, earlier visitors who some claim were struck by the abundant fig trees, which have a beard-like appearance. Others surmised it was down to the presence of bearded people. From 1627, the English settled on the island, wiping away any traces of the original inhabitants, the Arawaks, who had lived here for centuries. People with good financial backgrounds and social connections with England were allocated land in this new colony; Barbados’s strong connection and staunchly British attitude earned it the title of Little England. The English turned Barbados into a slave society, a slave economy, which would be replicated in several parts of the “new world”. It was known as the “jewel in the crown” of the Caribbean. It is a history that we can never be proud of, but one that we must understand. Prof Hilary Beckles, a Barbadian historian, the current vice-chancellor of the University of the West Indies and a leading figure in the push by Caribbean islands to secure reparations, sums it up best. “Barbados was the birthplace of British slave society and the most ruthlessly colonised by Britain’s ruling elites,” he writes. “They made their fortunes from sugar produced by an enslaved, ‘disposable’ workforce, and this great wealth secured Britain’s place as an imperial superpower and caused untold suffering.” Barbados, this beautiful island known today for its social amiability and political civility, has truly had a tumultuous history and a painful legacy, which still haunts us. But this has not prevented the nation, as Kofi Annan, the former UN secretary general, once said, from “punching above its weight”. We see it as a journey: 30 November – when we become a republic – is another stop on our journey. It’s a date with resonance, as 30 November 1966 was independence day. It is a sign of this journey continuing that at 55 we are confident to say to the UK and the world that, despite our size and our limited resources, we can be our own shepherds, our own stewards. Of course, our transition may not find favour among those whose view remains that the “sun will never set on the British empire” and that Barbados should always remain Little England. Older folks here remember the days when British royalty would visit. They would stand in the sun waving the union flag, hoping to catch a glimpse of the Queen or her representatives. But Little England has grown up, it has matured, it should no longer be loitering in its “master’s castle”. As part of the transition, there will be ceremonial activities in National Heroes Square in the capital city, Bridgetown, but one notable absence will be Lord Nelson. For 208 years his statue stood in that square but in 2020 it was ceremoniously removed – a result of the Black Lives Matter movement here and the reawakening of our consciousness. There are no plans to change our national symbols: the flag, the coat of arms, the national pledge, the national anthem. But the terms “royal” and “crown” will be removed from official terminology. The Royal Barbados Police Force will be the Barbados Police Service; “crown lands” will become “state lands”. Independence day will still be on 30 November, but the focus will not be this event. The day will belong, as it always has, to our national hero, our first prime minister, the father of independence, the Right Excellent Errol Walton Barrow. Of course, Barbados will maintain a strong relationship with the UK. Our main source for tourists is from there; Brits love Barbados. But this is a new era, in which all Barbadians must take pride and take ownership. As for Little England, these times may call for a new term of endearment. Suleiman Bulbulia was a member of the republican status transition advisory committee in Barbados and is a columnist for Barbados TodayIt is the morning after the preview of Suzanne Lacy’s new solo show at the Whitworth and there is a buzz about the place. Apparently there was a banquet for 150 people, a choir of Sufi singers and a bus load of visitors from Lancashire. The staff have the tired, twinkling eyes that come with a satisfying night out, and Lacy is spotted racing through the gallery on her way to host a meeting with the exhibition collaborators. This is because much of what the Californian artist does has little to do with art hanging on walls. Instead, Lacy’s art happens in mills and car parks and community centres, connecting people and using creativity as a vehicle for social change. Activism sits at the heart of Lacy’s work, which makes it tricky to categorise; “performance” negates the long-lasting impact of her collaborative interventions and “project” ignores the aesthetic value of her presentations. In simple terms, Lacy has spent the past five decades using art to chip away at inequalities and injustices, building bridges where silence has kept people divided. What Kind of City? across the Whitworth and Manchester Art Gallery brings together four of Lacy’s works, spanning 30 years from The Oakland Projects (1991-2001) to Uncertain Futures (2021). Across and In-Between opens proceedings at the Whitworth with 102 smiling faces staring us dead in the eye. The black and white portraits cover three walls and represent people that live close to the border that splits Northern Ireland from the Republic. Pop on a pair of headphones, and you’ll hear their voices, indistinct and echoing, stating their name, home town and distance from the border. Accents, genders and ages blend with the sounds of the Irish landscape, generating an intrinsic bond between inhabitants and habitation. In 2018 while the Brexit negotiations were well under way, Lacy journeyed along the Irish border to generate a conversation about how life has been shaped by the divide. Harrowing tales of children having to traverse rivers to cross the border in order to get home from school and incidents of women smuggling food to feed their families are captured in a documentary. With these recollections fresh in my mind, I step into a dark room with a three-screen projection of yellow-clad participants drawing a border. With paint pigment, kites, hay bales and kayaks, a thick, bright boundary appears across the rugged Irish landscape. The figurative recreation of a literal border introduces the possibility of removing borders all together – if the landscape can be marked so easily, surely the opposite is true too? But borders make inroads in our minds as much as they do on the ground. Lacy’s art often returns to this theme, searching for ways to challenge historic prejudices. And sometimes that means reopening an old mill that used to draw a diverse community together. The Circle and The Square is the culmination of Lacy’s work in Pendle, Lancashire, where she orchestrated a three-day performance in Brierfield Mill that relied on the cultural heritage of the south Asian and Lancastrian population that once worked together. The performances are captured in film and projected opposite seven screens of individuals talking about their experience of living in Pendle or working at the mill. I sit at the centre of the room – in the midst of the participants – as Sufi chants blend seamlessly into the undulating flow of the Lancastrian shape-note melodies. A camera stays close to faces, mouths, hands and eyes, attempting to catch that undefinable magic that unites humans when they sing communally. Attempting to exhibit a previously concluded performance is not an easy task. The placement of films on thoughtfully positioned screens in immersive spaces does much to capture the dynamic and inclusive nature of Lacy’s work, but there are moments in What Kind of City? where the original energy of the intervention is lost. The majority of The Oakland Projects (a 10-year-long initiative to empower young people of colour to challenge stereotypes in the media) is primarily reduced into vitrine-based artefacts. Questionnaires, letters, marketing materials and jottings do little to spark excitement and alongside a 14-channel video work of interviews, the sheer scale of information pulls my head in different directions. There are moments of incredible insight – such as the sketch of emotive faces squashed into a bottle produced by a teen mum – but with a lot of text-based detail, the true impact and power of the programme is diminished. The world is a better place because of Suzanne Lacy. After her Cleaning Conditions performance at Manchester Art Gallery in 2013, the institution reassessed cleaning staff wages; Uncertain Futures (interviews with 100 Mancunian women over 50) is part of a research project that will aid a better understanding of how to recognise care and unpaid labour; and Oakland Revisited invites local young people to reclaim their presentation in the media. Lacy asks us what kind of city we want to live in, and the answer is certainly the one where she is making art. Suzanne Lacy: What Kind of City? is on at the Whitworth Gallery, Manchester until 10 April.The British Horseracing Authority has denied a claim by former trainer Charlie Brooks that Chris Watts, the BHA’s former head of integrity assurance, left his position after an “Oliver Reed-style bender” in Newmarket earlier this year. In a column in Monday’s Daily Telegraph, Brooks also suggested that Watts, a former senior police officer who was the anti-corruption manager for the England and Wales Cricket Board before moving to the BHA in 2017, was involved in an alcohol-fuelled incident at the British Racing School later the same day. A subsequent disciplinary process involving Watts, according to the column, contributed to delays in convening Tuesday’s hearing into Bryony Frost’s complaint of bullying by her fellow jockey Robbie Dunne, which Watts helped to investigate. In a statement released a few hours after publication, however, the Authority rebutted Brooks’s claims. “The article is misleading and inaccurate and we can categorically deny the suggestion that an incident of this nature was linked in any way to a BHA regulatory investigation or led to the departure of any staff member from the BHA,” the statement said, adding: “The Daily Telegraph have been contacted to inform them of these facts.” Watts conducted a number of interviews with members of the weighing room, including both Frost and Dunne, while investigating Frost’s complaint. A 120-page report on the investigation, which concluded that there was a case for Dunne to answer and also suggested that some of their fellow riders had been reluctant to cooperate fully with the inquiry, was subsequently leaked to the Sunday Times. Dunne has denied all the allegations.Western diplomats have expressed guarded optimism and relief after the first day of resumed Iran nuclear talks in Vienna made unexpected progress when Tehran formally agreed to discuss steps to come back into compliance with the 2015 agreement. The EU’s chief negotiator, Enrique Mora, said Iran had agreed that the talks could resume largely where they had ended in June, rather than with an entirely new agenda. There had been fears that Iran’s new harder-line administration, elected in June, would rip up the progress made in the first round of talks and insist the sole legitimate issue for discussion was the list of economic sanctions that the US must lift. Mora said: “There was a sense of urgency to bring an end to the sanctions and the suffering of the Iranian people … “The Iranian delegation recognises the work we have done in the past six rounds and the fact that we will build on this work going ahead.” The Russian ambassador to the talks, Mikhail Ulyanov, also described the opening of the talks as successful. Ali Bagheri, the new Iranian chief negotiator, said he was optimistic, but that he was looking for a US guarantee that it would not only lift a swath of economic sanctions but also promise not to reimpose them in the future. The talks are due to last at least two further days, with Tuesday dedicated to negotiating the sanctions that will be lifted on the basis that they are linked to the nuclear agreement, and were not imposed due to continuing Iranian human rights abuses or terrorist activity. There are still differences between the two sides on how to classify sanctions. Iran has also agreed that on Wednesday it will discuss the steps it would need to take to come back into compliance with the agreement. Iran regarded the sequencing of the discussion as significant. After Donald Trump took the US out of the deal in 2018, Iran responded by taking a series of reversible but escalating steps that breached the agreement’s terms, including stockpiling enriched uranium and stepping up use of advanced centrifuges at sites to which UN nuclear inspectors say they do not have full access. The talks are between Iran, Russia, China, Germany, France and the UK. The US is excluded from direct negotiations by Iran, but its delegation in Vienna is being consulted on each Iranian offer. Although there is a mood of optimism, at least in contrast to the gloom leading up to the talks, many hurdles remain to an agreement and there is still a suspicion in some western capitals that Iran is playing for time as it develops its nuclear technology. Earlier on Monday, Israel’s foreign minister, Yair Lapid, claimed his country’s arch-enemy had only agreed to restart nuclear negotiations to remove sanctions and covertly advance its weapons programme. Speaking in London, Lapid suggested Iran’s nuclear ambitions could be halted with “tighter sanctions, tighter supervision and conducting talks from a position of strength”. Standing alongside the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, he said Iran was “at the talks for only one reason – to get sanctions lifted because it needed money for its global terrorist network and for their continued race towards a nuclear weapon.” He predicted Tehran would “play for time, earn billions from lifting sanctions, deceive the world and covertly advance their nuclear programme”. Iran’s foreign ministry condemned the British decision to host the Israeli foreign minister on the day the talks started. It said: “The UK issues anti-Iran statements with the Israeli regime – a nuclear-holder and enemy of the 2015 nuclear agreement. Utter lack of goodwill and an evident sign that London doesn’t seek to preserve the deal. You can’t have lunch with the foe of a deal and for dinner sit at another table to claim support for the same deal.” Lapid is due to deliver a similar tough message to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, on Tuesday, but France and the UK remain at present committed to seeing most US sanctions lifted if Iran takes consequent verifiable steps to return to compliance with the deal, including allowing UN nuclear inspectors acceptable access to Iran’s nuclear sites. Israel is isolated in the Middle East to the extent that the Gulf states now follow the US lead in accepting that a revival of the nuclear deal would be good for stability in the region. But that isolation may prove temporary if the talks do not manage to make any progress.The EU border agency Frontex deported a record number of people in the first half of the year, according to a leaked document that has sparked concern about people being sent back to countries where they may face war or persecution. In a report issued to the EU Council of Ministers, Frontex said it had deported 8,239 non-EU nationals in the first six months of 2021, a record number and a 9% increase on the same period in 2019, before the pandemic hit global travel. EU member states continue to run their own deportations, but the increase in Frontex operations shows how member states are increasingly turning to the EU agency for help in managing migration, from deportations to border patrol. The civil liberties NGO Statewatch, which published the leaked report, argued there was “no certainty” that Frontex was not supporting refoulements, ie sending people back to face repression or war in their home countries. A spokesperson for Frontex said returns decisions were always made by EU member states in line with EU law. People denied the right to asylum can be returned to their home country, although governments struggle to carry out deportations. In 2019, 491,200 people were ordered to leave the EU, but only 29% were returned to their country of origin. The European Commission aims to sign more return agreements with non-EU countries as it seeks to increase the number of people denied asylum returned to their home nations. In 2020 the main nationalities of people ordered to leave the EU were Algerian, Moroccan, Albanian, Ukrainian and Pakistani. In the first half of the year, 61% of people returned by Frontex chose to leave, while 39% were forcibly returned, according to the agency. The overall proportion of forced returns declined, which Frontex attributed to people refusing to undergo Covid-19 tests or get vaccinations to frustrate a deportation order. Under EU law, people being forced to return should be accompanied by human rights monitors. Yet in the first half of 2021 a “forced return monitor” was present on only 47% of Frontex-organised charter flights, 23% of nationally organised flights and 73% of jointly organised flights. Overall there was a 7% reduction in the presence of monitors on all returns flights compared with the same period in 2020, which the agency blamed on Covid travel restrictions. Tineke Strik, a Dutch Green MEP, said the increase in deportations raised concerns, because Frontex says it is not obliged to verify if all steps of an asylum procedure have been followed. “Frontex seems to underestimate its responsibility in making sure that fundamental rights are respected,” she said. She pointed to a recent European court of justice ruling that found the Hungarian government had broken EU law by limiting the right to asylum. “If the asylum procedure has a lot of deficiencies, you don’t know if it’s safe for the person to be returned,” she said. The Dutch MEP was the author of a recent cross-party report that concluded Frontex had failed to protect the human rights of asylum seekers and appoint its full quota of legally required human rights monitors. She said EU member states also needed to “step up their capacity” to ensure human rights monitors were always present on deportation flights. Frontex has become a centrepiece of EU migration policy since 1.2 million people fled to Europe in 2015 to seek asylum. After the migration crisis, EU leaders agreed to increase funding for the Warsaw-based agency and create a 10,000 strong European border and coast guard by 2027. A Frontex spokesperson said: “Before any return flight is organised by Frontex, the agency requires from the national authorities confirmation that their return decisions were issued in line with the European law. “Frontex is responsible for the coordination of return operations, but the decision about who should be returned is always taken by the judicial or administrative authorities of the member states. According to European legislation, the individual is always given the possibility to appeal against this return decision. Frontex does not enter into the merits of return decisions issued by the member states.”Senior French ministers have accused the UK of operating a labour market akin to slavery and called on London to open safe routes for migrants, as the two governments continued to deflect blame for last week’s drownings in the Channel. The criticism came hours after France’s interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, held a crisis meeting with European ministers and border agencies to discuss the migrant emergency around the Channel ports. The UK home secretary, Priti Patel, was disinvited to the meeting after Boris Johnson riled President Emmanuel Macron by publishing a letter calling on France to accept people being returned, and calling for British troops or border police to patrol French beaches. Darmanin said cross-Channel migration was “first and foremost an English issue” and Britain must “accept its responsibilities”. “Today, people who want to seek asylum in England have no other means than to cross the Channel. This is because there is no legal way for immigrants to go to Great Britain and because you can work without identity papers in England and that creates a demand,” Darmanin told BFM TV. He added that France accepted 150,000 asylum applications a year, compared with 30,000 in the UK. France’s European affairs minister, Clément Beaune, also hit back at the UK, accusing it of having “an economic model of, sometimes, quasi-modern slavery” that he said encouraged desperate people to attempt perilous Channel crossings. “We’re asking the British to change their [legal] framework,” Beaune told France Inter. He said exploitation of illegal workers was “more prevalent in the UK because there are fewer checks” and the UK needed “more humane” labour market regulation to discourage migrants. Darmanin, who gave an interview to the Guardian after Sunday’s meeting, reiterated that France was not prepared to be treated as the UK’s “vassal” and was fed up with the double talk coming from the British government. “I’m very happy to discuss things … on the condition that we have a normal relationship and a spirit of equality,” he said on Monday. France convened the meeting of ministers responsible for immigration from Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, as well as the European commissioner for internal affairs. Representatives from the EU’s agency for law enforcement cooperation, Europol, and the EU’s border management agency, Frontex, were also invited to the hastily arranged summit in Calais on Sunday. Last Wednesday 27 people died in the Channel, a tragedy that has prompted a blame game between London and Paris. Patel was due to attend the summit but the invitation was rescinded because of Johnson’s letter, published on Twitter before it was seen by Macron. Afterwards, Darmanin said France and its EU partners were in agreement over new measures to clamp down on people smugglers. On Sunday a French newspaper claimed British police and intelligence services had stopped cooperating with their counterparts on investigations aimed at tracking and arresting people smugglers. The Journal du Dimanche said it had seen a report from the Police aux Frontières (PAF) stating: “We have to report that the British services are not sending us intelligence information that is either useful or usable … our requests do not receive any reply … information sent is not always taken into account”. It claimed that in June UK intelligence services were sent the names of two people-smugglers who had organised a Channel crossing by a group of Sudanese in December 2020 and had just left France to travel to the UK. The UK services did not acknowledge receipt of this information and had not replied, stated the report. French police say they have broken up 20 smuggling rings organising Channel crossings, almost all organised by Iraqi-Kurds. They say a number of the human traffic ringleaders are based in the UK and Germany and recruit desperate people who are offered a free crossing in return for working for the network. “Boats that come from China and able to carry up to 60 migrants are stocked abroad (mainly in Germany) then transported to the coastal area by carriers who are rarely aware of the details of the organisation (they are helping). Other accomplices are tasked with bringing the migrants to the water’s edge or delivering petrol cans and lifejackets,” read the report. Beaune also criticised Britain over the Channel fishing licence row, saying “the British know that the ball is in their court”. Talks are being held this week between the UK and France, and Beaune warned: “If there’s no massive gesture by the 10 December, we’ll stop the talks.” He added: “Unfortunately, I believe that the failure of Brexit is masked by a smokescreen of making Europe a daily punching ball.”John Linnell, vocals, keyboards, songwriter We had played the showcase night at New York’s CBGB, but didn’t stand out, so we tried instead playing alongside performance artists in East Village. People showing up to watch avant garde performance art bought our cassette, and we became part of this groovy little scene of really enthusiastic people. After some indie success, major labels were suddenly coming along like buses wanting to sign us. We opted for Elektra because they were nice people and didn’t seem to want to change us. They gave us a list of potential producers. We knew Clive Langer and Alan Winstanley from their work with Madness, and, weirdly, as a teenager I had seen Clive’s band Deaf School on their US tour. I told Clive the gig was hilarious and fun. I think that’s the reason they agreed to produce us. I’d written the melody and beginnings of Birdhouse in Your Soul some years earlier, but when we started working with the producers in 1989 I was still in the process of arranging it. It was just a rough verse and a chorus. I’d made a demo using a drum machine and put the snare drum on the off beat, but when I made another demo I changed it to the sort of classic rock beat I thought might get us on the radio. To their credit, Clive and Alan said: “No! Go back to what it was.” They said I had made it sound “just like any other pop song”, and they were right. The summer we recorded it in New York it was very hot, and we were inspired by the Lovin’ Spoonful’s Summer in the City – we copied its chords for our guitar part. The lyrics were stream of consciousness. I was in my apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and wrote it from the perspective of a night light serenading the occupant of its room. I wasn’t thinking too hard. It was just intended as a dummy lyric, but it ended up as the finished song. People seemed to find it really innocent or charming. Before we appeared on the Johnny Carson show, the scrupulous bandleader made us rehearse it several times using a metronome, but for the actual performance the count had somehow been set 10 beats-per-minute faster. It was hard to sing that fast, but it gave it a nervous energy. The song cemented my decision to never sing in an affected accent. I sang in my own voice and when it was played on the radio in the UK someone rang in to say how irritating she found it that I was doing a fake, thick American accent. It was hilarious. John Flansburgh, guitarist, songwriter I would never have dared to try to write a song if it wasn’t for Elvis Costello and the Ramones. Those people getting in the charts opened the way for the likes of us and changed my life. The performance art scene was about partying our brains out, living in the moment and doing interesting things. Before we got noticed we did this thing called Dial-a-Song to get our music heard. You basically rang a phone number and heard a song free of charge. A really embryonic version of Birdhouse in Your Soul was on Dial-a-Song as a one-minute demo a good year before we signed to Elektra. When we met Clive and Alan they were at the height of their cultural influence. I think the label thought: “We’ve got this impossible band that will never work on the radio. We’ll give them to these triple-cool producers.” Working with them was a masterclass and they gave us this beautifully cinematic production. Birdhouse has real instruments on it but also drum machines and sequenced bass. We built up the whole arrangement without guitars, but Clive and Alan let me add this big Marshall stack guitar part, to give me something to do. On Top of the Pops I just bounced around playing a guitar. Back then, sampling was the preserve of rich musicians like Duran Duran, but Casio had just brought out the budget FZ-1 sampling synth, which made sampling available to ordinary musicians. While we were making Birdhouse, De La Soul were across town making 3 Feet High and Rising with the same keyboard. You could do stuff like hit a mallet on a fridge, capture it and play it. So we had all these eccentric sounds. I sampled the trumpet part from a very successful record, but to get round the copyright laws we got the trumpet player in and paid him for two days’ work while he performed it again, note for note. I’m completely happy that we fall within the noble tradition of one-hit wonders in the UK. It’s a different kind of song and has a strange effect on people. When we last played Birdhouse in London, some in the audience started crying. They Might Be Giants’ new album, Book, is out now, as well as a 144-page clothbound, hardcover art book of the same nameGay rights campaigners expressed joy at the Botswana court of appeal’s decision to uphold a ruling that decriminalised same-sex relationships, saying the country’s judiciary had set an example for other African countries. The government had appealed a 2019 ruling that criminalising homosexuality was unconstitutional. The ruling had been hailed as a major victory for gay rights campaigners on the continent, following an unsuccessful attempt in Kenya to repeal colonial-era laws criminalising gay sex. Dismissing the appeal on Monday, the bench of five judges unanimously ruled that criminalising same-sex relationships was a violation of the constitutional rights of LGBTQ+ individuals to dignity, liberty, privacy and equality. “Those sections [of the penal code] have outlived their usefulness, and serve only to incentivise law enforcement agents to become keyhole peepers and intruders into the private space of citizens,” said court of appeal president Ian Kirby. The ruling added: “Since the appellant’s grounds of appeal have been unsuccessful there can be only one outcome and that is that the appeal must fail.” Before the 2019 ruling, gay sex was punishable by up to seven years in jail. “I feel really happy, I feel relieved, I feel hopeful about our future as the LGBTIQ community in our country. I feel protected. I have all sorts of emotions, but the bottom line is I am really happy,” said Caine Youngman, head of policy and legal advocacy for the organisation Lesbians, Gays and Bisexuals of Botswana. “This victory is a massive one for the LGBTIQ community and it is an indication that the judiciary in Botswana takes human rights very seriously. It is an indication that the judiciary is willing to play their part for equality before the law.” He added that the judgment will “be very useful for other comrades around the continent of Africa”. Homosexuality is illegal in many African countries, with convictions carrying a death sentence in some states. “I hope it will alleviate our suffering as the LGBTIQ community,” Youngman said. The LGBTQ+ community in Botswana has received support from the country’s president, Mokgweetsi Masisi. “Just like other citizens, they deserve to have their rights protected,” he said in a speech in 2018. UN resident coordinator and representative of the UN secretary general in Botswana, Zia Choudhury tweeted: “Woohoo! Justice for #LGBTQ community, and justice for all who believe in #HumanRights. “The @UN_Botswana family stands hand in hand with #LGBTQ community. We believe human rights belong to everyone. Every human being can love and be loved, without fear of persecution.”Throughout the history of the Davis Cup, one of its defining features has been the pivotal role of doubles, particularly as modern players prioritise singles on the day-to-day grind of the tour. The shortened format of the Davis Cup has made doubles more pronounced and numerous ties in the past week have been settled by the strength of each team’s duos. This is a welcome development for Great Britain who have produced numerous capable doubles players in recent years and welcomed one of the best doubles players in the world into their fold this year. With his regular tour partner, Rajeev Ram, Joe Salisbury has thrived. He won his second major at the US Open this year, rising to No 3. He has been dominant in mixed doubles this year, too, winning the French Open and the US Open with Desirae Krawczyk. At 29, he is the youngest player in the ATP doubles top 20. There is much more to come. After the disappointment of Salisbury and Neal Skupski losing Salisbury’s debut match in straight sets to France on Saturday, their thorough 6-4, 6-2 defeat of Jiri Vesely and Tomas Machac, of the Czech Republic, the following day should provide them with significant confidence for the challenges ahead. That next challenge comes against Germany in Innsbruck on Tuesday, a rematch of the 2019 quarter-final when Kyle Edmund and Dan Evans beat Philipp Kohlschreiber and Jan-Lennard Struff respectively to send Great Britain through. That encounter underlines the progress Great Britain has made. Evans has improved significantly but he is no longer the country’s No 1 since the arrival of Cameron Norrie. As Salisbury has risen to the top, the returning Skupski has firmly established himself in the top 20 after being ranked 31 in 2019. Germany won both of their ties at the weekend to reach the quarter-final, including an excellent win over Novak Djokovic’s Serbia, but their progress since 2019 has been more modest. Dominik Koepfer, the world No 54, is an upgrade on the veteran Kohlschreiber. He is a durable left-hander with a sweet cross-court backhand and has played the best tennis of his life over the past 18 months. However, Koepfer and Evans suffered frustrating defeats on Sunday toplayers outside the top 100 in Jurij Rodionov and Tomas Machac. In the absence of Alexander Zverev, who is not interested in the revamped Davis Cup, 51st-ranked Struff remains Germany’s first singles player. His game is replete with weapons and he is more than capable of overpowering Norrie indoors, but Norrie’s consistency and his ability to neutralise Struff’s serve is more likely to wear him down. Great Britain possesses the higher-ranked, more successful players and they are the favourites, but both teams will put forward top-50 calibre players. The past week has shown how quickly a team can find themselves down a match and then fighting for their lives in the deciding doubles rubber. Should that be the case, Salisbury and Skupski will hope to take a further step forward as they face two formidable top 20 doubles players in Tim Puetz and Kevin Krawietz. The reward for the winner will be a semi-final against either Russia, the tournament odds-on favourites, or Sweden, with the final two rounds held in Spain. Italy versus Croatia and Serbia versus Kazakhstan make up the bottom half. Perhaps even more motivating for Great Britain and Germany is that after the silence of locked-down Austria, the winner will be able to see out their tournament, however it ends, in front of other human beings.Lee Elder, the pioneering golfer who broke several of the sport’s colour barriers, has died at the age of 87. The PGA Tour confirmed Elder’s death on Monday. The most notable moment of his career occurred in 1975 when he became the first black golfer to play at the Masters, a tournament many saw as an embodiment of the racism and privilege that was a large part of the sport in America at the time. This year his contribution to the Masters was acknowledged when he joined Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player as an honorary starter at the tournament. In 2015, Elder told CNN that playing at the Masters for the first time was intimidating, particularly after he received death threats leading up to the tournament. One warned him that “he ought to check behind every tree” as he completed his round. “It was frightening. You try to eliminate the possibility of anything happening,” he said. “That was part of the reason for renting two houses during the Masters week. The logic behind that was the fact we did not want the people to know where I was staying.” Elder faced other problems as he established himself as a golfer in the 1960s and 70s. At one tournament he was forced to change in the parking lot after he was refused entry to the clubhouse. At another, a spectator threw his ball into the rough. Elder first enountered golf working as a caddie but did not play an 18-hole round until he was 16. Early in his career he made money by hustling white golfers who could not believe a black player had the necessary skills to compete. “I once shot 38 playing on one leg. Another time I shot 41 playing on my knees,” he recalled later. He refined his skills during his military service and joined the United Golf Association, a tour for black golfers, upon his discharge. He went on to win four tournaments on the PGA Tour but getting there was a battle in itself: the PGA billed itself as a “Caucasian-only” organisation until 1961. Elder had soon proven himself good enough to become known outside America, and in 1979 he became the first black player to represent the US at the Ryder Cup.Nicola Sturgeon has announced that a payment for children in low income families in Scotland will double to £20 a week next year, arguing that combating poverty was central to her vision for independence. The first minister said the increase in the Scottish child payment would first take affect for families in poverty with children under six from next April, before being expanded to those with children under 16 by the end of 2023. In a prerecorded speech to a Scottish National party conference on Monday, she said it would eventually support 400,000 children and was “the most ambitious antipoverty measure anywhere in the UK”. She told delegates this policy, which has been championed by anti-poverty campaigners and had been previously resisted by Sturgeon’s ministers, was further evidence of the case for independence. The Scottish government said the uplift, which has become affordable after a £4.6bn boost to Holyrood’s funding from the Treasury in last month’s UK budget, would cost £360m a year. Sturgeon said the decision by the UK government to scrap its temporary £20 uplift to universal credit, during the Covid pandemic, was “cruel and shocking”. Poverty “deprives too many children of the chance to make the most of their education and enjoy life to the full, and it robs of our country far too much potential”, she said. “Eradicating child poverty is essential if we are to build the strongest foundation for Scotland’s future.” Cutting universal credit illustrated Scotland’s divergence from the UK government’s approach, she said. Boris Johnson was also threatening a fresh trade crisis with the EU and had deliberately underminedScotland and Wales by expanding Whitehall’s powers over devolved policies. “This crystallises the choice Scotland faces,” Sturgeon said. “If we don’t choose to move our parliament forward and make it stronger with independence – the Tories will drag it backwards and make it weaker.” But Sturgeon chose her words carefully on the timing of a second independence referendum, and offered no new information on plans to stage one. She confirmed to delegates her government planned to “initiate the process necessary to enable a referendum before the end of 2023”, but said resuming the campaign for independence in 2022 was “Covid-permitting”. Recent opinion polls show support for independence has fallen by around 10 points since peaking at 58% last year, and lags behind support for remaining in the UK. Opposition parties believe voter dissatisfaction with the SNP’s domestic record is harming support for independence. A YouGov poll for the Times last week put the no vote at 53% and yes at 47%; the same survey found Sturgeon’s approval rating had slumped from a peak of 72%, or +50, at the height of the pandemic last year to 53% or +12 last week. Even so, the same poll showed the SNP remains twice as popular as the Tories and Labour. Last week Sturgeon told the BBC political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, that she recognised the SNP had “still got a job to do” to build a majority in favour of independence: “I think we are much closer to that than ever before, but are we there yet? No.” Jackie Baillie, Scottish Labour’s deputy leader, said the £20 increase in the child payment was welcome but said Labour would be pressing for that to be doubled again to £40 next year in the next Scottish budget. “As it stands, this welcome development will not be enough to ensure we meet the statutory child poverty targets that the Scottish parliament has passed,” she said.“Vinícius has a motorbike beneath his boots,” Carlo Ancelotti said last week. What the Real Madrid manager didn’t know was that he has a traction engine down there too. But late on Sunday night there it was, when they needed it most. Madrid were entering the 87th minute against Sevilla, the score even and a place at the top awaiting the winner, when a long ball from Eder Militao dropped from the sky by the left touchline. Vinícius chested past Lucas Ocampos, controlling and coming inside in one move, dropped his shoulder, went beyond Gonzalo Montiel and sent the ball tearing through the air and Yassine Bono’s hand into the far corner, the Bernabéu exploding. Four touches is all it took; four touches and then that. “The perfect hit,” Emilio Butragueño called it. “An extraordinary, fantastic goal, incredible,” Ancelotti said. It had all happened so fast. Suddenly, there was Vinícius dancing with the corner flag, teammates running to catch up. He pointed at the badge, at himself and gestured to calm down, as if that was going to happen. The place was going wild. In the aisles and by the exits, where fans had gathered for a quick getaway, they decided they weren’t going anywhere yet. They had an ovation to give. Below them, the manager pumped his fists and hugged his son. Asked what he was thinking when it hit the net, Ancelotti smiled: “That we could win.” That hadn’t often looked likely. This was the season’s biggest game so far, first v third going into week 15, two contenders with only two defeats between them, the start of a run to define the title race: Madrid now face Athletic, Real Sociedad, Atlético and Athletic again before Christmas, while Sevilla play Villarreal, Athletic, Atlético and Barcelona. It was 1-1 when the ball dropped to Vinícius and although there was something inevitable about the ending, Fede Valverde and Eduardo Camavinga had been sent on to seek a winner and Bono admitted that Sevilla “didn’t manage the final minutes well”, for much of the night Madrid had been grateful for a point, let alone a win, relieved not to be losing. Rafa Mir had given Sevilla the lead then saw David Alaba clear off the line and Thibaut Courtois make an astonishing save. Lucas Ocampos probably should have got a penalty – “I’m an interested party, but that’s my view, it’s the view of anyone who sees it,” said sporting director Monchi – and he might have got a goal too, a lovely curler bouncing off the bar. He was everywhere and Sevilla were in control. Joan Jordan and Papu Gómez barely lost a ball; Fernando barely seemed to need to run. “They’re a very good team with a spectacular coach who I admire,” Casemiro said, and they were showing it. But before half-time Bono let a long shot from Militao slip through his fingers and against a post, leaving Karim Benzema with an easy finish to equalise. The ball had moved in mysterious ways but it was a dreadful mistake, the Sevilla keeper admitting it had changed the game and conceding: “Maybe I shouldn’t have tried to catch it.” The second half was more even dramatic – Vinícius put one over and Marco Asensio bent wide – but it was still heading for a draw that Ancelotti admitted might have been “fairer” when Vinícius appeared to smash in the winner. When he was withdrawn, they stood to applaud, chanting: “Vini! Vini! Vini!” Even then, it might have ended with a draw. In added time, Courtois made another superb save, from Thomas Delaney. “I think we can say we have a goalkeeper,” Ancelotti smiled afterwards, which was easier to do then; at the time, he stood and watched heart in his mouth as the ball bounced out and fell at the feet of Bono, five yards from goal. The goalkeeper scored for Sevilla last season but this time he couldn’t find what he was looking for. His feet, mostly: something strange happened, like his legs just stopped working or he had been tackled by a ghost, some invisible phantom footballer sending him tumbling to the floor, Vinícius’s rocket ultimately proving the winner. This was the 13th consecutive time Sevilla had lost at the Bernabéu (last year’s 2-2 was at Valdebebas). They may never have been closer, yet as the chances slipped by it was easy to imagine that the game would too, the victory somehow simultaneously both improbable and inevitable. “One year, the run will end,” Mir said, shaking his head and muttering: “It’s a pity, it’s a pity. Now we have to clear our heads.” That wasn’t easy. Julen Lopetegui felt the anger swelling inside, another opportunity lost, possible victory replaced by the feeling lingering that when it comes to it there’s something lacking. He wasn’t really in the mood for talking, but didn’t have much choice. “We’re sad, hurt and have a bitter taste because we don’t deserve to leave defeated,” he said. “When you have your foot up against Madrid’s throat you have to keep pressing. If you ease off, this happens. Everything that could go against us did.” Vinícius especially. It was, Lopetegui said, “a golazo”, the kind of thing you couldn’t do anything about. Sevilla had twice as many shots on target than Madrid but none quite like that. “A golden missile,” Marca called it. “A grenade,” said El Mundo. “Not just a shot, a lightning bolt,” according to El País. Which isn’t what anyone expected from him but doing what no one expected is what Vinícius does now. “A year ago, it would have ended up bouncing around the Bernabéu car park,” wrote Roberto Palomar, who clearly hasn’t been for a while. A year ago, he might not even have tried it. It hadn’t been Vinícius’s best performance – when he put a shot over rather than pass, Benzema had words – but a moment of brilliance had won a huge game, taking Madrid four points clear of Atlético and Real Sociedad, five over Sevilla,10 above Barcelona. It also took Vinícius to nine league goals, 11 over all. He has seven assists. That’s not just more La Liga goals than last season already, it is more than in his entire Madrid career, more in 14 games than the previous 82. And if it wasn’t his best game this season, it might have been in previous campaigns, when he was sometimes held as a figure of fun, source of a million memes, a player who could exhilarate but also exasperate – in the same move. Famously, Benzema was caught on camera telling Ferland Mendy that Vinícius was playing for the other team and that it would be better not to give him the ball. Now he is possibly the best player in Spain, certainly the best Vini since Samways. Someone you give the ball to whenever you can. When Vinícius scored in the clásico in March 2020, it came via a deflection. Some joked that was the only way it would come. More importantly, Gerard Piqué admitted he had invited Vinícius take the decision, wrongly judging that the best plan given the likelihood he would take the wrong one. That night helped Vinícius, a sense of liberation, and there were other moments too – against Liverpool he was superb, his finishing impeccable – but it is this season that he is really tearing through teams. In the latest clásico, you could feel the fear every time he set off. Asked last week what has changed since the early days, Vinícius responded: “I was younger then.” It was a simple point, delivered neatly, but it was an important one too easily forgotten. “I came from Brazil, I had hardly played a year in the Flamengo first team, I came to the biggest club in the world and I was 18,” he added. “Now I’m better prepared technically and psychologically.” Watch up close and the acceleration is extraordinary, but it is the tranquillity that is new, the precision, reliability and consistency. The continuity too. Sunday night was his 18th consecutive start, fully backed by Ancelotti for a simple reason: he earned it. You don’t ease off him now, safe in the knowledge that he’ll run out of pitch, slice the shot or choose the wrong option, and Gonzalo Montiel certainly didn’t on Sunday night. “People know he’s a top player now,” Casemiro warned afterwards. “But that’s what great players are: the slightest chance and it’s a goal.” Mostly, Montiel won the battle but when the ball came to Vinícius on the left with not much time left and many men and metres between him and goal, it ended up in the net and everyone erupted. “The goal is a symptom. It’s confidence,” Butragueño insisted. “Great players win games on their own.” “He has something special in his feet and his physique,” Ancelotti said. “The surprising thing is that he showed a quality he hadn’t shown before. That’s another step towards being one of the best in the world.”Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey has stepped down from his executive role at the social media company. Dorsey will be replaced by chief technology officer (CTO) Parag Agrawal, the company announced on Monday. The surprise move ends Dorsey’s much criticized tenure as chief executive officer of both Twitter and Square, his digital payments company, which led to Twitter stakeholders Elliott Management and billionaire investor Paul Singer calling on him to step down from one of those roles. Twitter’s shares rose 11% after the news broke on CNBC before being briefly suspended. The company said Dorsey would step down immediately but that Dorsey would remain on the board until Twitter’s stockholder meeting in 2022. “I’ve decided to leave Twitter because I believe the company is ready to move on from its founders. My trust in Parag as Twitter’s CEO is deep. His work over the past 10 years has been transformational. I’m deeply grateful for his skill, heart and soul. It’s his time to lead,” said Dorsey. Agrawal has been with Twitter for a decade and served as CTO since 2017. “I want to thank the board for their confidence in my leadership and Jack for his continued mentorship, support and partnership,” said Agrawal. In his most recent tweet on the site, posted Sunday, Dorsey wrote: “I love Twitter.” In an email to staff on Monday Dorsey wrote that after 16 years at the company, it was time to leave. “There’s a lot of talk about the importance of a company being ‘founder-led’. Ultimately I believe that’s severely limiting and a single point of failure,” he wrote. “I’ve worked hard to ensure this company can break away from its founding and founders.” Dorsey said Agrawal was his preferred choice for CEO. “My trust in him as CEO is bone-deep,” he wrote. “I want you all to know this was my decision and I own it.” Dorsey, 45, co-founded the microblogging site in 2006 and posted the world’s first tweet: “Just setting up my twttr.” He co-founded Square in 2009 after being pushed out of the top job at Twitter before returning as chief executive of the social media company in 2015. Investors and some staff have questioned Dorsey’s management style and have worried that he is stretched too thin by his roles at both companies. In 2019 he announced plans to relocate to Africa for six months, a move that worried both staff and investors. He scrapped the plan after the coronavirus pandemic struck. Dorsey also set off a political firestorm following Twitter’s decision to ban former president Donald Trump from the platform. He later defended the move as the “right decision” but said it also highlighted “a failure of ours, ultimately, to promote healthy conversation”. His stakes in Twitter and Square have helped Dorsey amass a personal fortune of over $12bn, according to Forbes. In April Dorsey announced he was giving $1bn to relief programs related to the coronavirus, “girls’ health and education”, and the study of universal basic income (UBI) – financial payments to people.It was Eddie Howe’s 44th birthday on Monday but Newcastle’s manager had no time, or apparent inclination, for celebrations. Howe is in the unique position of helming arguably the world’s wealthiest football club at a moment when even its cash-rich Saudi Arabian-led owners are incapable of purchasing the only currency that counts: Premier League points. “We’re certainly going to have to start winning soon,” he said before a watershed week featuring home games with Norwich on Tuesday night and Burnley on Saturday. “There’s a huge challenge ahead.” Given that Newcastle are the sole team in England’s top four divisions yet to secure a victory, Howe faces constant reminders that football’s modern history offers little hope of escaping relegation. Only one side with a comparably dismal record at this point in a campaign have avoided falling into the second tier but, even if emulating Derby’s Houdini act of 2000-01 will not be easy, he spies a potential solution. Whereas Rafael Benítez complained regularly that Newcastle’s limited squad and vulnerable backline left him with a “short blanket”, Howe intends elongating the team’s tactical bedsheet. Benítez, who left St James’ Park in 2019, justified his safety-first tactics by maintaining that a strong emphasis on attack would create a self-destructive imbalance, exposing the team’s defensive weaknesses. “If you cover your head, you have cold feet,” he said. “But if you cover your feet, it leaves your head cold.” In contrast Howe remains convinced that attack is the best form of defence. “I prefer to talk about stretching the blanket,” said a manager without the suspended Jamaal Lascelles and Matt Ritchie against Norwich. “I don’t believe in copying Rafa’s statement. It’s about coaching, educating, helping the players. When confidence returns we’ll see a difference.” It is all part of a long-running debate revolving around whether Newcastle’s travails are down to the shortcomings of Howe’s immediate predecessor, Steve Bruce, or a squad still containing a nucleus of the first XI Benítez led out of the Championship in 2017. The former Newcastle captain and manager Alan Shearer believes “at least three or four signings are required in January”, with the current side “nowhere near good enough”. Although the cashflow may be restricted by an extension until 14 December of the Premier League’s temporary ban on clubs striking commercial arrangements involving pre-existing business relationships, there should be significant money to spend in the new year. Under financial fair play rules Newcastle could, theoretically, spend almost £200m on players in January. Howe, though, says he is still to discuss transfer budgets with Amanda Staveley and her fellow directors and suggested his biggest problem may be enticing talent. “It’s very difficult to make any promises,” said a manager still awaiting the appointment of a new chief executive and director of football. “You have to attract players, they have to want to come and they have to improve the squad. January’s an incredibly difficult window to recruit in, especially when your league position’s difficult. “I know the owners will support the team, and me, in trying to achieve what we need but it would be foolish to make rash promises. My priority is getting the best out of the players we have in the building now.” Gabby Agbonlahor, the former Aston Villa striker, has provoked controversy by saying footballers regard Newcastle as an undesirable home. “I don’t think that’s accurate,” said Howe. “I haven’t seen the city in daylight yet but everyone I’ve spoken to says how nice the area is to live in. “I’ve heard amazing things about the city centre and the surrounding areas. Longer term we’ll have no problem attracting players. I don’t think that’s going to be an issue. But what will be an issue in January is our league position.” At least Howe will be able to greet his new public on Tuesday night. He was forced to spend his first home game as manager, a 3-3 draw against Brentford, isolating in a hotel room overlooking the Tyne after testing positive for Covid-19 the previous day. “It was devastating,” he said. “The timing couldn’t have been worse but even from so far away I could hear the noise when we scored. I’m so looking forward to being inside the stadium.”Jenna Russell: ‘The songs are ridiculously rich’ So much of his work is about love. People talk about it being cold but as a teenage girl all I could feel from it was warmth. The songs are ridiculously rich. I’d play the original cast recording of Company again and again, in the front room. I remember my mum came in with her rubber gloves on and tears streaming down her face. She said: “Oh my god, I get it!” The song was Being Alive. Steve understood the human condition like no one else in musical theatre. Children and Art, from Sunday in the Park With George, encapsulates that for me. To understand that children and art are what push life forward is one of the most beautiful things that he recognised; there is something so tender and gentle in that song. A few of us at school would sing Sondheim stuff and then I first worked with Steve when I was 20 on Follies. Meeting your hero is always a scary thing but he was wonderful. We had some really interesting chats about Sweeney Todd. He remembered watching the tech rehearsal for it when Len Cariou did the big number Epiphany, thinking: “Oh my god what have I written? Where has this come from?” The realisation that he had unleashed this beast. His lyrics fall into place with you at certain points in your life. For me, with Sunday, I always thought Act 1 was perfect. I’d fast-forward Act 2. But the older you get, the more you realise that Act 2 is where the truth and the ache are. When that reveals itself to you, it’s devastating. Some people are very guarded about their work but he encouraged directors to be brave and was always excited about young directors and their imagination. The brilliant thing about performing his works is that they are littered with rhymes that you don’t notice you’re doing, because the arc of the story is so character-based. A couple of times he said to me: “Oh, just pump up that internal rhyme.” And I didn’t even realise it was there! It’s so subtle. Musicals can be crap. They really can be. But because of the work that he did, and writers who have come after him and been inspired by how brave he was, we have some really good musical theatre. I’m so grateful to have met him and had the privilege of doing his work. Daniel Evans: ‘He was really strict!’ Since the news of his death, I’ve been hearing the songs from Merrily We Roll Along, the first Sondheim-composed show that I acted in. There is so much in Merrily about time, friendship and regret. That line: “Charley, why can’t it be like it was?” And the whole lyric of Our Time. When I did Merrily and Sunday in the Park With George, I had one-to-one tutorials with him at the piano, which was such a privilege. It was pretty intimidating and scary – he was really strict! If you replaced a syllable of a lyric with something that was inaccurate he would come down on you hard. But his notes were so practical, insightful and implementable – he writes for actors, he puts himself in the place of an actor and asks how would this character express this particular sentiment? That’s why actors love his work. When you understood his notes, and were able to do them, he was then so encouraging and that was the best feeling in the world. Merrily had a predominantly young cast and when he arrived, just before previews, he came in front of us and said: “It’s OK everyone, God has arrived!” He was being self-deprecating but we were so scared, we didn’t know if he was serious. He was a type of god for us, so we took him at his word. His immense generosity to others came, I think, from the way the baton was passed so generously to him from Oscar Hammerstein. He would always pay tribute to what Hammerstein did for him – how he mentored him. Watch the videos where Sondheim talks about teaching: he saw it as a sacred profession. Teaching and encouragement were something he’d benefited deeply from and I think he wanted to repay that debt from Hammerstein. He had such a delight in language, even in a casual email. The last one he sent to me ended: “So thank you Daniel, you are a prince. No, Hal is a Prince. You’re a gent.” Janie Dee: ‘Every word was precious’ I just watched the clip of Broadway gathering to sing his number Sunday over the weekend. All those people turning up in Times Square to sing. I was awash. Every note he writes is perfect for the emotion. You can’t sing a better note than the one he’s written. When I saw Sunday in the Park With George it spoke to me – I felt addressed personally. Even though I was sitting in a crowd of people, I felt like I was receiving guidance and healing at the same time. He has moved me to tears more than any other writer in my lifetime, left me feeling refreshed as a human being. The first show I saw by him was Putting It Together – I laughed so much but he also summoned my innermost spirit. He recognised how monstrous we can be and how monstrous relationships can be, but made it somehow OK and fun and laughable. In 1990, Stephen became chair of musical theatre at Oxford University. Cameron Mackintosh pulled together a few actors and some up-and-coming writers to take a course with Sondheim and create new musicals. It was very intimate. I was one of the actors. We were working on a song in the theatre and I suddenly felt a sort of warmth and looked to my left – he was sitting there, twinkling. I didn’t know when he’d come in. He was very friendly, encouraging, quiet. Every word was precious. Doing Follies at the National Theatre in 2017, it felt like a huge ship that we were getting on. I didn’t know if it would sail. Dominic Cooke, the director, had put so much into it and we had rehearsed for weeks and weeks. At the end of the first preview, we walked on to take our bows and I looked down and there was this man going crazy, clapping and shouting hooray. It was Stephen Sondheim. He was like a fan, and had run down the front to clap at us and give us his blessing.The UK’s minimum gap for Covid booster jabs will be halved from six months to three, after the government accepted advice from its vaccines watchdog to speed up the programme to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed that all adults would be offered the jab, after the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) announced that the waiting time was being cut for all adults, with priority for booking to be decided by the NHS. The watchdog said adults aged 18 to 39 should be offered booster jabs and recommended cutting the gap between second and third doses from at least six months to at least three months. Speaking in the Commons soon afterwards, Javid said the rollout would be staggered by age group, with older people invited for boosters first. The JCVI advised that severely immunocompromised people should be eligible for boosters three months after their primary course of three vaccinations. The committee also said 12- to 15-year-olds should be able to get their second Covid jabs for the first time. “I have accepted this advice in full,” Javid told MPs, also outlining previously announced measures to try to curb the spread of Omicron, including travel restrictions, mandatory self-isolation for close contacts of people who test positive for the variant, and mandatory masks on public transport and in shops in England. The number of confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in the UK had reached 11, he said, with two more detected in England. “Our experience of fighting this virus has shown us that it’s best to act decisively and swiftly when we see a potential threat, which is why we’re building our defences and putting these measures in place without delay,” Javid said. Saying the new rules would be reviewed after three weeks, Javid said that if it turned out Omicron was no more dangerous than the currently dominant Delta variant, “then we will not keep measures in place a day longer than necessary”. The extension of the booster programme to a further 13 million adults under 40 means that in total 53 million people in the UK will eventually become eligible. All over-50s and clinically vulnerable people – 32 million Britons in total – have been eligible for boosters since September. On 15 November, this was extended to those aged 40 to 49 – an extra 8 million people. Explaining the plans at a press conference, Jonathan Van-Tam, England’s deputy chief medical officer, said: “We need everyone on the pitch to up their game and play their part to come forward for boosters. It has never been more vital than at this point.” He said the NHS would have to decide the timings of opening up bookings to younger people “in an orderly way” that gets the balance right between ensuring the most at risk are getting their boosters and keeping up the pace of jabs. Van-Tam also suggested there may need to be a “true national effort” to get booster jabs done in the same way vaccinations were done in early 2021. The NHS is administering 350,000 booster vaccines or third jabs a day, or about 2.4m a week, official figures show. It will have to increase the daily number of jabs to 500,000 a day in order to hit 30m boosters by Christmas Day, according to Guardian analysis. Despite the large number of adults who have been eligible for months, however, only 17 million have had their booster jab. The NHS is expected to concentrate on getting booster jabs to older age groups rather than opening up booking for people in their teens and 20s at this stage, unless capacity is significantly expanded. The JCVI has been reviewing the evidence for two to three weeks, and the Omicron variant had only accelerated the recommendation for boosters. The government’s advisers believe it is better for boosters to be delivered before any wave from the Omicron variant hits the UK and based their decision on the need to boost people’s immune response. Reacting to the announcement, Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist at the University of Warwick, said: “I’ve being advocating for 12- to 15-year-olds to be double-vaccinated for months. Looking at the data from the US and Israel, I just couldn’t understand why we’ve held off for so long and caused all that disruption to the education and wellbeing of our young. “I am a bit worried about the three-month gap. We know that often the longer the gap the better, but it’s a fine judgment call in terms of how long you leave it before getting the population fully protected.”Hayley Raso is back in Australia for the first time in a long time. “Seventeen months,” she clarifies. Her native country’s strict Covid-19 border restrictions had shut out the rest of the world and the Manchester City winger with it. Now she is finally ensconced in Sydney, and yet still separated from family, this time courtesy of Queensland’s unbending border closure which stopped them travelling from the Gold Coast to watch the Matildas’ two-match friendly series with the United States. “Only my dad can come,” she says, “because he lives in northern New South Wales.” So Raso on Saturday made in her first international appearance since the Tokyo 2020 Olympics – a chastening 3-0 loss to the world champions – while her mum, grandma and siblings watched on television in the manner they do the Women’s Super League at silly hours of the southern-hemisphere night. Just like her return home, the minutes off the bench had been a while coming. If 17 months is a long time in life, two months can feel a lifetime in football. Raso had barely signed for City from Everton when she injured a shoulder, effectively ruling the 27-year-old out for the first portion of the club’s so-far sodden season. “I’m only just coming back in so it’s been a little bit of a rusty start finding my feet,” she says. “But I’ve done that now.” She has indeed, to the tune of two goals and an assist in City’s 5-0 rout of Aston Villa before the international window, a result which at least momentarily relieves the pressure on the manager, Gareth Taylor. Even so, last season’s second-placed finish now seems the stuff of fantasy. “I think he’s a very good coach,” Raso says. “He’s getting the best out of the players and going through a little bit of a rough patch at the moment, but I’m certain that will clear itself up. The win was nice, and I hope we can continue in that direction.” Raso is not a huge talker; there’s a quiet durability about the Brisbane product which has served her well during more challenging periods. The big one occurred in 2018 when she fractured three vertebrae while playing for the NWSL side Portland Thorns. Over a long stay in hospital she relearned to walk, then played for Australia at the 2019 World Cup. Well before that, though, she was the youngest of three siblings brought up by a single mother providing round-the-clock care for her oldest brother. “Jordan is intellectually disabled,” Raso says, adding it can be difficult to keep in touch with him while overseas. “I don’t speak to him that much unless he’s with my dad or my mum.” Jordan visits family often from the group home he moved into some years ago, though Raso concedes the complications associated with his condition have been tough on him and her whole family. Her other brother Lachlan, the final piece of the childhood backyard football triumvirate and now a civil engineer, was born with congenital heart disease and in 2015 underwent open-heart surgery. At the time Raso was in the US on contract with Washington Spirit and wanted to come home; Lachlan convinced her to stay so he could watch her play while he recovered. “The whole concept of the book – and 50% of the profit of the sales are going to HeartKids – that’s for him and for my family,” she says. The “book” is of the children’s variety, an in-vogue project for professional footballers but also one which generally offers nuggets of truth about their subjects. Raso’s is called Hayley’s Ribbon, a story which goes like this: “Football gave Hayley freedom when she could relax and play. She felt her shyness hold her back and wished it would go away.” And so on and so forth, until nan introduces “the magic of the ribbon”, a shimmering symbol of on-field strength and enlightenment. In real life nan’s name is Patricia, and she matches ribbons to each and every one of Raso’s kits. For the Matildas they are yellow, for City sky blue. The gesture is so simple it practically feels pure. “I kind of am known for it now and it’s become my trademark,” she says. “I rang my grandma and told her about it and read her some of it. She was crying; it was so sweet.” Raso, at least on the field, is not so sweet. On the ball she is aggressive, unafraid to take on opponents – as a teenager she lost her front teeth in a head-on collision while playing touch football – and more often than not emerges the victor. “I’d like to say that I’ve developed since being in the UK as the standard is so high,” she says. “Training week in, week out with some of the best players in the world at City will only help.” The two-year contract means Raso, who will likely earn her 58th cap against the USA in Newcastle on Tuesday, will continue to play alongside a decent chunk of the England team and her Australia teammate Alanna Kennedy. “It’s a massive club and a place I want to be,” she says. “I want to be competing for trophies and playing Champions League football … what I like about European football is that you have a proper season and then breaks. When I played in the NWSL and in the W-League I was just going back to back to back and never giving my body a rest.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.Legislation scheduled to be debated in federal parliament this week would shield Australia’s Future Fund from freedom of information requests such as the one that revealed the sovereign wealth fund is investing in weapons manufacturers that sell arms to the Myanmar military. The Australian government’s Future Fund has more than $157m invested with 14 publicly traded companies that have done business with the sanctioned Myanmar military, which has been accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Australia has investments with Aviation Industry Corporation of China, a Chinese state-owned weapons manufacturer that has sold combat aircraft to the Myanmar military, and Bharat Electronics, an Indian government-controlled company which has sold radar and sonar equipment to the regime. The Coalition’s Investment Funds Legislation Amendment Bill 2021 is slated to be debated in the Senate on Wednesday, the penultimate parliamentary sitting day of this year and possibly of this parliament. The proposed law would exempt the Future Fund from releasing any details about its investments under FOI laws, including, as the department of finance confirmed to a Senate inquiry, information about which companies the fund has invested in and how much. Greens senator Nick McKim has tabled amendments that would remove the Future Fund’s FOI exemption and require the fund to publicly report its investments every six months. The Future Fund, which controls nearly $250bn in funds and has 182 employees, has previously said the 10 to 20 freedom of information requests it receives each year are “administratively burdensome”. McKim told the Guardian it was “grossly inappropriate” Australia’s sovereign wealth fund was investing public money in arms manufacturing, “let alone in Chinese state-owned corporations supplying weapons to Myanmar’s military regime”. He said the fund should immediately divest its investments in arms manufacturers, and argued the proposed government legislation was unjustified and unnecessary. “Rather than more secrecy, we need far greater scrutiny of their investments,” McKim said. “Under the government’s proposal, we would never have found out about the Future Fund’s investments in companies linked to the Myanmar military. The Australian people have a right to know how their money is being invested and into which companies.” Introducing the bill into parliament in August, the employment minister, Stuart Robert, said having Future Fund investments subject to the scrutiny of the FOI regime presented an “investment and governance risk”. “The exemption under FOI laws will increase confidence in the operation of the law and allow important engagement with investment managers to successfully invest … on behalf of the government where returns benefit all Australians,” he said. Myanmar’s military, known as the Tatmadaw, has faced international condemnation over its 2017 “clearance operations” – executed with “genocidal intent” according to UN investigators – against the ethnic minority Rohingya in Rakhine state, which included mass killings, including of children, as well as gang rapes, arson and torture. More than 25,000 Rohingya were killed, and 700,000 driven over Myanmar’s border into Bangladesh. The Tatmadaw, which has ruled Myanmar for much of its independent history, forcibly took control of the country in a coup in February and has since killed more than 1,200 civilians in a crackdown on pro-democracy protests. The chief executive of Save the Children, Paul Ronalds, said Australia’s Future Fund was established for the benefit of future generations, not to fund companies that provide weapons used by regimes accused of committing mass violence against children in conflict. “The information uncovered highlights the need for greater transparency of Australia’s investment in weapons manufacturers with the Australian public.” Rawan Arraf, the executive director at the Australian Centre for International Justice, said FOI laws had exposed the Future Fund’s “astonishingly inadequate” environmental, social and corporate governance, and responsible investment policy. “If it wasn’t for access to freedom of information, we wouldn’t know just how bad these investment activities are. Now, that mechanism is at serious risk. These investments should be reviewed and scrutinised by the public.” Arraf said Australian taxpayer funds should be invested ethically. Clancy Moore, the Australian director at Publish What You Pay, said “transparency means Australians now know that our sovereign wealth fund is invested in weapons companies and big gas companies, like Total and Chevron”. “The proposed change would keep these investments secret from Australians.” Justice For Myanmar spokesperson Yadanar Maung said: “It is deplorable that Australia’s Future Fund is seeking to profit from companies arming the Myanmar military and effectively financing its campaign of terror.” The Future Fund did not answer questions about its investments in companies linked to the Tatmadaw. In a statement, a spokesperson said: “In line with its mandate from government, the Future Fund has built a broadly diversified portfolio which includes passive investments through external investment managers in thousands of entities globally. “The fund has a well-established policy on environmental, social and governance matters and exclusions which takes account of its objectives, legislation, investment strategy, Australian law and the treaties that the Australian government has entered and ratified.” Neither the Aviation Industry Corporation of China nor Bharat Electronics responded to questions from the Guardian.Australians are increasingly aware that racism is a problem in their country, while positive sentiment about immigration and multiculturalism has also increased over the past 12 months, according to an authoritative survey on social cohesion. The annual Mapping Social Cohesion Report from the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute, released on Tuesday, has charted a 20 percentage point increase in 12 months in response to the question “How big a problem is racism in Australia?” Back in 2020, 40% of respondents thought racism in Australia was either a very big or fairly big problem. But in the 2021 survey of 3,572 respondents, 60% held that view. The survey authors note “an increase of 20 percentage points in response to a general question of this nature is almost unprecedented in the Scanlon Foundation surveys”, which have been conducted annually since 2007. But they say there is no clear trigger or cultural catalyst explaining such a large shift. The research suggests Australians were also more enthusiastic during the period of pandemic-induced international border closure about the contribution migrants make to the economy, with 86% of the sample agreeing with the proposition “immigrants are generally good for Australia’s economy” (compared with 76% in 2019, the year before Covid-19 hit). Similarly, 86% of respondents agreed “multiculturalism has been good for Australia” compared with 80% agreeing with that proposition in 2019. A super-majority (90% – the highest affirmation in the survey) also endorsed the importance of the relationship between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and the wider Australian community. But the latest report also notes that a deeply established “longstanding hierarchy of ethnic and racial preference” exists alongside majority community endorsement of Australia’s cultural diversity. This hierarchy is established by responses to questions about attitudes to immigrants from particular ethnic backgrounds. In general terms, Australians are more negative about immigrants from India, China, the Middle East and Africa than arrivals from Britain or European countries. “Between July 2020 and July 2021 there has been a marginal reduction in the indication of negative views, yet the hierarchy still remains,” the latest Scanlon report says. “Negative attitude towards immigrants from Lebanon were indicated by 42% in 2020 and 38% in 2021; towards Sudanese, 49% in 2020 and 46% in 2021.” Australians are also more negative about Muslims than other faith groups (37% of respondents were negative in 2020 and 32% in 2021). The 2021 Scanlon Foundation national survey, led by emeritus professor Andrew Markus from Monash University, is the fifteenth in the series. The bulk of the fieldwork was undertaken in July. As part of mapping social cohesion, the research canvassed community attitudes to government management of the pandemic. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the 2020 data, 85% of respondents approved of the Morrison government’s management of the pandemic. But in the latest survey, that’s fallen to 52%. States able to suppress Covid infections without long lockdowns, like Western Australia and South Australia, had approvals of about 90%, while community support for the New South Wales government was 59%. The data also shows the public were on board with public health restrictions, including lockdowns. “While there were protests against government lockdowns which gained much media attention, the survey finds that approval of lockdowns won close to 90% endorsement,” the survey says. “In July 2021, 87% of respondents across the nation viewed lockdown restrictions as definitely required or probably required; in the states most affected, restrictions were approved by 91% of New South Wales and 85% of Victorian respondents”. The survey also tracks trust in the federal government. Trust had been at a low ebb before coronavirus hit, bumping along in the 30% range. But in 2020 there was a rebound to 54%, which was “the highest proportion obtained in the fifteen years of surveying by the Scanlon Foundation”. But the trust rebound did not last. By July 2021, the relevant measure was down 10 percentage points to 44%, although the survey notes that reading is still above the long-term average. In response to a question about personal trust – a metric regarded as a key indicator of a cohesive society – Australians trusted each other more than they did a year ago (in 2019, 43% agreed most people can be trusted and in 2021, that was up to 52%). Survey respondents were largely optimistic about Australia’s future despite the travails of the pandemic and a majority (71% compared with 64% the year before) expressed satisfaction with their financial situation. The Morrison government transferred billions in taxpayer support for workers and businesses over the course of the pandemic. As Canberra rolled out income support, the household savings ratio notched up a record rise. But focus groups also yielded significant insights about how any future health crisis could be better managed. There is a view communication need to be improved with community members from non-English speaking backgrounds. There was also concern about inequities with technology, the burden placed on women attempting to manage home-based learning and remote employment, and about the impact of school closures on children. “Many interviewees expressed strong concern about disengagement amongst children and young people,” the report says.A high-profile NSW Liberal woman is quitting to run as an independent at the next federal election, partly to protest the handling of an internal complaint in which she alleged “inappropriate” behaviour by some senior men within the party and government. Natalie Baini, a lawyer and sports administrator who nominated as a Liberal candidate for the marginal Sydney seat of Reid in May, is withdrawing from the preselection process and quitting the party to run as an independent. Her decision is also due to her concerns about the preselection process, with expectations growing the Liberals will not allow a ballot of members in the seat that would have seen her compete against the sitting moderate MP, Fiona Martin. Baini, who advised the party on Monday that she would be withdrawing from the preselection race and cancelling her membership, told Guardian Australia she had initially decided to nominate after being approached by party faithful unhappy with their representation in Canberra. She accused the Morrison government of paying “lip service” to women’s issues, saying she had raised “serious concerns” with the NSW state division about the alleged conduct of some senior individuals in the party, and she was yet to receive a response. “It is astonishing the level of dismissiveness with which those concerns have been met,” Baini said. “At the same time, I see a government paying lip service to this notion of respect at work and the protection of women and I believe that the concerns that I have raised have caused the party to sweep yet another critical issue under the rug.” Baini did not want to discuss the details of the complaint made to the NSW division, other than it related to the alleged “inappropriate conduct of some senior members of the party and the government”. “The party failed to respond adequately at all,” Baini said. “I am a fair person. I could have accepted that following a thorough investigation, the findings did not come down in my favour. However, despite a number of reports that suggest an investigation was conducted and that it reached a conclusion, I received absolutely no requests for input into that investigation, which is astonishing.” It is understood the NSW division responded formally to Baini’s complaints last month – three years after they were initially raised with the party – but found the behaviour was outside the scope of the party’s code of conduct. The self-described “lifelong Liberal”, who was previously vice president of the Reid branch, said she had struggled with the decision to withdraw from the preselection race and quit the party she had supported for 40 years. She first joined as a member aged 16 in the mid-1990s and has been involved in every election since, including as co-manager of the 2016 campaign of former sitting Liberal MP Craig Laundy. But Baini said once it became clear the Liberal party was not going to allow the preselection process to go ahead, she made the decision to run to offer an option to “traditional Liberal voters” in the seat. “The reason I have withdrawn from the preselection process is because it is entirely unreasonable and infeasible that a candidate for an upcoming election would be preselected now, given the various challenges the government is facing, and certainly the uphill battle it is facing in Reid. “I believe that nominations were sought in bad faith by the party and I am calling it out.” Frustration has been building in the NSW division over the failure of the party to finalise preselections in a raft of other seats in NSW, including Hughes, Gilmore, Parramatta, Warringah, Bennelong, Dobell, Eden-Monaro, Fowler and Greenway. Baini said there was unhappiness among conservative Liberals in the seat about the issues being pursued by Martin in Canberra, who has become one of a group of outspoken moderate MPs agitating for more action on climate change. At the time of Martin’s endorsement ahead of the 2019 election, the Daily Telegraph reported that the “captain’s pick” faced “strong opposition among the conservatives” on state executive, with the party needing to vote on whether to waive a requirement for a candidate to have been a financial member of the party for at least six months. “Chief among the concerns of the four voting against the waiver were Martin’s Facebook posts in favour of pill testing, legalising abortion, and cheering on Donald Trump’s fiercest political rivals Nancy Pelosi and Elizabeth Warren,” the Daily Telegraph reported at the time. Baini, who also identifies as a moderate, said climate action was important but she did not see it as a priority issue in “one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse electorates in Australia”. “It’s not that there’s an issue with moderate views, it is our local member believing that the causes being championed by the so-called Modern Liberals are of the highest priority to the people of Reid,” Baini said. “We are an aspirational electorate that is very concerned with the recovery of business in the area. The infrastructure that is required for families to do well in Reid has been largely neglected, whether that is physical infrastructure, business infrastructure, or social infrastructure, we have been heavily underrepresented. “I will be campaigning on a return to business strength in Reid. I’ll be campaigning on better support for families. And I will be campaigning on better infrastructure for Reid and a deeper engagement with multicultural communities.” Baini said she anticipated she would draw support from within the Liberal party in the local area and would secure backing from community groups she is involved with. She resigned her position as the AFL’s cultural diversity manager on Friday to focus on campaigning full time for the seat. Baini, whose family is prominent in the Lebanese community, sits on the advisory board of St Patrick’s College Strathfield, is a former club president of the Concord Giants AFL club, is former co-chair of the Canada Bay Canons Football Club, and is a prominent member of St Martha’s Catholic Parish in Strathfield. On the prime minister Scott Morrison’s response to women’s issues, Baini said her own experience was emblematic of a deeper issue within the party, which she said was of concern to many Liberal women. “Many women who make up the rank and file of the party are certainly uncomfortable with the government’s narrative and lack of genuine concern on this issue,” Baini said. “More importantly it impacts women outside of the party. And my concern is for the people, not just in Reid, but all Australians.” A Liberal party spokesperson told Guardian Australia: “Nominations are dealt with in accordance with our constitution, and this applies equally to all potential candidates. All individuals who nominate are subject to the same process.” “The division had provided the individual with a comprehensive response. Given the person had requested their approach be treated confidentially, which we have respected, we are unable to provide any further information.”Tesla, Snowy Hydro and other big suppliers of storage capacity on Australia’s main electricity grid warn proposed rule changes amount to a tax on their operations that will deter investors and slow the decarbonisation of the industry. The Australian Energy Market Commission (AEMC) will release its final decision this Thursday on new rules for integrating batteries, pumped hydro and other forms of storage. The AEMC’s draft decision, released in July, angered many firms because it proposed charging storage providers for drawing power, ignoring a recommendation by the Australian Electricity Market Operator (AEMO) that they be exempt. Battery maker Tesla, which has supplied some of the largest storage to the National Electricity Market, said in a submission that the charges would “kill the commercial viability of all grid storage projects, causing inefficient investment in alternative network”, with consumers paying higher costs. Snowy Hydro, which is building the giant Snowy 2 pumped storage project and already operates a smaller one, said in its submission the proposed changes if implemented would jeopardise investment. “This is a major policy change, amounting to a tax on infrastructure critical to achieving a renewable future,” Snowy Hydro said. AEMO itself argued it was important storage providers were not “disincentivised from connecting to the transmission network, as they generally provide a net benefit to the power system by charging at periods of low demand”. Australia’s electricity grid faces economic and engineering challenges as it adjusts to the arrival of lower cost and also lower carbon alternatives to fossil fuels. While rule changes are necessary to account for operators that can both draw from and supply power, how they are implemented can have long-lasting effects on the technologies that get encouraged or repelled, independent experts say. “It doesn’t have to be this way,” said Bruce Mountain, director of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre. “In Britain, the regulator dealing with the same issues has said that storage devices don’t pay the system charges when they withdraw electricity from the grid,” he said. The prospect that storage operators will have to pay transmission charges could “drastically” affect their profitability since their business models rely on the difference between the price their pay for power and how much they can sell it for. Gas generators and network monopolies would benefit from the change, Mountain said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning An AEMC spokesperson said the commission had consulted widely, including from those who objected to the payment for transmission access. “The market is moving towards a future that will be increasingly reliant on energy storage to firm up the growing volume of renewable energy and deliver on the increasing need for critical system security services as the ageing fleet of thermal generators retire,” the spokesperson said, declining to elaborate on the final ruling before it is published. “The regulatory framework needs to facilitate this transition as the energy sector continues to decarbonise,” the official said. AusNet, which operates the Victorian energy transmission grid, said that while “technological neutrality is paramount for battery and hybrid unit connections to both the distribution and transmission networks,” it did not back charging storage access to networks in all cases. “[Ausnet] supports a clear exemptions framework for energy storage providers,” a spokesperson said. “We recommend that batteries and other hybrid facilities should have transmission use of system charges waived if they provide a net benefit to network customers.” We are not aware of anyone that supports the charging storage access to networks in all circumstances. “Batteries and hybrid facilities that consume energy from the network should be provided no preferential treatment relative to other customers and generators.” Jonathan Upson, a principal at Strategic Renewable Consulting, though, said the AEMC wants electricity flowing through batteries to be taxed twice to pay network charges – once when the electricity charges the battery and then again when the same electricity is sent out by the battery an hour or two later but this time with customers paying. “The AEMC’s draft decision has the identical rationale for eliminating franking credits on all dividends, resulting in double taxing of company profits,” he said. Christiaan Zuur, director of energy transformation at the Clean Energy Council, said that while much of AEMC’s draft proposal was constructive, “those benefits are either nullified or maybe even outweighed” by uncertainty over charges. “Risk perception” will be important since potential newcomers won’t be sure of what charges they will pay to connect to the grid and existing operators could have their connection agreements reopened, Zuur said. “Investors focus on the potential risk. It does factor through to the integral costs for projects,” he said. The outcome of new charges may prompt more people to put batteries on their premises and draw power from their own solar panels, Mountain said, cutting their reliance on a centralised network. “Ironically, it encourages customers to depend less and less on the grid,” he said. “It’s almost like the capture of the dominant interests playing out over time at their own expense.” Separately, the latest edition of the Clean Energy Council Confidence Index shows leadership by state governments is helping to shore up investor appetite for investing in renewable energy even with higher 2030 emissions reduction goals from the federal government. Overall, investor confidence increased by a point in the last six months – from 6.3 to 7.3 out of 10 – following strong commitments and policy development from state governments, particularly on the east coast, the council said. “The results of this latest survey illustrate the economic value in policy that lowers the emissions footprint of our electricity generation, supporting regional centres and creating jobs. Investors recognise the opportunities created by limiting global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees,” said council chief executive Kane Thornton. Among the states, NSW, Victoria and Queensland led in terms of positive investor sentiment. • This article was amended on 30 November 2021. An earlier version stated Ausnet supported charging storage providers for network access. A spokesperson said it backed a waiver on charges if certain conditions were met.As pandemic restrictions lift across Australia and more face-to-face activities resume, socialising can be a source of profound anxiety for many people. But what if, when you met up with others, you don’t have to be yourself? If decision-making is done through a character you create and consequences determined by the roll of dice? Since its inception in the mid-1970s, the tabletop role-playing game Dungeons &amp; Dragons (D&amp;D) has brought together a far more diverse array of players than its stereotypes suggest. Earlier this year, the game’s publisher, Wizards of the Coast, released a report showing that, of its estimated 50 million players, 54% were younger than 30 and 40% identified as female. What it didn’t reveal was the rise in visibility of queer and neurodiverse players. “It has always been a safe haven for folks who might not feel at home elsewhere,” says the game’s principal rules designer, Jeremy Crawford. “D&amp;D is about a group of people with wildly different pasts coming together to create an intentional family and overcome adversity. A group of players are stronger because of their differences from each other. You don’t want four fighters; you want a fighter, a cleric, a rogue and a wizard. In other words, you want a group that is powerful because of its diversity.” To play, a storyteller – known in the game as the Dungeon Master, or DM – takes a group of players through an adventure set in an imaginary world. It is their role to bring that world to life around the players, describe or enact the characters or creatures they meet, and to roll the dice that decide the outcomes of the party’s decisions. Games can involve more than a dozen players, but most feature four to six players who gather around a table with books, dice, pencil and paper. Some may join via Zoom; sometimes miniatures, figurines and maps can be used to illustrate the adventure. For people such as Shadia Hancock, the founder of advocacy group Autism Actually and Dungeon Master to a group of young neurodiverse players, the therapeutic potential of the game has always been clear. “It’s about creating a sense of community,” Hancock says. “I work out the players’ expectations at the beginning of a game. Some get really into creating their characters, some are more interested in finding items and exploring the world, others are really interested in how the characters met. We all have a mutual love of gaming, but we all want something different from the session.” Some characteristics expressed by some of Hancock’s players – social anxiety, increased empathy, difficulty adapting to change, feeling overwhelmed in noisy environments – have become familiar to many Australians in the wake of lockdowns. Studies cited by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare found reported levels of social anxiety increased over the past two years among all age groups, with young neurodiverse Australians even more likely to have experienced a decline in wellbeing. “While other people are excited about going out, I’m filled with dread,” Hancock tells me. “With Covid, we [autistic communities] had all these sudden changes, often with short notice, and there was this need to constantly adapt to new rules. Not knowing what is coming up is really anxiety-inducing. During the pandemic, that became a shared experience.” While there is no shortage of anecdotes about how D&amp;D has transformed the lives of neurodiverse players and their families, published studies are few and small in scope. “Before starting, the players might be more withdrawn and not used to larger social situations,” says Hancock. “But once they create their character and get used to the structure of the game, they become more outgoing. It fosters friendships that, in unstructured settings, wouldn’t flow as well. Having that activity-based format and a collaborative approach gives players support to try new things.” Overcoming fear of failure is one of the game’s most notable therapeutic aspects. Throughout the game, the player or DM will roll a die to decide the outcome of a decision. Will you notice the secret door in the castle wall? Can you determine the history of an ancient book? Are you able to charm a unicorn? While failure is not avoided, it is potentially instructive and, often, an excuse for humour and the release of tension. “I think the game is really powerful,” says Crawford. “It allows players to be daring in ways that are hard in our daily lives, knowing that if things do go spectacularly wrong, we’ll be able to laugh about it.” American game designer Amanda Hamon has used teenage life as inspiration for her forthcoming D&amp;D book and adventure setting, Strixhaven: A Curriculum of Chaos. Strixhaven is a magically enhanced university where players arrive as students, join colleges, form and handle relationships and deal with sinister forces. The book’s artwork, some of which is drawn from the trading card game, Magic: The Gathering, “draws students and faculty from across the world and from other realms in the multiverse”. “As D&amp;D has grown the creators have realised this game is for everybody,” says Hamon. “There’s lots and lots of folks who are playing, and we want everybody to feel that they’re welcome and come to the table. I get questions like: ‘What is it like now that D&amp;D is more diverse?’ But it always has been. You might not necessarily have seen it because the people who were making things didn’t always think: ‘Hey, there’s this whole wide world of folks out there.’ ” For a host of reasons, many players prefer playing D&amp;D on online platforms, such as Zoom, Discord or Roll20. Others have a hybrid arrangement of in-person and remote players. As technology evolves, D&amp;D continues to grow in popularity, with a greater number of people finding appeal in moving through conversations and encounters at a more manageable pace and replacing the ambiguity of real-world interactions with shared adventures of the imagination.Parts of the Great Barrier Reef would be hit with extreme levels of coral bleaching five times each decade by the middle of this century if global heating was kept just below 2C, according to ‘“confronting” new research. Even under the most ambitious scenario where heating is kept to 1.5C, coral bleaching strong enough to kill corals would hit somewhere on the reef more than three times a decade, the study predicts. Allowing global heating to go beyond 2C would bring unprecedented levels of heat stress. “It’s hard to imagine what that would look like” said Prof Peter Mumby, one of the study’s authors. Using the latest climate models, the scientists added extra information about the depth, tides and winds around reefs to give a more detailed projection of how much bleaching could occur over different areas. Lead author of the study, Jen McWhorter, said the modelling suggested warming above 2C would be “very, very bad” for corals along the reef. But she said keeping temperatures to 1.5C – the most ambitious target in the Paris climate change agreement – meant corals were exposed to far less heat stress. “The stress we see above 2C under these higher [greenhouse gas] emissions scenarios is three to four times greater than present day conditions,” said McWhorter, who has a combined role at the University of Exeter and the University of Queensland. Coral reefs are considered one of the most sensitive ecosystems to global heating. If corals sit in warmer than average water for too long, they lose the algae that provides much of their colour and nutrients, leaving a visible white skeleton. If water temperatures are not too severe, then corals can recover from bleaching. Higher temperatures or prolonged exposure can cause coral death. The Great Barrier Reef, off the Queensland coast, experienced three mass outbreaks of coral bleaching in 2016, 2017 and 2020. University of Queensland’s Prof Peter Mumby, a co-author of the study said the findings were “confronting”. “It tells us that even with the most optimistic scenarios, we are still looking at one bleaching event somewhere every three years.” Published in the journal Global Change Biology, the study found while all areas of the reef would see increased risk from bleaching as emissions went up, the central and southern areas would fare slightly worse. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Mumby said scientists were busy on research to understand if, and how, different species of coral might naturally adapt to warmer temperature. The study suggests if greenhouse gas emissions were held to levels that would keep global warming below 2C or at 1.5c, then the frequency of coral bleaching peaks just before the year 2060 and then falls slightly. Mumby said he thought coral reefs “could still persist” with global heating of 1.5C, but the diversity of corals would not be at levels seen today. But as heating hit 2C, bleaching would hit parts of the reef “every two to three years” and he said “it’s hard to imagine what that would look like.” The Great Barrier Reef has seen five mass bleaching events – 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020 – all caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by global heating. One study earlier this month found that since 1998, more than 98% of individual reefs along the Great Barrier Reef had been hit by bleaching at least once. Prof Terry Hughes, of James Cook University and a leading expert on the effects of global heating of coral reefs, said: “The trajectory is already under way and we can see damage from only one degree of global warming. We are hading for 1.5C, which is unavoidable. “Without a climate model, we know that warming has triggered three events and that has several damaged 80% of reefs. This study shows that will be ongoing, but the end point depends on how much warmer we are prepared to allow it to go.”Wednesday’s GDP figures will likely be the second worst ever recorded in Australia, but more than anything they will highlight an economy still massively affected by the pandemic. Whenever I hear talk about how we are moving on from the pandemic and things might be getting back to normal and so perhaps we need to start focusing on other things such as inflation or government debt, I draw people’s attention to the retail trade figures. The latest figures came out last Friday and while I usually would rhapsodise about monthly or quarterly growth, let the graph of the total retail turnover tell the story: If the graph does not display please click here You don’t need to be an economist to know that something weird is still happening out there. From 1982 until February 2020, retail trade would on average go up or down each month by 0.7%. In the 20 months since the pandemic hit, only twice has retail trade either risen or fallen by less than that amount. In October it rose 4.9% in a month – a level that aside from the months around the introduction of the GST in 2000 had never happened before the pandemic, but which is only the fourth biggest increase since Covid-19 arrived. Things are not even close to business as usual. And of course the retail situation varies greatly depending on whether you’re selling goods like hardware, furniture or recreational goods, or you’re offering hospitality services in cafes, restaurants and takeaway: If the graph does not display please click here This wildness flows through to the national accounts and GDP figures. On Monday the latest business indicators were released and showed a massive range in company profits. Profits in the construction industry, off the back of government subsidies, jumped 20%, while the they fell 13% in the accommodation and food services industry, and 25% in the administrative and support industry, following business lockdowns and people working from home. Wages overall fell 0.8% in the quarter, with a 1.0% fall in the non-mining sector of the economy: If the graph does not display please click here The biggest news from the business indicators was the change in inventories. Inventories are essentially unsold items held by businesses. In the September quarter they fell 1.9%: If the graph does not display please click here As a general rule, when inventories fall it means that businesses are selling their stock and not seeking to replenish it for future sales. Falling inventories detract from GDP growth. So great was the fall in the September quarter, it alone will cause the economy to shrink around 0.7 percentage points. Off the back of that larger than expected fall in inventories, Shane Oliver from AMP Capital now expects GDP to decline 3.1% in the September quarter. That would flow through to annual growth of around 2.7% – well down on the (truly abnormal) 9.6% growth last quarter: If the graph does not display please click here But as is often the case with economics, the fall in inventories is not all bad. While it is a bad sign when companies run down their stock, once things improve (and open up) they will again need to build up that stock, and that in turn spurs economic growth. This is where the inflation concerns do arise, given international supply blockages could mean that businesses will struggle to have enough stock to sell to customers. In that case prices will rise. But all of this is a bit tough to predict. As those who are planning interstate Christmas holidays will know, there is little confidence in predicting what will happen three weeks from now, let alone three months later or the next year. This brings us to the latest private capital expenditure figures, which also came out last week. While the September quarter was affected by lockdowns, what was most interesting were the latest estimates for investment in the 2021-22 financial year. There was a strong increase in expectations for non-mining investment over this time last year. While that is good, it really doesn’t even make up for the falls last year. Even worse, the increase does not appear due to any expected strength in the economy, but is largely driven by the instant asset write-off policy, which allows small businesses to write off a range of machinery such as new work vehicles and IT equipment: If the graph does not display please click here As Michael Pascoe noted, there’s only so many utes and laptops a business can buy. Much like the fall in inventories now means a build-up later, the big boost in machinery and equipment investment now means less later. It all makes for an economy still very much buffeted by the pandemic waves. Wednesday’s figures are going to be bad. And there will be an attempt to suggest that it is all in the past and that things are on the improve. But while the figures will show an economy far from normal, we still do not know for sure what the “normal” economy will look like. Whether it be spending on services or goods, or whether it be investing and house prices once interest rates begin to rise, there remains much that is in flux.More so than other fabrics, the history of silk is shrouded in mystery and folklore, which feels apt for a fibre that is drawn from the cocoon of the silkworm. Its legend begins with the teenage wife of the Yellow Emperor. Sometime in 2640BC she was in her garden drinking tea beneath a mulberry tree when a cocoon fell into her cup. As she pulled it out, the cocoon dissolved into a long, translucent thread. The teenage empress studied and experimented with the thread until eventually she invented a version of the reel and loom so she could teach the ladies of her court to weave the long strands into fabric. In the thousands of years that have passed, the practice of sericulture has been refined and spread across the globe. We asked some experts for advice on the best way to care for this ancient fabric. Keep silk’s special properties in mind Georgia McCorkill is a fashion lecturer at RMIT University, she says because silk filaments are so fine and delicate they can be woven into very lightweight, sheer fabrics that make beautiful evening wear like georgette, chiffon or taffeta. But be careful, these fabrics can “catch and snag on jewellery or rough surfaces” so it’s important to consider your accessories and what you’re sitting on or leaning against when wearing silk. Find a good dry cleaner Most silk garments will say “dry clean only” on their care label. McCorkill says although sometimes you can handwash silk, dry cleaning “is the best way to retain the natural lustre and drape of the fabric.” Dry cleaning is also the best way to care for silk garments with linings and interfacings “such as a jacket or a structured gown” because it prevents uneven shrinkage, resulting in linings or shoulders that are misshapen. This also applies to garments with beaded embellishment – McCorkill says these should be taken to “a specialist occasion wear dry cleaner as the beads and sequins can be damaged by standard dry-cleaning chemicals.” Katie Kolodinski, Founder and Creative Director of Silk Laundry agrees, she says dry cleaning is especially important if the garment is made of delicate silk like chiffon or georgette since these fabrics are prone to shrinkage. She adds, “Finding a dry cleaner you can trust is really great for pieces with structure and tailoring like silk blazers and pieces with shoulder pads or detailing.” More simple pieces can be hand washed and dried in the shade If you find dry cleaning inconvenient or expensive, McCorkill says, “softer garments like lingerie and blouses can often be hand washed” even if they are labelled dry clean only. But be aware, she says handwashing may cause the fabric to lose some of its lustre, shrink or for the colours to run. So, if you’re considering handwashing, take into account the care instructions, assess how complicated the construction of the garment is and avoid handwashing finer silks or patterned silk that might not be colour fast. If you’re feeling brave enough to try handwashing, Kolodinski suggests starting with simple silk pieces. She says to fill a bucket with cold water and the smallest amount of delicate wash, like this one from The Laundress. She advises washing one piece at a time, “starting with the lightest colour moving through to the darkest.” Swish each garment around in the water for a minute or so and squeeze out the excess water, but be careful not to ring it, “as this can break the fibres.” Instead, lie the garment flat on a towel and roll the towel up with the garment to absorb the excess moisture. Then lay it flat to dry or hang it out of direct sunlight, as this can damage silk. Iron versus steam Since silk is such a delicate fibre, it responds well to steam and ironing. Kolodinski says it’s worth buying a personal steamer that doesn’t take up a lot of space or cost too much money. If you’re using an iron she says to “iron on the reverse side and use the silk setting.” But be careful, McCorkill warns “silk doesn’t need much heat at all to iron out creases and won’t tolerate high heats.” She says, “steam from the shower is a great gentle way to encourage creases to drop out.” Kolodinski also has a tip to remove wrinkles if you find yourself without an iron or steamer – the steam from a freshly boiled kettle. “Open the lid and put your garment over it. It works brilliantly if you’re at the office and getting ready to go out after work.” Silk has a complicated relationship with sweat and deodorant Pay attention to how much you sweat and what deodorant you use when wearing silk, because sweat and deodorant can leave sneaky marks on silk fabrics. McCorkill says, often they aren’t apparent at the time because silk does not hold on to smells the way synthetic fabrics do. “But over time the deodorant or oils in the sweat will damage and discolour the fabric and it’s not uncommon to return to a garment that seemed fine to discover it has some awful sweat rings.” She recommends washing or dry cleaning silk items promptly to prevent stains from damaging the fabric. Kolodinski believes this can be partly solved by fit and choice of deodorant. She says it’s best not to wear silk “too close to your underarms” and advises finding the right deodorant, she uses one by Dr. Organic. Do you have a clothing care conundrum you’d like this column to tackle? Email australia.lifestyle@theguardian.com with requests.Since he was diagnosed with cancer in the middle of the year, Tim Hurley has been relying on the support of family and friends to get him to hospital five times a week. They’ve also brought him meals and helped cover the cost of medication and other essentials. While Hurley has nothing but praise for the health system, he said Australia’s welfare system was not equipped to support people like him. “We’re blessed with the medical system we have in Australia,” he said. “It’s just that Centrelink needs an update.” Hurley is one of the more than 7,000 people in Australia who are living on the $45-a-day jobseeker payment, despite the government acknowledging their work capacity is limited due to a cancer diagnosis. Hurley is exempt from mutual obligations such as looking for work, but there’s no financial acknowledgement that he’s too sick to work enough to make a decent income. And that he will be for some time. Instead, there is only the jobseeker payment, which is well below the poverty line and $338-a-fortnight less than the disability support pension. “I’m definitely not a jobseeker right now,” Hurley, 55, said. “It’s kind of insulting to just be struggling so hard. I’ve been a sole trader and an entertainer that’s paid taxes nearly all my life. “I worked hard for this country … [It] just feels like an added burden when you’ve got something like this.” Guardian Australia revealed in October that the Cancer Council was concerned the low rate of the jobseeker payment and the strict eligibility criteria for the disability pension meant thousands of cancer sufferers were battling cancer while in poverty. The Australian Medical Association has now joined those who have raised concerns about the welfare system’s failure to support those with cancer – as well as people with other temporary illnesses. “At the moment the system is just very unsupportive for them (people with cancer),” said Richard Kidd, the chair of the Australian Medical Association Council of General Practice. Advocates have offered various options to solve the problem. Most say lifting the jobseeker payment to the poverty line would ensure those with temporary illnesses – as well as others out of work – would be adequately supported. Others say a specific payment – paid at the rate of the disability support pension – could be provided on a temporary basis until a person had recovered and was able to work again. Another suggestion is to ease the eligibility for the disability support pension, particularly the requirement that a condition is “fully diagnosed, fully treated and fully stabilised”. As written, the requirement rules out many people unable to work due to temporary illnesses, such as cancer, and also makes it harder for those with chronic illnesses, degenerative conditions and mental health conditions to obtain the pension. In a submission to an ongoing review of the disability support pension, the AMA said “defining ‘stabilised’ is problematic when the patient may experience impairment that is progressive, episodic or fluctuating”. Kidd said the rules needed to be clearer. He said they affect people with mental ill health, those with degenerative diseases, as well as those battling cancer, who find it harder to get on to the pension as a result. The AMA said one option would be to specify that a condition must only be “fully treated for current stage of [the] disease/condition”. Kidd said those with cancer were left without adequate support. “[Jobseeker] is not as much as disability support pension,” Kidd said. “For someone who is undergoing cancer treatment, their requirements in terms of costs of medical treatment, costs of accessing it, are probably a lot higher than people who are already on a disability support pension. “That highlights not only a problem with the [impairment] tables but also, at the higher level, access and equity for people who have got really serious, life threatening conditions. “The treatment may not be stabilised and the person’s diagnosis may not be stabilised but they really need an awful lot of help. The system at the moment is not really providing it.” Despite the Cancer Council’s concerns, the government is yet to say it sees a problem. Last month, the social services minister, Anne Ruston, was quizzed about what the Greens senator Janet Rice described as “gaping hole in the policy framework”. Asked if the government was going to leave [people with cancer on jobseeker] languishing in poverty, Ruston told Senate Estimates: “I reject the premise of what you’re saying. “The social security system, in conjunction with the healthcare system in Australia, is designed to support Australians through difficult situations,” she said. “Of course, it’s there when people find themselves eminently in need of support. “When people’s illnesses are long-term such that they meet the requirements of the disability impairment tables, of course, they have the opportunity [to get the pension],” Ruston added. Hurley’s work as an entertainer dried up with the pandemic, forcing him to apply for jobseeker payment. Then, in June, he was diagnosed with lymphatic cancer. Last week, he finished a course of radiotherapy that meant he needed to travel from his Castlemaine home to Bendigo hospital, about 40 minutes away. He said he was lucky that a friend or family member was able to drive him each day. While his treatment and most of his scans have been covered by Medicare, one Pet scan cost him $650, he said. The treatment has been “intense” and “quite emotionally scary”, while the chemotherapy tablets have “some pretty intense side-effects”. “I had a bit of a cry to one of the nurses in the hospital yesterday about the intensity … the pain and ongoing discomfort and everything,” Hurley said. “I don’t even know if I’m going to make it or not.” Last week, Hurley did his first gig since finishing treatment. It went for two hours, and he did it, he said, because the jobseeker payment was not sufficient to cover his living costs. He’d prefer to be recovering, and says the show was painful at times, but he managed OK. Hurley thinks the idea of a payment for people with temporary illnesses, like cancer, would be a good idea. “They need something to help people like me that fall in between,” he said. “Life’s complicated and the Centrelink system doesn’t seem to reflect that.” Do you have a story? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.comOne reason why sleeping rough was a rare sight in the 1970s (Letters, 26 November) was because squatting was then legitimate, with about 30,000 squatters in London alone in 1979. Subsequent governments made things harder, and the enactment of section 144 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 effectively made squatting illegal. Kevin Bannon (former squatter) London • With the first night of Hanukkah on Sunday, I looked to your food pages for inspiration. The weekend editions were loaded with ideas for Christmas. But whither kugel, matzo ball soup and latkes? Odd, as the Guardian has worked hard to highlight politicians’ lack of regard to the multiple faiths that make up this country. Allison Dutoit Penarth, Vale of Glamorgan • A very good point, Toby Wood, on great sex v food (Letters, 28 November). The imbalance speaks to the quote from George Meredith’s book The Ordeal of Richard Feverel: “Kissing don’t last: cookery do.” Siobhán Ní Chuanaigh Dublin • Presumably the Ernest Shackleton and Robert Falcon Scott expeditions used quill pens because fountain pens would become inoperable at sub-zero temperatures (Letters, 28 November). Dr Brigid Purcell Norwich • Since masks become mandatory on Tuesday, surely it would be sensible to provide free masks at stations, bus depots and other locations? Harry Miller London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Martin Kettle is right to say that Boris Johnson’s “lack of a team, a structure and a shared ethos adds up to a humiliating verdict” on Britain’s politics (The Tories now see that although Johnson can win elections, he simply can’t govern, 25 November). The Tory party puts up with his shambolic and corrupt leadership simply because its members think so little of the British electorate that another election can only be won with Johnson at the helm. The trouble is that the Labour party is in similar mode, prepared to sacrifice decency and principle for a boost in the polls. With a home secretary and prime minister only capable of thinking in terms of blame and attempting diplomacy on Twitter when dealing with the tragedy of asylum seekers in the Channel, the opposition, as Gaby Hinsliff writes, often “struggles with what to say about it” (Twenty-seven dead in the icy Channel. This must be the spur for change, 25 November). It seems that Labour cannot appear to be sympathetic or generous because it has to appeal to voters who aren’t. Rather than merely following national opinion, why isn’t the Labour leadership team leading from the front, shouting out the facts, like the one about the UK receiving the fourth highest number of asylum applications, and demanding changes to the way asylum claims are processed? If it is true that the only way for this country to have a Labour government is for the opposition to adopt Farage-lite policies, then Kettle’s “humiliating verdict” on our politics appears too generous. Bernie Evans Liverpool • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The government has announced that universities are to be set targets for the proportion of their students who go on to well-paid jobs, which the minister described as “good outcomes” (UK universities told to show ambition in graduate job targets, 24 November). We have two adult sons. One took degrees at two of the UK’s top conservatoires, and now works as a cellist with leading symphony orchestras. The other studied law at university and is now a management consultant, mainly in banking. Needless to say, the management consultant earns more than the cellist. So presumably the government regards being a management consultant as a “good outcome”, while being a cellist is a less good outcome. That sounds to me like knowing the price of everything and the value of nothing. Name and address supplied • Studies on social mobility in relation to universities often miss the important work done by adult education departments in many higher education institutions (England’s most prestigious universities failing to boost social mobility, IFS finds, 24 November). These departments, recruiting from their local communities, often take students with no formal qualifications and offer tailored degree routes for adult learners that provide a boost in confidence and learning, from which many enter the professions. In the quest for greater social mobility, the role of adult education departments should be celebrated. Dr Steven Gascoigne Centre for Lifelong Learning, University of Warwick • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ofsted is forcing talented leaders and their teams into chronic stress (‘I can’t go through it again’: heads quit over ‘brutal’ Ofsted inspections, 27 November). As a headteacher, my vision must be maintained amid shifting goalposts. Prior to 2019, a school’s raw attainment data was enough to make or break an inspection grade. Since the new framework, it is whether your planned curriculum matches exactly what is in the books that is the deciding factor. And there has been a pandemic in between. Meanwhile, a crisis in children’s services adds more responsibilities. Due to a 60% increase in referrals to the Oxfordshire multi-agency safeguarding hub and its lack of resources, work with vulnerable families has now fallen to schools. There are 25 full-time vacancies for health visitors in Oxfordshire. Since the pandemic, there have been no child development checks at year 1 and year 3 in our area. Children are arriving at school with a multitude of problems, and we are the first professionals to identify these. I am working hard to make sure my school is well prepared for Ofsted. The inspection begins with a 90-minute phone call, where I will need to set the tone. But I don’t know if this will come this week, this month, or even this year. The inspection process is inadequate as a method to improve educational outcomes for our children. Rachel Hornsey Headteacher, Sutton Courtenay C of E primary school • I also have recent experience of the inspectors’ frantic two-day hit. Schools value trust, challenge and support. “Move fast and break things” is a less commendable approach. The disconnect between schools and the inspectorate is most glaring with regard to the pandemic. Ofsted has made the bizarre decision to exclude all specific references to the pandemic from many recent reports. The single cut-and-paste phrase that it had been “taken into account” was the best it could do for my school. In the period of greatest educational disruption since 1945, this makes it appear tone deaf or irrelevant. Schools are in the business of building, not breaking. We will keep on weaving straw into gold. Dr Chris Pyle Head, Lancaster Royal grammar school • Inspection pressure is nothing new, nor are its dysfunctional consequences. But it doesn’t have to be like this. We can have rigour without disrespect, and improvement without causing schools to implode. The process works best when informed specialists provide accurate judgments supported by robust evidence. In my experience, the best inspectors reported strengths as well as weaknesses. They held informed professional evaluative conversations with teachers and leaders. We were far more likely to act on their advice and the school was all the better for it. It’s amazing what benefits can be derived from insightful two-way professional dialogue. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight • Ofsted inspections test only one thing: how savvy schools are at passing Ofsted inspections. They do not test how good schools are at the important things such as teaching children to think, care, understand, play well, act wisely, make a difference and know that they are loved and valued. As your harrowing article indicates, Ofsted is one of the worst manifestations of the hideous audit culture that so deforms the UK. Let’s abolish Ofsted and trust our teachers to do what they are most committed to: teaching our children well. Prof Nick Megoran Newcastle University • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Asda has revealed it chartered its own cargo ship to ensure key festive items such as toys, clothing and decorations reach its stores, in the latest example of the extreme measures retailers are taking to mitigate pre-Christmas supply chain problems. The supermarket, which revealed in a trading update on Monday that sales fell 0.7% in the three months to 31 October, said the ship carrying 350 containers of items from east Asia was its first ever private charter. Asda said it had also stocked up on extra turkeys and pigs in blankets in stores and was building supplies of mince pies, confectionery and puddings to head off problems in the final weeks before Christmas Day. It said sales in the summer quarter were down in comparison with the same period a year before, when spending on homes and gardens was very strong as families adapted to lockdown life. With rising concern about the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, which has raised fears about more high street lockdowns, Asda also said it had increased the capacity of its grocery home delivery service to 1m slots in the final week before Christmas, up from 765,000 in the same period last year. The measures come as retailers pull out the stops to keep shelves stocked amid concerns about Christmas deliveries. A shortage of qualified lorry drivers, disruption in the distribution of containers during the pandemic and hold-ups in production in east Asia because of Covid restrictions have all held up delivery of products to the UK. The global supply problems have combined with shortages of labour in the UK partly driven by changes to immigration rules after Brexit. The problems have affected availability of a range of goods, from kitchen appliances and computers to turkeys and pigs in blankets. The shortages have forced retailers to come up with inventive solutions. John Lewis teamed up with other retailers to charter container ships to deliver products and also flew in items such as Christmas lights. Tesco, meanwhile, has scaled up its use of rail freight and offered lorry drivers £1,000 signing on fees in order to secure deliveries. Mohsin Issa and Zuber Issa, the billionaire brothers who bought a majority stake in Asda this year in partnership with the private equity firm TDR Capital, said: “We know how much Christmas means to our customers, especially after some missed out on celebrations with friends and family last year. “Our colleagues have pulled out all the stops during the last few months to make sure customers can get their favourite festive products at Asda and enjoy the Christmas they deserve.”Nikita Parris has been sent home from the England camp for “a few days off” as Sarina Wiegman attempts to manage the workload of her players. “There’s not a big problem – she is OK,” the England manager said, when asked why the Arsenal forward had left the squad on the eve of the World Cup qualifier against Latvia. “Nikita has had so much loading during the last two years, from Lyon to England, she has hardly had any rest. During the week we had chats with her and the medical staff and we decided it was good for her to have a few days off. Our squad is fit, everyone can play tomorrow, so it was an option to give her some days off.” Parris is not the first Arsenal player to benefit from a coordinated rest. The Netherlands forward Vivianne Miedema and England centre-back Lotte Wubben-Moy, who both travelled to the Olympics in the summer, were given time off in the latter half of the previous international break, as well as the subsequent week with Arsenal, after discussions between the WSL club and their international managers. One player not given a break was Leah Williamson, who is out with a “significant” hamstring injury, according to Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall. Williamson’s injury prompted Wiegman to express concern regarding overloading when announcing her squad. “We have to consider when they are going to have some rest, physical and mental,” she said. “They are just human beings.” With the team having beaten Latvia 10-0 away, the game at Doncaster gives Wiegman the chance to rotate and consider the workload in particular of Chelsea and Arsenal players, who will be involved in the FA Cup final on Sunday and in the Champions League the following midweek. “They want to play for England, just like Nikita wanted to,” Wiegman said. “We have a team programme but we always modify where needed, so we always look at individuals, we talk to the players, we listen to them and wherever we need to make an adjustment or modify we will.” She refused to be drawn on the team to face a Latvia side which has lost all four of their qualifiers, conceding 26 goals . Wiegman said of the possibility of selecting some fresh faces: “Maybe. We make the final decision after training. In the Latvia game away we played with one extra attacker and we might do the same.” Having dominated in Latvia, with 43 shots to none, England will focus on what they can improve on in possession. “Speeding up the game, have a high ball tempo but be patient, have runs behind the defence – those things are principles; we’re just putting emphasis on those things all the time,” said Wiegman. “Then in the final third stay aggressive, keep scanning, be composed and of course be ruthless and get the ball in the net.”Chinese hackers could target heavily encrypted datasets such as weapon designs or details of undercover intelligence officers with a view to unlocking them at a later date when quantum computing makes decryption possible, a report warns. Analysts at Booz Allen Hamilton, a consulting firm, say Chinese hackers could also steal pharmaceutical, chemical and material science research that can be processed by quantum computers – machines capable of crunching through numbers at unprecedented speed. In a report titled “Chinese threats in the quantum era”, the consultancy says encrypted data could be stolen by “Chinese threat groups”. It says quantum-assisted decryption will arrive faster than quantum-assisted encryption, giving hackers an edge. “Encrypted data with intelligence longevity, like biometric markers, covert intelligence officer and source identities, social security numbers, and weapons’ designs, may be increasingly stolen under the expectation that they can eventually be decrypted,” the report says. It says “state-aligned cyber threat actors” will start to steal or intercept previously unusable encrypted data. However, it adds there is a “very small” likelihood that quantum computing could break the latest encryption methods before 2030. The analysts say quantum computing’s advantages over classical computing – the computing used in everything from laptops to mobile phones – are at least a decade away. “Although quantum computers’ current abilities are more demonstrative than immediately useful, their trajectory suggests that in the coming decades quantum computers will likely revolutionize numerous industries – from pharmaceuticals to materials science – and eventually undermine all popular current public-key encryption methods,” the report says. Quantum computing is viewed as an exciting development. For example, experts say it could predict accurately what a complex molecule might do and thus pave the way for new drugs and materials. China is already a strong player in the field, and Booz Allen Hamilton says it expected the country to surpass Europe and the US – where IBM recently made the most powerful quantum processor – in quantum-related research and development. “Chinese threat groups will likely soon collect encrypted data with long-term utility, expecting to eventually decrypt it with quantum computers,” the report says. “By the end of the 2020s, Chinese threat groups will likely collect data that enables quantum simulators to discover new economically valuable materials, pharmaceuticals and chemicals.”France’s interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, is a sensitive soul. He dislikes British politicians saying nice things to him in private, then turning round and using “insulting” and “strongly unfriendly” language in the House of Commons and the press. He is particularly upset by his British opposite number, Priti Patel, and her boss, Boris Johnson, doing this on the topic of immigration. We might wonder where the French minister spent his political upbringing to become so innocent of political reality. Yet the substance of Darmanin’s complaint is true. The current cross-Channel migration crisis has two dimensions. One is the real human anguish needing diplomatic and practical resolution. The other is its exploitation in a shouting match for public and political consumption. Thousands of refugees have sought British shores this past year, and last week tragedy struck as 27 of them died in the crossing. It was more than Johnson could stand. The tragedy made a mockery of his boast that Brexit would allow him to “take back control” of immigration. In response he duly wrote to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, with his proposals for ending the cross-Channel migration, couched as virtual demands. They included the stationing of British forces on French soil and the immediate return of people back to France. He must have known they were unacceptable. Bizarrely, Johnson released his letter on Twitter before it was even delivered through diplomatic channels. Its message was clearly intended for the British public rather than the Élysée Palace, and it could hardly have been better crafted to infuriate the latter. Macron’s response to the Channel tragedy had been to summon an emergency meeting of EU migration ministers to Calais. The predictable outcome of Johnson’s letter was that Priti Patel was disinvited from the meeting. With Britain’s interest excluded, the ministers merely insisted that any solution to ongoing European migration should be EU-based not bilateral Anglo-French. So much for Johnson’s demands. Why Johnson should have wanted to sabotage the Calais meeting is a mystery. It suggests a complete lack of discipline or competence in Downing Street and, we must assume, a collapse of liaison with the Foreign Office, which would normally vet such a letter and cannot conceivably have approved it. The prime minister’s obsession with his daily photographs and macho press releases is not a route to effective government, least of all during this sort of diplomatic standoff. Britain is moving towards an ever more disadvantageous relationship with the rest of Europe, on migration as on other facets of the single market. Brexit has not, as Johnson bragged, made it stronger, but made it weaker. That does not mean it is ineffective. It remains a force on the European scene. But it needs friends and allies and should tread with care. Europe must urgently find a way forward in an era of persistent migration that does not respect national borders – because it is unlikely to cease in the near future. Johnson should suspend his Brexit bombast and join the EU in handling this predicament. He should look for solutions, not headlines. Just now he has a particular need to find them in collusion with France. So what is the point in being rude to Macron? Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistMore than 150,000 homes across the UK were facing a fourth night without power after Storm Arwen wreaked havoc, bringing down trees and electricity lines. The Energy Networks Association (ENA) said damage caused by Friday’s storm was some of the worst since 2005. More than a million homes lost power with 155,000 nationwide still waiting to be reconnected on Monday afternoon. It came as parts of northern England had their coldest night of autumn so far, with temperatures plummeting to below zero. The Met Office said Shap in Cumbria, north-west England, recorded the lowest temperature of the season so far at -8.7C (16.34F). Continuing snowfall in some areas made access for engineers more difficult, a spokesperson for ENA said. Helicopters and drones were also being used to identify and assess damage. “Engineers are continuing to uncover snapped electricity poles, downed wires and other complex faults. In some areas of the country the damage is some of the worst seen since 2005.” The electricity network operator Northern Powergrid said the storm had caused the most extensive damage to the network in 20 years, initially leaving 240,000 households across north-east England, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire without power. By Monday, 29,000 households were still without power. One badly affected area was north Northumberland. Mark Mather, who represents the market town of Wooler on Northumberland county council, said most households still had no electricity. Some also had no water. “We are under a lot of pressure here and we’re very concerned about older people. The other concern is that a lot of the phone signal is down so a lot of people are going to struggle to call for help.” Mather said he was very proud of the community response. The Angel Inn pub had become a refuge centre and had managed, with a generator, to give hot soup to more than 250 people on Sunday. Bottled water was being given out at the town’s middle school. Volunteers did their best to get hot drinks to people who struggled to leave their houses. “The majority of the main roads are now open but there are still some homes totally isolated because of fallen trees. That’s my big concern, that we miss somebody in the more rural areas who will have had no heating, no electric, potentially no water if they’re being serviced off private wells and they can’t make a call for help. I’m worried. “This is day three. Three nights without electric. It is a potential disaster.” Northern Powergrid said the scale of the damage in some locations was so extensive that large sections of overhead cables needed to be rebuilt to restore supplies. It said the priority had been temporary fixes. Rod Gardner, Northern Powergrid’s major incident manager, said: “Intelligence from our helicopter inspections has illustrated the scale of impact on our network. The impact from Storm Arwen has been one of the worst we’ve experienced in the last 20 years.” Electricity Northwest said the storm led to 92,000 properties being without power. By Monday, power had been restored to 81,000 properties. Overhead lines teams from the south-east of England and the Isle of Man had been drafted in to help with the effort. Incident manager Clive Wilkinson said engineers were doing all they could. He said: “Customers have been very understanding so far as they know the massive impact that we are dealing with. We know it is difficult and we will get to you so please keep warm and keep checking on neighbours until we can restore power.” The clean-up operation after Friday’s storm continued across northern England, hampered by treacherous road conditions. Oli Claydon a Met Office spokesperson, said there had been a “warming trend” through Monday. “The whole of the UK will turn milder,” he said. “The places that will hold on to the cold air the longest will be in the south-east of the UK. The low temperatures will return on Wednesday and Thursday night. However, I don’t think it will be quite as low as we have seen before.” Three people died in the storm, which brought gusts of up to 98mph. A headteacher in Northern Ireland died after a tree fell on his car, another man was hit by a falling tree in Cumbria, and a third died after his car was hit in Aberdeenshire. Saturday night television was affected by the storm, with I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! cancelled after significant damage to the Welsh castle where the show is filmed. Hosts Ant and Dec tweeted an update on Sunday evening saying the production team was working round the clock “to get us back on your tellies ASAP”.Ireland’s most famous traditional music pub has been saved after a Dublin city council planning decision that is being heralded as a landmark victory over property developers. Plans to turn the three-storey Cobblestone pub and Irish music school in the Smithfield area into a hotel sparked anger in a growing debate about the development of the capital at the cost of cultural heritage. On Monday, the city council refused planning permission for a hotel at the site after 700 objections were submitted, including one from the minister for heritage, Malcolm Noonan, alongside high-profile protests and street demonstrations by campaigners from Save the Cobblestone and Dublin Is Dying. Tomás Mulligan, 31, whose family have run the pub for 34 years, said he was delighted with Monday’s decision. “This is a very emotional day for all of us,” he said. “This was a campaign that was organised by our friends and we are just so grateful that so many people were willing to stand up and protect our culture and the institution.” The pub is seen as Ireland’s home of “trad” music, which was brought to the international stage by acts ranging from The Chieftains to the singer Mary Black who once did a set there with the actor Steve Martin on the banjo. Others who have visited or played there include, Billy Connolly who set part of a documentary there, the late celebrity chef Anthony Bourdain, the actor Jon Voight and the pioneer of Latin alternative music Manu Chao. The planning proposals, which would have seen part of the pub retained as a listed structure but the remainder of the building, home to an Irish music and language school, demolished to make way for the hotel. Giving its reasons, the city council said it considered “the development would be overbearing and significantly out of scale and character with the prevailing architectural context, and would represent substantial overdevelopment of this highly sensitive site”. Mulligan said the owners of the site did not consult his family about the development and when news of the hotel emerged it just “galvanised a lot of people, because it was a kind of breaking point” over the perceived erosion of cultural heritage across Ireland. Green party MEP and architect Ciarán Cuffe, who was one of the objectors to planning application, described the plans as “an over-scaled, crude and soulless monument to greed”. He said: “The Cobblestone has been an extraordinary venue for traditional Irish music that has attracted singers and musicians from all over the world. It is unthinkable that it would have been sanitised and become a cocktail bar of a 21st-century boutique hotel.” The owner of the site, Marron Estates, have four weeks to appeal.Peter Jackson has spent the last four years whittling down 60 hours of unseen footage of the Beatles into a new three-part documentary series, The Beatles: Get Back, now streaming on Disney+. Shot in 1969 by the director Michael Lindsay-Hogg, the intimate footage provides fresh insight into the Fab Four’s history and their creative process. We would like to hear what you think of the documentary and its revelations about the band’s final days before splitting in 1970. What were the most surprising, moving, exciting, revelatory, or baffling parts of the documentary for you? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Some time around your 40th birthday, you get a letter from your GP instructing you to attend an MOT, and from here on in, this letter will arrive every five years and the first time everybody definitely ignores it. The second time I got mine, it was in the middle of the first wave of Covid. Wait, the maths don’t stack up on that: maybe the second time I ignored it, again. Then perhaps the pandemic militated against being reminded by the surgery, or somehow, some way, even though it is nowhere near my birthday, and I’m neither 40 nor 45, and most certainly not 50, I got the knock. Actually, a text. Just come stand on a machine, it implored. Any time of day, no need to chat to a nurse. I ran into my previous husband on the way in. “How come you’ve been to the doctor when I’m also going to the doctor?” I quizzed. He inclined his head, in a shorthand devised over time to indicate that this is on the list of questions you’re no longer allowed to ask once you’re divorced, along with, “What’s that big crack in your wall?”, and “Have you seen Line of Duty?”, and actually, now I’m drilling in, this list is really long. I can’t stand not being allowed to ask intrusive questions. I feel like a working dog, bred for generations to chase sheep, transported to a sheep-free environment, then told off for chasing cars. Inside, the machine loomed in the corner, and around it sat everyone approximately my age I had ever seen in the neighbourhood. There were two women I vaguely recognised from having kids older than mine at primary school. The guy who used to run the corner shop, before it became a children’s photography studio, before that went bust, to the vast and untrammelled delight of everyone who preferred when it was a shop, was standing on the machine. “This machine will not speak your weight,” it said in a metallic voice. Obviously now all I wanted to know was how much he weighed, even though it was none of my business and, realistically, I could have guessed. It is etiquette, when you’re going round a prison, not to ask anyone what they’re in for. It is considered good manners not to make small talk with strangers in the reception area of a surgery. These are more than mere conventions: there are situations people can be in that they don’t want to describe to a stranger, and these situations are more likely to obtain in a penal or medical setting than in a cocktail bar. But I had a load of questions, and not being allowed to ask them made my quest for knowledge more imperative. I wanted to find out how the kids of the school gate posse were doing, what secondary school they were at, how they were finding it, what their journey was like, whether they had any tattoos or piercings or whatnot. Only middle-aged women need to discover this stuff and we can’t explain why. “This machine will not speak your weight,” the weighing robot reiterated to a fresh patient, who replied, “Maybe just don’t speak at all?”, and we all tittered, then looked swiftly at our feet, and goddammit, he was exactly the kind of person who wouldn’t have minded some small talk, only now he was leaving, and I’d never find out whether I half-recognised him from the dry cleaners or some other place, and I didn’t even know how much he weighed. Two other women were better acquainted than the rest of us, and one had recently left her job, and she was trying to describe why, except that high emotions were interrupting the narrative coherence, and the other one was making no effort to get to the root of it, just going “Mmm, how awful”. Tantalising. Like watching an unsubtitled film in a foreign language. I have become a person who wants to get in on everybody else’s business. I was there to chart the sad statistics of my declining vigour and, instead, did a stock-take of all the things I am newly interested in, which, it turns out, is everything. The busybody is such a figure of fun, culturally speaking, but what culture doesn’t get is how much we enjoy it. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWINNERS EVERYWHERE The most prestigious gongs in world football are being doled out at a sw@nky ceremony in one of Europe’s most glamorous capital cities tonight, and here at Fiver Towers we’re beside ourselves with excitement. Squeeze into a suit that appears to have shrunk several sizes while hanging in the wardrobe during lockdown? Check. Sashay down the red carpet? Check. Get stuck into the free hospitality laid on by whoever happens to be sponsoring this year’s Football Supporters’ Association Awards in that there Big London? Check. Cause a disturbance upon being overlooked for Best Daily Football Email and get escorted from the sw@nky West End hotel in which the ceremony is being staged? Checkity-check, check check! Meanwhile in Paris, the Ballon d’Or will will be awarded, with the good and the great of the football world convening at the Théâtre du Châtelet, all oblivious to the fact that their thunder is being stolen by a load of boring middle-aged men bloated with good food, booze and self-regard drunkenly bickering over whose podcast, website, fanzine or radio show is the best. The Ballon d’Or is likely to be a comparatively sober affair, where where the main talking points will inevitably concern the colour and cut of Lionel Messi’s tuxedo, plus the likelihood of Cristiano Ronaldo throwing his second very public strop in as many days when he is beaten to the men’s award by either Messi or Robert Lewandowski. The current holder, Messi is the favourite to win a record seventh Ballon d’Or although there is speculation the Bayern Munich striker might get a pity vote after missing out when last year’s ceremony was cancelled because of Covid. The trio are all included on a very long 30-man shortlist that also includes several English-based players who are also vying for the FSA Best Male Footballer award. Which one are you going to, Mason? Would Rúben Dias, Mo Salah or Phil Foden go to Paris and dare snub the fans? Of course it’s not just the men who are being acknowledged in Paris. England striker Ellen White is among the nominees for the women’s gong, although outrageous anti-English bias means the gong is expected to go to Barcelona’s Alexia Putellas or Arsenal’s Vivianne Miedema. In another instance of poor planning, or perhaps a sign that the women’s award is little more than a sop, the national teams of all 20 nominees are playing tonight or tomorrow, so don’t expect to see too many of them present. Anyhoo, whatever your opinions on the merit of individual awards being doled out for participants in team sports, receiving one is quite an honour. Unless of course you don’t, in which it’s important to remember the wise words of Jerry Seinfeld, who addressed one awards show audience with the observation that “the whole feeling of reverence and honouring in this room is the exact opposite of everything I have wanted my life to be about”. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 6.30pm GMT for hot Ballon d’Or updates. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I went into this ‘church’ in Liverpool and asked for a half pint … well, I did, but you can’t ask for a half. I took photos of the murals on the houses. There’s a magic, a chemistry, something. These three women, 90 years old, who could barely get up the stairs going into the ground” – Diego Martínez gets his highly entertaining chat on with Sid Lowe about how he has immersed himself in English football culture since leaving his job as Granada manager. FIVER LETTERS “The weekend weather was so cold that a jacketless Sean Dyche felt the need to don a tie. Meanwhile, as the mere mortals of the Premier League skidded about, their faces blue and their noses red, I couldn’t help wondering why their balls weren’t orange” – Mark McFadden. “Spain ‘smited the Faroe Islands 12-0’ it said in Friday’s Fiver. Surely it should be ‘smote’. I need to get a life” – Richard Fernandez. “Whilst my summation of Jonathan Wilson’s and Barney Ronay’s successes in Pseuds corner, Private Eye, went unacknowledged by you a few months ago, I do think it was sh!t-housery of the highest order for them to claim four out of six spots in this week’s PE” – George Paterson. “A doff of the cap to BBC Sport for its coverage of the Copa Libertadores final on Saturday night; virtually no promotion, listing it on the iPlayer under ‘Swimming’, only joining coverage of the game six minutes after it had started and consequently missing the first goal and both the commentator and co-commentator being under the mistaken impression that one of the teams (the biggest, wealthiest club in Brazil) was named after a Spanish dance. A slow handclap all round …” – Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … George Paterson. WIN! WIN! WIN! In the first weeks of lockdown The Blizzard started running online quizzes, the result is The Quizzard: The Blizzard Quiz book, which is available in print or digital form. The Fiver has two print copies to giveaway, all you have to do is answer this fiendish question: Which former Liverpool forward is the only player to play international football in four decades? Send your answer with the Subject ‘Fiver Quiz’ along with your name and postal address to info@theblizzard.co.uk. Guardian readers can also buy a copy of The Quizzard for the reduced price of £6.99 (print) or £5 (digital) by entering the code GQUIZ at the checkout. Good luck. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS It’s official! Ralf Rangnick is at the Manchester United wheel for six months and likes what he sees at Old Trafford. “The squad is full of talent and has a great balance of youth and experience,” he whooped. “All my efforts will be on helping these players fulfil their potential.” Top-secret chats between the Premier League and the EFL have been held to discuss removing the controversial parachute payments system, with alternatives set to be put to top-flight clubs for consideration. Eddie Howe reckons it would be daft of him to promise fans that Newcastle will splurge their way out of relegation bother in January. “It would be foolish of me to make rash promises or statements,” he blabbed. “My priority at the moment is to get the best out of the players we have.” Two Tottenham Hotspur fans who travelled 34 hours from Texas to watch them play Burnley on Sunday only for snow to postpone the game have been invited to a home game as Harry Kane’s guests. Nikita Parris will not be involved in England’s World Cup qualifier against Latvia in Doncaster. Who is the best spot-kick taker in the world? Nope, it’s not David Batty. “[Ivan Toney] is the world’s best penalty taker,” whooped Brentford boss Thomas Frank. “He proved it again against [Jordan] Pickford … goal, no problem.” Livingston boss David Martindale was feeling fresh and funky after watching the Pope’s O’Rangers fans pelt his goalkeeper with snowballs during the 3-1 defeat. “It’s on national telly and people are watching that, so come on, screw the nut a wee bit,” he howled. “I just don’t understand it.” And renowned headphones salesman Daniel Sturridge has denied a claim by Perth Glory chief suit Tony Sage that he was not selected for the match against Western United after suffering cramp-knack on the plane there. “A four-hour flight would never stop me playing football,” sniffed Sturridge. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly is right here. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Ten talking points from the weekend’s Premier League action, right here. The remote hand of Ralf Rangnick was already in play as Cristiano Ronaldo felt the chill at Stamford Bridge, writes Barney Ronay. Meanwhile, floating football brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson reckons Rangnick’s arrival finally signals a shift from the messiah fix to a modern vision of the game at Manchester United. One thing is certain in the life of a manager: you will get sacked. Hereford’s Josh Gowling on why you need a hide like a rhino to survive in the dugout. Patience is wearing thin with Timo Werner at Chelsea, so says Jacob Steinberg. Juve’s season is going from bad to worse on and off the pitch, writes Nicky Bandini. Lucky they sold Ronaldo, or it’d be even worse. Sid Lowe reckons Vinícius is now among an elite group of game-changing players. Steffen Baumgart is a flat-cap wearing superhero who can do no wrong at Köln, reports Andy Brassell. PSG should use Neymar’s latest knack to build for a future without him, reckons Ligue Urrrrn aficionado Eric Devin. Millie Bright has got even better after deputising as England’s captain – and she’s now undroppable, writes Suzanne Wrack. From Aubameyang to Zaha: how the Africa Cup of Nations will hit the Premier League. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! NOT YOUR AVERAGE LEAGUE ONE GOALEarlier today I set you the following three problems, taken from this year’s Mathigon puzzle advent calendar. 1. The seven digits Solution: 2 Here’s one way to arrange the numbers: First, we can eliminate the digits 0, 5 and 7 from the solution. If 0 was used once, then at least one of the products would be zero, but at least one would be nonzero, a contradiction. If 5 was used once, one of the products would be a multiple of 5, but since no other digits are a multiple of 5, there would also be a product that was not a multiple of 5, again a contradiction. Likewise with 7. At least one of the products contains 8, and at least one of the products contains 9 as a factor. Since these two numbers are co-prime (meaning they dont share any prime factors) the product needs to be at least 8 × 9 = 72. If you haven’t come across (or forgot) the idea of co-primality, you would by a process of trial and error come to the conclusion that the products had to be at least 72. If we rewrite the digits in terms of their prime factors we have: 1, 2, 3, 2x2, 2x3, 2x2x2, 3x3. There are four 3s and seven 2s. Since we have to split the number of 2s and 3s evenly between the left product and the right product, the middle digit has to be 2. 2. A plurality of paths. Solution: 70 The least technical way of solving this puzzle is to count how many ways there are to get to every intersection in the grid, starting in the top-left corner. Along the first row and column, there is only a single way to get to each intersection: either going straight to the right, or straight down. For all other intersections, the number is simply the sum of the two previous intersections, going up or to the left. If we repeat this for the entire grid, we also get 70 as the answer. But wait! The numbers in the intersections are one of the most famous and useful number patterns in maths: Pascal’s triangle. (To find out more, here is Mathigon’s page on Pascal’s triangle.) 3. Flipping frogs. Solution: yes First, let’s just try to swap the four frogs in the middle row. This is possible in 8 steps, and below is one possible solution. Notice that every square in the middle row is empty at some point in this process. For example, the middle square is empty to start with, and the last square is empty after the third step. Now we insert some additional steps into our solution. Whenever a square in the middle row is empty, we use that opportunity to swap the four frogs in that column – using the same steps used to swap the frogs in the middle row. Once we’ve swapped both the middle row and each of the five columns, the solution is complete. Ta-dah! Or should that be Toad-aha! I hope you enjoyed these puzzles. I’ll be back in two week.s Thanks to Mathigon for today’s puzzles. They come from the Mathigon puzzle advent calendar, which starts on Wednesday December 1. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch. I’m the author of several books of maths and puzzles , most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, but all of which would make fantastic Christmas gifts!UK farmers may have to reduce the number of animals they keep because of the critical state of some river catchments, a pollution expert from the government’s environment watchdog has said. Farming is the most significant source of water pollution and ammonia emissions into the atmosphere in the UK, according to government data. It accounts for 25% of phosphate, 50% of nitrate and 75% of sediment loadings in the water environment, which harms ecosystems. Speaking independently, Tim Bailey of the Environment Agency said the state of catchments such as the River Wye and the Somerset Levels and Moors had become critical because of the number of chickens and dairy cows and the problem of disposing of manure from farms. Just three counties – Herefordshire, Shropshire and Powys – produce more than a quarter of a billion chickens a year, capacity having doubled in the past decade. “Many catchments are already at or beyond the capacity of the environment to cope, and more will follow unless we take unparalleled action,” said Bailey, the author of Livestock’s Longer Shadow, about the industry’s environmental impact in the UK. “In some instances it will entail the reduction and restriction of livestock production, or the treatment and export of organic manures. There are catchments like the River Wye where we need to export to other catchments, but transferring the problem will eventually risk creating a UK-wide pollution problem,” he said. “It’s a critical situation.” Environmental campaigners have referred to the Wye as “like pea soup at times” as a result of algal blooms fuelled in part by phosphate-rich excrement eventually making its way to the river. One of the UK’s biggest chicken suppliers, Avara Foods, which supplies Tesco and other supermarkets, has admitted that chicken litter from its farms has polluted the waterway. Bailey said livestock numbers needed to match the carrying capacity of the area, rather than the current heavy concentrations in some places. “We have to start fitting livestock into the environment. That way we are not stressing the environment so that it can’t cope.” As well as destocking, the solution would entail a mix of regulation, advice and financial support for farmers, he said. “This is not a farmer problem, it’s a societal problem. Farmers want to get to the same place, but are trapped in a cheap food economy. If society wants a clean River Wye or to stop Amazon deforestation, then it has to take responsibility.” A spokesperson for Avara Foods said the company was looking at alternative destinations for chicken litter waste from its supply chain, including combined heat and power plants and novel anaerobic digestion technology, which would also remove phosphates. The National Farmers’ Union and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs have been approached for comment.Teachers are calling for face masks to be mandatory for secondary school pupils in England and extended to include classrooms, amid pushback from sceptical MPs who have warned additional Covid restrictions will cause “chaos” for pupils. According to new government guidance in response to the Omicron variant, masks are merely “recommended” in communal areas and corridors in schools rather than compulsory. In contrast, face coverings will be mandatory on public transport and in shops from Tuesday. Head teachers say the advice for schools is “too vague”, making it difficult to enforce effectively as parents and pupils can legitimately refuse to comply, leaving it up to school leaders to deal with confusion and dissent in schools. “It’s very difficult to manage on the ground,” said Richard Sheriff, the executive headteacher of Harrogate grammar school and chief executive of the Red Kite Learning Trust. “Any parent or child can say, ‘You can’t make me. It’s not compulsory.’” He told the government: “Make it obligatory by law, as we are doing in other places like transport.” The National Education Union (NEU) and the NASUWT teachers’ union, which represent the vast majority of teachers in England, say the government guidance should go further, extending mask-wearing to classrooms. Dr Mary Bousted, NEU joint general secretary, said: “Covid does not recognise the difference between a corridor and a classroom, and a failure to require face coverings in both areas in secondary schools is a mis-step in the latest guidance.” Dr Patrick Roach, NASUWT general secretary, agreed: “If schools are to maintain safety during the remainder of this term, the government will need to accept that its messaging needs to be stronger.” Glyn Potts, the headteacher at Blessed John Henry Newman College in Oldham, Greater Manchester, said masks had been in place in communal spaces in his school for some time in response to enhanced measures locally. “There is a little bit of fatigue among parents and students, but we’ll have to battle that. “We are back to handing out masks before they gain entry to the school and hopefully the parental support will remain, but they are starting to get a little bit frustrated at what they see as measures that are dropped on them.” The government made similar recommendations on face coverings in communal spaces in universities in guidance published on Monday, but it says higher education institutions may also want to consider using face masks in workshops, laboratories, libraries and lecture halls, especially where social distancing is difficult to maintain. In addition, international students travelling from red-list countries will be required to quarantine in a managed hotel on arrival to the UK for 10 days. Under the new restrictions, close contacts of those who test positive for Omicron will have to self-isolate for 10 days, including children, which has led to warnings that thousands of healthy children will be forced to stay at home and study online, causing further widespread disruption to education. Steve Baker, the deputy chairman of the Covid Recovery Group, told the Telegraph the new measures “will cause chaos including collateral harms like damage to children’s education”. In interviews on Monday, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, insisted closing schools was the “last possible option”. He also disagreed with bringing back class bubbles to contain infection spread and encouraged primary schools to press ahead with their nativity plans. “The best place for children to be is in a classroom, learning,” the former vaccines minister told ITV’s This Morning programme: “Keep schools open: do all the things necessary, like face masks in communal areas … to protect the education in the classroom.” According to a new poll, more than a quarter of primary school teachers (27%) say their school is planning an online nativity, one in 10 say they are not planning a nativity at all, while 55% are hoping to invite visitors to watch their nativity in person. The poll of 1,711 primary school teachers in England was carried out by Teacher Tapp and shared with PA.In New Orleans, “neutral ground” is what they call the grassy meridian in the middle of the street. Mainstream media in the US is forever striving to get to its own version of neutral ground, which often turns into its own bias in favor of centrism, the status quo, and sometimes pandering to the right as truthful when it’s lying or sympathetic when it’s hating. It’s driven in part by fear of Republicans shouting media bias, which they shout about pretty much anything to the left of their own press releases. The truth is, itself, sometimes radical when facts suggest the system is rotten or that profound change is called for, and those in pursuit of stories that sound neutral often shy away from this reality. The Guardian never does. I’m not just proud to write for the Guardian but relieved to be with a publication based in London, with an independent US edition, that has no fear about being clear where it stands, who lies, and what matters. The Guardian is by far the best major newspaper on the climate crisis, giving it more coverage with more depth and that coverage more prominence, and providing bolder analysis of the problems and the solutions. Every newspaper takes stands, and not just in its editorial page and opinion columns; each of them takes positions in what it covers every day and how it covers the news, and the Guardian benefits from courage, integrity and clarity. It’s a newspaper you can trust because it’s not in a muddle, and it’s not afraid. The Guardian has also pioneered a model of economic survival that is based on readers’ contributions. If you’re reading this, you’re one of them and we’d like your contribution to keep reporting the news and writing about what it means. A free press, we often say in the United States, is vital to a democracy, and it’s a curiosity of history that in many ways the freest press for readers in the United States started out elsewhere – and is providing solid worldwide news coverage throughout the English-speaking world, from Australia to India, from Silicon Valley to South America.Israel’s top court has ruled that a six-year-old boy who was the sole survivor of a cable car crash in northern Italy must be returned to relatives there within the next couple of weeks. Eitan Biran has been at the centre of a bitter custody battle between relatives in Italy and Israel since his parents were killed in the Stresa-Mottarone aerial tramway crash on 23 May. He was allegedly abducted from the home of his paternal aunt, Aya Biran-Nirko, near Pavia by his maternal grandfather, Shmuel Peleg, on 11 September. Biran-Nirko was granted temporary custody of Eitan soon after the tragedy, which also claimed the lives of his two-year-old brother and maternal great-grandparents. Lawyers for Biran-Nirko said the verdict, which upheld a ruling by a lower court in October, marked “the end of an unfortunate episode”. The boy must be returned to Italy by 12 December. Meanwhile, the Peleg family pledged to continue to fight “in every legal way” to have him brought back to Israel. According to reports in the Italian press, the supreme court said Eitan had lived in Italy most of his life and could not be removed from his “habitual residence”. The court said his parents had chosen to settle indefinitely in Italy and that Peleg “did not provide a valid reason why the return to Italy could cause psychological or physical damage to the child”. Italian police issued an international arrest warrant for Peleg after the alleged abduction, and last week his alleged accomplice, Gabriel Abutbul Alon, was arrested in Cyprus. Eitan was driven across the Italian border to the Swiss city of Lugano, from where he was taken by private plane to Tel Aviv. Peleg and Alon are wanted by Italian police on charges of kidnapping, abduction and “sequestration abroad of a minor”. Biran, who received injuries to his head and legs in the crash, went to live with Biran-Nirko after being discharged from hospital in June, and had been due to start school two days after the alleged kidnap. His parents were Israeli but he had been living in Italy since he was one month old and has dual Israeli/Italian nationality. His paternal relatives claimed he had been taken away against their wishes and immediately filed a petition for his return to Italy. Peleg argued he had acted in the boy’s best interests. The cable car crash, which killed 14 people including a six-year-old Italian boy, is believed to have happened when a lead cable snapped, causing the cabin to hurtle backwards before falling about 20 metres into a wooded area below. The cabin was just a few metres away from Monte Mottarone, its destination almost 1,500 metres above sea level, when the crash happened.In the early 1970s at the Orange Tree Theatre Upstairs, Richmond, in Surrey, one Saturday lunchtime, the superb Henry Woolf ambled on to the floor space and addressed us, the audience. It was a play based on a 1917 short story by Franz Kafka – A Report to an Academy. Apartheid was a concerning topic. From the moment this diminutive figure casually came in as if he were a bit late, we were captured and there was silence. Woolf began to torturously lumber about as he then eloquently delivered the lecture. It was a mix of shocking, bewildering and amusing, as he portrayed the dignified, civilised character. No scenery, no props. He was magnetic in this stunning performance. As parents of young children we had little money or time to go to the theatre, but this proved to be a wonder.Amateur virology is all the rage in the City. Analysts who would normally be more at home inputting some seasonally adjusted labour market data into a spreadsheet now find they can’t explain what is likely to happen to the economy without understanding how viruses spread. When news emerged of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 last week it was the signal for financial markets everywhere to take a tumble. That was an entirely rational response: stock markets were not prepared for a potentially dangerous new strain of the virus and the sensible thing to do was to mark down share prices. Over the weekend the sense has grown that things might not turn out so bad after all, so share prices have regained a bit of the ground they lost on Friday. The prospect of central banks delaying action to combat rising inflation probably helped sentiment a bit. The fact is, of course, that nobody knows for sure what sort of threat Omicron poses. Scientists are saying it will take a couple of weeks before there is enough data to make informed judgments, which means for now all commentary is glorified guesswork. Here’s what we know. Omicron has arrived at just about the worst possible time for countries in Europe and North America because cold weather means people make themselves more susceptible to catching the virus as they spend more time indoors. If Omicron is as easily transmissible as epidemiologists fear, then that’s a worry. What we also know is that the big developed countries were slowing down even before news of Omicron surfaced. Some amateur psychology would suggest consumers will spend less in the shops this Christmas and be more reluctant to go out for meals. Businesses will put investment plans on hold. It doesn’t take a full officially mandated lockdown to influence behaviour and some sectors of the economy – hospitality, travel, airlines – will suffer more than others. The final thing we know is that economies have got used to dealing with the disruption caused by the pandemic. Even if vaccines are less effective against the new strain – and there is no evidence that is the case – the impact on activity will be moderated by working from home and shopping remotely. In short, the markets have probably got their judgment about right. Omicron currently looks more like an economic setback than a calamity. But that’s only a hunch. Don’t bet on an end to UK property boom Reports of the end of the UK’s residential property boom are exaggerated even though latest figures from the Bank of England show mortgage approvals at their weakest since before the stamp duty holiday began in the summer of 2020. Demand for home loans always tails off as the nights draw in, and this year there was the additional factor of Rishi Sunak’s tax break coming to an end in September. Buyers brought forward transactions to beat the chancellor’s deadline, yet, even so, the number of approvals simply returned to the average for 2019, the year before the pandemic. Cheap borrowing costs are the main reason activity in the housing market continues to be strong. To be sure, some of the more tempting offers to homebuyers have been withdrawn by lenders in anticipation of higher interest rates from the Bank of England but mortgage rates are still extremely low by historic standards. Moreover, the supply of new homes has not recovered to pre-pandemic levels despite soaring demand. As Andrew Wishart of Capital Economics pointed out, traditionally new-builds have averaged 13% of housing transactions but that figure dropped to 9% in the first half of 2021. Shortages of labour and materials mean supply will remain constrained, and with demand strong there can only be one result: house prices will continue to rise. Risk assessment Incentives matter, so when the Treasury announced its “eat out to help out” scheme in August 2020 the UK public responded to the offer of cut-price food and drink. But did the financial inducement also make people more likely to take more risks than they otherwise would? The answer from Sweden suggests that it might. Marco Islam of Lund University carried out an experiment during the pandemic in which participants were given vouchers for use at cafes worth either €1.50 (£1.27) or €10. Unsurprisingly, both groups were more likely to go out for a flat white after receiving the voucher but those receiving €10 also convinced themselves that a visit to a cafe was less risky than they had previously thought even though infection rates were rising. Food for thought there, perhaps.The “godfather of streetwear” Tommy Hilfiger paid tribute to the fellow designer Virgil Abloh, describing his death as “a devastating blow to the industry”, as he was honoured with an outstanding achievement gong at the Fashion Awards. Abloh was “not just a designer, but a true Renaissance man”, Hilfiger said as he prepared to accept his award at the Royal Albert Hall. “He was a student, not just of fashion, but of the whole culture. He loved music. He understood and appreciated architecture.” Hilfiger described Abloh, who died at just 41, as “a real gentleman. He was kind, and he was also very driven. Not just for himself but driven to make real change in the industry.” Abloh, the first black designer to lead a luxury fashion house, took the streetwear genre – which Hilfiger pioneered – to a new strata of high-fashion luxury during his tenure at Louis Vuitton. Hilfiger changed the face of fashion in the 1980s when he took the preppy clothing of midcentury suburbia and, drawing inspiration from the sportswear being worn on the streets of New York, made it oversized and colourful. “The last conversation I ever had with Virgil, he told me that when he was in high school, he only wore my clothes,” Hilfiger recalls. “That was a huge compliment, because he has great taste.” The Tommy Hilfiger brand, with its graphic red, white and blue flag-shaped logo instantly suggestive of the stars and stripes, is synonymous with Americana. Hilfiger’s empire was built on his ability to connect the energy and excitement of streetwear with white-picket-fence traditionalism. In the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement last year, Hilfiger launched the People’s Place, an initiative to offer opportunities in fashion to people of colour. “Inclusivity and diversity – this is the subject in our industry today,” said Hilfiger. “It’s not good enough for companies to put a diverse group of models on their catwalk, if they only hire white people to work for them. We need to purposefully unlock the door of opportunity across design and business to a diverse population.” The scheme, which Hilfiger has described as an attempt “to do more and to better”, is backing a research study, The Unsung History of American Sportswear, which will spotlight the often overlooked influences from Black American culture on signature Tommy Hilfiger styles. Hilfiger, dressed for his interview in an unstructured blazer with a top-pocket silk handkerchief layered over a half-zip sweater and striped shirt and teamed with chino trousers and suede loafers worn without socks, believes that comfort is at the core of post-pandemic dressing. “Comfort is incredibly important now,” he said. “Now that we can get out of our homes and get out we want to wear something new and nice, but we still want it to be comfortable.” He predicted that the metaverse “will have a big role to play” in a sustainable future for fashion, with consumers buying new clothes that do not have to be physically produced, in a new era of “dressing up for a video game or for meeting friends online”. Hilfiger’s career began in 1969, when he opened his first store in his home town of Elmira, New York, aged 18. His eponymous brand was launched in 1985. Caroline Rush, chief executive of the British Fashion Council, said of his award that “his efforts to change the world for the better, combined with his tenacity, collaborations and instinct, is what truly sets him apart”.Scientists in South Africa have begun crucial work to assess how well Covid vaccines hold up against the Omicron variant that has been detected in more than a dozen countries since it was formally reported last week. The variant carries dozens of mutations that are expected to change how the virus behaves, including its ability to cause infection and how well it can hide from immune defences primed by vaccines or previous infection with an older variant. Antibodies protect against viruses by gumming them up and preventing them from infecting human cells. To do so, they must recognise particular parts of the virus. Most Covid antibodies latch on to one of three sites on the virus, but all are mutated in Omicron, meaning antibodies produced by vaccines or past infection may be significantly less effective. Prof Penny Moore at the University of the Witwatersrand and the National Institute for Communicable Disease in South Africa said “pseudoviruses” – harmless, non-replicating viruses used to model coronavirus variants – will be engineered to carry Omicron’s mutations. These will then be exposed to antibody-carrying blood plasma from vaccinated people and those who have recovered from Covid infection to see if they neutralise the virus. Her lab will assess the protection provided by the Oxford/AstraZeneca, Pfizer/BioNtech and Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccines, while tests on plasma from recovered patients will help to shed light on the risk of reinfection with Omicron. Early reports from South Africa suggest that reinfections are more common with Omicron than the Delta variant, but far more data is needed to be sure. Moore’s results, which could be available in the next two weeks, are expected to provide some of the first laboratory evidence on whether existing vaccines are sufficient to keep Omicron at bay, or whether manufacturers will need to produce an updated vaccine. But with Omicron carrying so many mutations, making the pseudoviruses is not straightforward. “It will take some time to introduce so many mutations,” Moore said. Further work on vaccine protection is under way at the African Health Research Institute in Durban where Prof Alex Sigal, a virologist, is growing batches of live Omicron from people who became infected in the recent surge in Gauteng in South Africa. Once he has enough to work with, the variant will be tested against blood plasma from vaccinated people and those with some natural immunity after a Covid infection. South African scientists were the first to report the Omicron variant to the World Health Organization on 24 November. At the time, the first known infection was on 9 November, but earlier infections may come to light as countries conduct thorough searches for cases, chiefly among travellers who recently returned from the region. The work in South Africa is part of an urgent global effort to understand the threat posed by Omicron. Ravi Gupta, professor of clinical microbiology at the University of Cambridge, hopes to join the effort soon, first with pseudoviruses and then with live Omicron. Further experiments, he said, will look at how well synthetic antibody treatments deal with the variant. The therapies are crucial for patients who are not able to mount their own immune response to the virus. Several vaccine manufacturers have also launched studies into how well the jabs protect against Omicron. AstraZeneca is analysing infections and vaccination status in people in Botswana and Eswatini on the borders of South Africa. Meanwhile, a spokesperson for Pfizer said the company hoped to have initial results from its own antibody studies “in the coming weeks”. If the variant largely evades vaccines, both Moderna and Pfizer claim they can produce a new, tailor-made vaccine in about 100 days, subject to approval by regulators.Ye, the singer formerly known as Kanye West, has paid tribute to friend and collaborator Virgil Abloh, who passed away following a two-year battle with an aggressive form of cancer. Ye dedicated the latest of his Sunday Service concerts to Abloh at the weekend. At the end of the livestream of the show, which saw Ye’s choir sing a version of Adele’s Easy On Me, a message flashed onscreen that read: “IN LOVING MEMORY OF VIRGIL ABLOH, THE CREATIVE DIRECTOR OF DONDA.” The two first started working together in the early 2000s with Abloh becoming Ye’s creative director in 2010. “I have all these ideas and Virgil is able to architect them,” Ye said in an interview, “because he is an actual architect.” The fashion designer also oversaw the artwork for some of Ye’s most acclaimed album covers including My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, Yeezus and his collaboration with Jay-Z, Watch The Throne. Other celebrities paid tribute to Abloh, who was both the creative director of Off-White and the menswear creative director for Louis Vuitton, focusing on his originality and unique ability to play havoc with the worlds of fashion and music. “The teachable lesson here is disrupt,” wrote the musician and film director Questlove on Instagram, “provoke. Be controversial. Push buttons. Be a conversation piece ... live as a true artist ... Virgil Abloh was art.” Kerby Jean Raymond, creative director of fashion label Pyer Moss wrote that Abloh was, “the rubric. He unlocked new worlds,” and called him “an incredibly kind genius”. Fellow designer Dontella Versace called him “an innovator. A creator for the history books.” Model Naomi Campbell left three broken heart emojis in the comments of Versace’s post. Fashion brand Gucci’s official Twitter said that the designer was “an immense inspiration to us all both as a designer and as a person”, they wrote. “He will be deeply missed though his vision will live on through the trails he blazed throughout his career.” Giorgio Armani commented that he “followed his career with great interest, his new approach to fashion and communication with a strong sense of inclusivity”. Creatives from the across the world of music, film and sport including BTS, Justin Timberlake and Pharrell also paid tribute. Rapper Busta Rhymes thanked him for “an amazing and significant contribution to culture and all walks of life”, while Drake wrote that he would “touch the sky 1000 more times for you”. Venus Williams wrote that Abloh “inspired me to be better in everything I do. His collections literally brought me to tears because they were so connected so beautiful and so inspiring.” British actors Idris Elba and Riz Ahmed also celebrated Abloh’s achievements. Ahmed said that the designer had “stretched culture and changed the game”. Abloh had been fighting cardiac angiosarcoma, a rare, aggressive form of the disease, according to an announcement on his official Instagram page. He was 41. Meanwhile, Louis Vuitton announced that their upcoming spring/summer 2022 presentation, which is being held on 30 November in Miami, will be a tribute to the life and legacy of Abloh.Banks and building societies have been urged to consider changes to lending criteria to help an estimated 47,000 borrowers who could benefit from a cheaper home loan but are currently unable to move. A review of “mortgage prisoners” by the Financial Conduct Authority found there were about 195,000 households whose debts had been sold on to inactive lenders and that a quarter of them could save money if they were allowed to switch to a new deal. However, despite changes that have made it easier for banks to offer these borrowers home loans at a better rate than the one they are currently paying, the FCA found that demand from customers and supply from lenders has been low. “We hope that more mortgage prisoners will be able to switch their mortgage,” the FCA said. “We encourage lenders to consider if they can amend their lending criteria to lend to mortgage prisoners who are close to their risk appetite.” The review looked at the position of borrowers whose loans were sold on to new lenders after the financial crisis. At the last count, it found about 250,000 borrowers were affected, but the number has fallen as some borrowers have been able to move. The borrowers were initially with banks including Northern Rock and Bradford &amp; Bingley, which failed during the crisis. Many had taken out interest-only mortgages, some had self-certificated their income, rather than having to prove it, and some took on loans of more than 100% loan to value (LTV). After the crash they were moved to lenders that did not offer new deals, so were not given the same opportunity to move to lower rates than if they were with an active lender. The FCA said about 47% were paying an interest rate between 3% and 5%, compared to 17% of borrowers with active lenders, while 3.3% were locked into paying interest at more than 5%, compared with just 0.8% of other borrowers. Of the 195,000 cases the regulator looked at, it said 66,000 may be able to switch to new lender without difficulty, 30,000 could not switch but were unlikely to benefit as the interest rate they were paying was competitive and 34,000 were behind on payments or near the end of their term so would not be able to switch even if they were with an active lender. The remaining 47,000 were up to date with payments, but unable to switch because either their mortgage or their circumstances would deter a lender. Gemma Harle, managing director of Quilter Financial Planning, said mortgage brokers from the company had been trying to support borrowers “but without lender support and a proliferation of mortgage products aimed at these customers, it is going to be difficult to move these people into more suitable products even with financial advice”. She added: “As intermediaries we are committed to helping this type of customer, but it requires solutions from the whole industry rather than just one segment of it.” The FCA’s review will now be considered by the Treasury and lenders.Staff have bid “a fond farewell” to the majority of a 61-strong group that spent three days trapped in the UK’s highest pub. Two of the guests will spend a fourth night at the 17th-century Tan Hill Inn in the Yorkshire Dales, after getting snowed in on Friday night as Storm Arwen struck having travelled to watch an Oasis tribute band. The guests managed to dig their vehicles out one by one on Monday to follow a path cleared by a snowplough after three days of pub quizzes, board games and karaoke. The two who remained were “young girls who were a bit nervous about driving in these conditions”, said Donna Harrowell, the inn’s duty manager. “Which is quite handy for us because they’re upstairs stripping beds and helping us get the place back to normal,” she added as the pub prepared to welcome new customers who had made it up the newly cleared road. Blizzards caused 3-metre snowdrifts and meant a tunnel had to be cut from the front door, but the roads remained impassable over the weekend because of fallen power cables that had blown over in the high winds. Most of the guests, including four dogs, slept on sofas and mattresses spread on the stone-flagged floor. One couple and their dog had planned to camp next to the pub, but were forced to make a hasty change of plan. “The tent was totally destroyed on the Friday, so they just brought the stuff inside, dried off and slept in our lounge on the floor,” Harrowell said. As well as acoustic performances by Noasis – now nicknamed Snow-asis - the group watched films shown on a projector and enjoyed the well-stocked bar and kitchen. The group were treated to a traditional Sunday lunch, including slices of roast meat for the canine guests when supplies of dog food ran low. “The only thing we really ran out of was breakfast sausages,” said Harrowell, leaving guests to “make do” with just bacon sandwiches on Monday morning. The pub’s owners decided to subsidise the food, providing all meals for free or at a heavily-discounted price to cover costs. Perhaps wisely, they continued to charge customers for drinks, which flowed throughout. “The karaoke last night was a bit slow to start with, but once they’d had a few more pints, everyone was jumping in and enjoying it. The sounds were incredible,” Harrowell said. As well as food, drink and entertainment, Nicola Townsend, the pub’s general manager, said staff had “made sure that personal hygiene has been taken care of”, with showers provided. There was talk of planning a reunion in a year’s time, and there has even been inquiries about making a film based on the snowbound lock-in. “We’ve all become really good friends actually, the people that are here … it sounds a bit like a cliche, but they came as strangers and they’re leaving as friends, they truly are,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Harrowell described the pub’s staff as like a family who like to “make everything fun”, which the stranded guests joined in with. “All of them mucked in, collecting glasses, washing dishes, helping out wherever they can. They’ve been brilliant,” she said. This is not the Tan Hall Inn’s first, or longest, snow-in. The pub, which stands 528 metres above sea level, housed staff and four guests for five days in 2013 after deep snowdrifts blocked the road. • This article was amended on 30 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Donna Harrowell’s surname at subsequent mentions.There is, as Aunt Ada Doom oft told, “something nasty in the woodshed”. But it turns out, in the Netflix horror series Elves, to be nothing compared with what is in the woods themselves. The opening scene establishes, without much room for doubt, that whatever lurks among the cold pines of the fictional island of Aarmand, an isolated part of the Danish archipelago, is not to be messed with. Local farmer Møller (Rasmus Hammerich) tethers a cow in the middle of a blackened circle and legs it as an unseen horde of unknown – unless you’ve read the title – somethings descend and the poor bovine is scattered over a large area. Pity, then, the Svane family, who are just arriving on the island for a quiet Christmas holiday – hardworking mum Charlotte (Lila Nobel) and dad Mads (Peder Thomas Pedersen) and their bickering children Kasper (Milo Campanale) and Josefine (Sonja Steen). Despite clear instructions to stick to the coast road to reach their holiday home, Mads cuts through some woodland and collides with something that leaves black goo on his bumper. But what? But what, in this six-part horror miniseries originally called Nisser, a word sometimes translated from the Danish into English as “gnomes” or “goblins” and, here, Elves, could this possibly be? Mum and Dad reckon the goo is oil or tar from the ferry crossing. Josefine, meanwhile, has tracked a trail of it heading towards a mysteriously fenced-off region of deeper forest (from which, I suspect, she could still pick up a tangy whiff of freshly slaughtered cow). Møller turns up in a truck and tells them all to føck øff his private land. The rest of the locals are barely more welcoming. It’s almost as if they have something to hide. The family arrives at their delightfully rustic abode – no electricity, no wifi, lots of apotropaic symbols hanging from branches and small, semi-digested carcasses lying beneath – and set to work buying fuses from the general store run by native islanders Karen (The Killing’s Ann Eleonora Jørgensen) and her granddaughter (hostility comes free with every purchase), making festive decorations and cutting down a Christmas tree from the edge of the wood, in direct contravention of Karen’s advice. Oh, and Josefine creeps back to the woods as darkness falls, follows the goo trail again and finds a wounded baby something, at the end of the first episode, and takes it back to care for it secretly in the barn. Appropriately enough for a YA-aimed drama, the setup is essentially a cross between ET and The Wicker Man. After that – not much, really, but a slow, steady march through the basics of the genre. The outsiders cause more and more disturbance, monsters flicker and skitter in characters’ and viewers’ peripheral vision. The island’s back story is filled in (an idyll before the arrival of a lumber mill changed the community, the land and its balance; a terrible accident; the closure of the lumber mill and the fencing off of a certain section of the forest) and its inhabitants grow more hostile to the family as the safety of all is threatened. Except for Kasper’s love interest Liv (Vivelill Søgaard Holm), who can be relied upon to tip him off whenever the plot needs to get moving again. As cow sacrifices fail to appease and the fence is breached, the very obvious secret the islanders are all very obviously hiding reveals itself to nods of recognition among the audience rather than gasps of surprise, I suspect. The elves – I hope I’m not giving anything away here – are rather good, rising off the forest floor, made of rasping bark and creaking malevolence. They also benefit from the fact that the human characters are barely more complex than wood wights themselves. Mum is a mum, Dad is a dad (albeit of the Danish variety, making jokes about hash brownies to his kids and not letting life-threatening situations get in the way of his sarcasm), teen boy is a teen boy, islanders are taciturn, Liv is bridge-between-two-worlds and Josefine is a collection of idiotic decisions held together by sensible knitwear. Nobody breaks out of formation, and neither does the plot – whose underlying message is the untold harm that can be wrought by humanity’s disrespect for and disruption of nature’s harmony. Which – has been done. It just about gets away with everything because the six episodes are under half an hour each, but it’s a very light, slight thing. I’d hunker down with ET or The Wicker Man again instead, if I were you, depending which way the season of goodwill takes you.Nearly $3m has been raised for victims of the Waukesha Christmas parade incident, in which a car plowed into the crowd in the Wisconsin city earlier this month, killing six people and injuring more than 60. About 7,000 donors from all 50 US states and 12 countries have contributed $1.8m to the United for Waukesha Community Fund, organizers said. The largest donor was General Electric, giving $100,000. According to the Waukesha County Community Foundation, Kohl’s, the Walbec group and American Family Insurance Dreams Foundation each donated $50,000. The Milwaukee Bucks NBA franchise, the Milwaukee Brewers baseball team and fans have raised more than $75,000 between them. More than $1m has also been raised under an umbrella GoFundMe page, with over 29 verified accounts. The Sparks family has received the most, at $444,124 as of Monday and from more than 10,000 donors. Jackson Sparks, eight, died on 23 November as a result of his injuries. His brother Tucker Sparks, 12, sustained road rash and a fractured skull and is currently recovering. Donations to the GoFundMe accounts range from $2,500 to $213,500. Organizers of the United for Waukesha Community Fund said: “Our priority is with the families of the deceased and hospitalized. Followed by those seeking medical attention (non-hospitalized). With additional support provided for those needing mental health, trauma and grief counseling.” The fund distribution process “will include representation from the mayor’s office, county executive’s office, United Way for Greater Milwaukee &amp; Waukesha County, Waukesha County Community Foundation, school district of Waukesha, as well as trusted community leaders”. Last Tuesday, prosecutors in Wisconsin charged Darrell Brooks Jr with five counts of intentional homicide. Conviction carries a mandatory life sentence, Wisconsin’s stiffest penalty. Bail was set at $5m. Brooks had been free on $1,000 bail for a case in Milwaukee county in which he is accused of intentionally striking a woman with his car. Prosecutors said they were investigating that bail recommendation, calling it inappropriately low. “He was accused of running over the mother of his kid and to put it as $1,000 strikes me as low,” said Julius Kim, a defense attorney and former assistant prosecutor. The Waukesha police chief, Dan Thompson, said Brooks, 39, was leaving the scene of a domestic dispute when he drove into the parade. Brooks has been charged with crimes more than a dozen times since 1999 and had two outstanding cases. Charges against him included resisting or obstructing an officer, reckless endangering, disorderly conduct, bail jumping and battery. GoFundMe pulled a fundraiser for Brooks, created in an effort to raise bail. “Fundraisers with misuse are very rare and we take all complaints very seriously,” a spokesman said. “Our team works with law enforcement to report issues and assists them in any investigations they deem necessary.”Here’s the main stories so far: Wall Street is pushing higher, as traders continue to digest the likely impact of Omicron on the recovery. While the new variant may hit growth, and hamper the recovery in the travel sector, it could also deter central bankers from risking raising interest rates soon. That could provide support to the economy, and the markets, for longer. David Miller, executive director at Quilter Cheviot Investment Management, explains: What is, however, clear is that our reaction time to this new health challenge has been shortened by past experiences. Even sentimental politicians intent on providing voters with a happy Christmas can’t see the upside of stubborn denial. No one is assuming that the Omicron variant can be kept out however strong border controls are. It has already arrived in Europe and it must be only a matter of time before it crosses the Atlantic. If previous new waves tell us anything it is that markets tend to look forward as soon as the worst is known. Investment strategists are already reducing growth forecasts for next year, which is bad news, and moderating assumptions about the need for higher interest rates, good news. The latter is likely to be the dominant factor when it comes to making a positive case for 2022. So, the Dow Jones industrial average is now up 330 points or almost 1% Big technology stocks, which fared well in the pandemic so far, are leading the charge, lifting the Nasdaq Composite by 2% today. Amateur virology is all the rage in the City right now, writes our economics editor Larry Elliott. And while there’s lots we don’t know about the latest Covid-19 variant, investors may have judged things correctly, he writes... Omicron has arrived at just about the worst possible time for countries in Europe and North America because cold weather means people make themselves more susceptible to catching the virus as they spend more time indoors. If Omicron is as easily transmissible as epidemiologists fear, then that’s a worry. What we also know is that the big developed countries were slowing down even before news of Omicron surfaced. Some amateur psychology would suggest consumers will spend less in the shops this Christmas and be more reluctant to go out for meals. Businesses will put investment plans on hold. It doesn’t take a full officially mandated lockdown to influence behaviour and some sectors of the economy – hospitality, travel, airlines – will suffer more than others. The final thing we know is that economies have got used to dealing with the disruption caused by the pandemic. Even if vaccines are less effective against the new strain – and there is no evidence that is the case – the impact on activity will be moderated by working from home and shopping remotely. In short, the markets have probably got their judgment about right. Omicron currently looks more like an economic setback than a calamity. But that’s only a hunch. More here: European stock markets ended the day a little higher, after their worst session in over a year on Friday. The Stoxx 600 gained 0.8%, with gains in Paris (+0.5%), Frankfurt (+0.15%), Milan (+0.7%) and Madrid (+0.6%) as well as London. The UK’s stock market has posted a modest recovery from Friday’s plunge. With investors putting their initial alarm about Omicron behind them, the UK’s FTSE 100 index has closed 66 points higher at 7109 points, up almost 1% today. That’s an improvement on the previous session, which saw 226 points, or £72bn, wiped off the Footsie in a pandemic panic. BT Group finished the day as the top riser, up 6%, despite India’s Reliance denying reports that it was considering a takeover approach for the telco. Some companies vulnerable to a new surge in Covid-19 recovered ground, with catering group Compass rising by 4.7%, budget airline Wizz Air up 5.5%, and conference organiser Informa 1.7% higher. But airline group IAG lost its earlier gains, closing down 0.3%. Oil majors lifted the UK stock market, with BP gaining 3% and Royal Dutch Shell up 2.4%, as the crude oil price recovered from its 10% plunge on Friday. Brent crude is up 3% today, at around $75 per barrel, having traded around $83/barrel just last week. Neil Campling, global TMT analyst at Mirabaud Equity Research, says investors are disappointed that Twitter didn’t appoint an external candidate to replace Jack Dorsey: “The company had appeared to lose direction, struggling to monetise their network and were under pressure from activist Elliott. The initial reaction, stock +10%, reflects that Jack had probably run his course and it was time for change. The fact that the stock reversed all the gains to trade lower is likely reflective of disappointment over who is now the CEO. It is the Chief Technology Officer, so it’s not an external hire which many wanted. Instead, it is someone who was in charge of the very process that was becoming antiquated and outdated. Not a good look.” Few financial professionals expect Omicron to be the biggest topic in financial markets by the end of the year. That’s according to a flash poll of over 1,500 financial professionals, conducted impressively speedily today by Deutsche Bank’s Jim Reid. It found that only 10% think Omicron will be the biggest topic in financial markets at year-end, while 60% thought it would still be an issue but only of moderate importance. The remaining 30% think this latest variant will be largely forgotten about. Reid says this shows that the markets are relatively relaxed, as calm returns following Friday’s wobble. That could be a worry if the news flow becomes negative on the variant, he explains: As such, it’s probably clear that markets are probably not set up for bad news on this front. So, negative Omicron news is likely to be bad for markets without huge additional stimulus. Twitter’s shares have now dropped back from their earlier highs, and are now flat on the day at $47 as the markets digest Jack Dorsey’s departure, and his replacement. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says investors will hope the new CEO, Parag Agrawal, can focus fulltime on Twitter. Twitter shares popped higher after it was reported that Jack Dorsey would be stepping down as CEO of the business. He has previously been accused of being a part time CEO, he also runs Square, which helps explain today’s share price reaction. The hope is that new CEO Parag Agrawal will be able to devote 100% of his energy to stop the bleeding in the share price, from this year’s peaks at $80. Victoria Scholar, Interactive Investor’s head of investment, points out that Twitter’s latest financial results missed expectations, giving Agrawal plenty to work on. Parag Agrawal, Twitter’s CTO has been named as Jack Dorsey’s successor, taking over as chief executive. The change in leadership is being received as a positive by the markets as a way for Twitter to turn over a new leaf. The development comes as no shock to its board members who have reportedly been preparing to say goodbye to Dorsey since last year. Twitter’s stock has been struggling lately, shedding more than 45% since the February high, with shareholders hoping that Agrawal can restore confidence in the microblogging site. Its latest earnings were a disappointment with revenue guidance and monetizable daily users falling short of Wall Street’s expectations, sending shares down double digits on the day. Back to the pandemic... and Ryanair’s CEO Michael O’Leary has said he sees no reason to cancel flights because of the Omicron variant. O’Leary also said his airline’s flights were heavily booked for the next few weeks, Reuters explains: “We are not cancelling any flights...I don’t see that (Omicron) as a justifiable reason to prevent people who are vaccinated or have negative PCRs” from travelling, O’Leary told a news conference in Lisbon. “We frankly don’t think there is risk to air travel within Europe from those people,” he said, adding though that Ryanair was worried about some countries potentially shutting air travel, as was the case of Morocco. Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey has stepped down from his executive role at the social media company. Dorsey will be replaced by chief technology officer Parag Agrawal, the company announced on Monday. The surprise move ends Dorsey’s much criticized tenure as chief executive officer of both Twitter and Square, his digital payments company which led to Twitter stakeholders Elliott Management and billionaire investor Paul Singer calling on him to step down from one of those roles... More here: It’s official, Jack Dorsey is stepping down as Twitter’s chief executive. The micro-blogging site says that its board of directors has unanimously appointed Parag Agrawal, Twitter’s chief technology officer, to succeed Dorsey as CEO. In a statement, Dorsey says: “I’ve decided to leave Twitter because I believe the company is ready to move on from its founders. My trust in Parag as Twitter’s CEO is deep. His work over the past 10 years has been transformational. I’m deeply grateful for his skill, heart, and soul. It’s his time to lead. Positive momentum has carried forward from the Asian and European sessions to drive a strong rebound out of the gates at the start of trade stateside, writes Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor. The S&amp;P 500 and the Nasdaq are both higher by more than 1% with many US traders returning to the markets after the Thanksgiving holiday when light volumes on Friday exacerbated the selling pressure. The Dow is in the green for the first session in four while the Dow and S&amp;P 500 are on track for their best day in over six weeks. As the world scrambles to digest the threat of Omicron, the sense is that Friday’s panic selling was overdone with many traders using this as an opportunity to buy the dip. Investors have responded well to the speedy imposition of travel restrictions by governments over the weekend and to the mild-to-moderate symptom displays of Omicron patients so far. However, the fallout for markets and the economy depends on a series of unknowns including the transmissibility of the variant, its resistance to the vaccine and the severity of symptoms. Shares in Moderna have opened up by more than 7%, extending gains after rallying over 20% in Friday’s session after its chief medical officer said a reformulated vaccine could be ready by early next year. The company is fully focused on the task at hand, already testing three vaccine boosters against the variant and announcing a new variant-specific vaccine candidate against Omicron. Investors are positively surprised by the speed at which the biotech company has already got to work on the new variant with the response time allowing the share price to restore its upward trendline after a 3-month decline. Although the stock has given back nearly 30% of its gains since the August peak, Moderna shares are still enjoying a 245% gain year-to-date. The US housing market remains hot, with home sales jumping sharply last month. Pending home sales, a leading indicator of the health of the housing market, jumped by 7.5% in October, the National Association of Realtors reports, much higher than expected. Lawrence Yun, NAR’s chief economist, says Americans were keen to secure house moves before borrowing costs rise, even though the number of properties up for sale remains low. Motivated by fast-rising rents and the anticipated increase in mortgage rates, consumers that are on strong financial footing are signing contracts to purchase a home sooner rather than later. This solid buying is a testament to demand still being relatively high, as it is occurring during a time when inventory is still markedly low.” Trading in Twitter shares has now been halted, a sign that an announcement may be coming... Shares in Twitter have jumped 4%, after CNBC reported that chief executive officer Jack Dorsey is expected to step down. Last year Dorsey faced calls from Elliott Management Corp to step down, after the hedge fund argued he was paying too little attention to Twitter while also running payments processing company Square Inc. Twitter and Elliott eventually agreed a truce. CNBC explain: Dorsey currently serves as both the CEO of Twitter and Square, his digital payments company. Twitter stakeholder Elliott Management had sought to replace Jack Dorsey as CEO in 2020 before the investment firm reached a deal with the company’s management. Elliott Management founder and billionaire investor Paul Singer had wondered whether Dorsey should run both of the public companies, calling for him to step down as CEO of one of them. It’s unclear who’s set to succeed Dorsey. But if he steps down, the next CEO will have to meet Twitter’s aggressive internal goals. The company said earlier this year it aims to have 315 million monetizable daily active users by the end of 2023 and to at least double its annual revenue in that year. Dorsey’s most recent tweet, sent over the weekend, declared: “I love twitter”. Vaccine producer Moderna are the top riser on the S&amp;P 500, up over 8% in early trading, on expectations of higher sales of its mRNA jab. As flagged earlier, Moderna says it could develop a new vaccine targeting the Omicron variant in a 60-90 day timescale. Moderna CEO Stephane Bancel told CNBC that developing and ship a vaccine that specifically targets the omicron variant of the virus that causes Covid-19 could take months, but a higher 100-microgram dose of the company’s booster shot could be ready much sooner. Bancel told CNBC’s “Squawk Box.” “The higher dose could be done right away but it will be months before the omicron specific variant is ready to ship in massive quantities.” Stocks have opened high in New York, as Wall Street looks to recover from Friday’s rout. The three main indices are all up at the open, after the Dow Jones industrial average posted its biggest drop in a year, down over 900 points, on Friday. Tech stocks and travel companies are among the risers, with oil companies and banks also higher. The Dow: up 241 points or 0.7% at 35,140 points S&amp;P 500: up 48 points or 1% at 4,643 points Nasdaq: up 191 points or 1.25% at 15,683 points French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire has said there was no worry a resurgence of the coronavirus epidemic would derail economic growth in the Eurozone and in France. Le Maire made the comments at a joint press conference with the bloc’s chief Paschal Donohoe, Reuters reports. Retailers have said they cannot be expected to police the reintroduction of mandatory mask wearing in shops in England from Tuesday as enforcing the rules can be a “trigger for abuse”. Richard Walker, the boss of the Iceland grocery chain, said he was “supportive” of the change in mask policy introduced in response to the Omicron variant, but added: “My store colleagues can’t be expected to police those who refuse.” The Association of Convenience Stores, which represents thousands of independent shopkeepers, said its members were concerned about potential abuse when asking customers to mask up. A spokesperson, Chris Noice, said: “The first response from retailers was that this would lead to a lot of abuse from people refusing to wear face coverings. There could be an issue as there is a bit more of a backlash around Covid regulations than there has been in the past. “We know from previous lockdowns that reminding people about face coverings and social distancing is a big trigger for abuse and [store workers] are hesitant about challenging people.” More here: Germany’s inflation rate has soared to the highest level in around 30 years, as the cost of living squeeze in Europe tightens. Consumer price inflation jumped to 5.2% per year in November, the highest reading since June 1992. On an EU-harmonised basis, inflation surged to 6.0% year-on-year, up from 4.6% in October, the German Federal Statistics Office, the highest since this series began. This jump in inflation could increase the pressure on the European Central Bank to consider acting to stem rising prices, although the ECB has insisted that it is transitory, due to supply chain disruption and high energy prices. The CEO of Moderna has told CNBC that the pharmaceuticals group could create a new vaccine that targeted the Omicron variant, and get it approved by regulators, in 60 to 90 days. Stephane Bancel also explained that Moderna needs to see more data on Omicron before making the decision on whether to switch production, pointing out that there are two important unknowns. First, the impact on vaccine efficacy, which should be known in around two weeks, he says. Given Omicron’s large number of mutations, it is “highly possible” that the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccines is going down, Bancel says, but data will show if that’s true, and by how much it is falling. The second piece is the virulence of the virus, and it will take two to six weeks to know this. Omicron could be more virulent than other variants, as virulent, or less virulent, and today it’s really impossible to know, Bancel adds. The interview is online here. Here are some clips: The Kremlin has said today that market reaction to the new Omicron variant of coronavirus was emotional and not based on scientific data because there is no data available yet, Reuters reports. Russia’s MOEX index tumbled by 4% on Friday, amid fears the new strain may trigger wider lockdowns that would slow the global economy and hurt demand for energy. Stocks are higher today, though, lifting the MOEX by 2.1%. After a strong morning’s trading, the FTSE 100 is still up over 1% today, 80 points higher at 7,124 points. That lifts the index up from a seven-week low, suggesting that traders are a little less anxious about the economic threat from Omicron. But, it still means the London stock market has lost all its gains since mid-October, and only pulled back under a third of Friday’s tumble. Travel and hospitality firms are among the risers, with catering group Compass now up 4.3% and airline group IAG 4% higher. Banks are also in the risers, along with oil giants following the recovery in crude prices today. On the FTSE 250 index, Carnival (+6.5%), WH Smiths (+6.6%) and Wizz Air (+5.4%) are still leading the recovery from Friday’s stock market plunge. European markets are holding their gains, with France’s CAC up 1.2% and Germany’s DAX rising 0.75%, after heavy losses in the previous session. LGIM’s global equity strategist Lars Kreckel says investors should consider how policymakers may respond to Omicron. It’s relatively easy for major central banks to do nothing for the time being. Rates are already at zero with some tapering underway. It’s a bit trickier for the Bank of England, given expectations of a December hike, but the Federal Reserve (Fed) does not have to speed up tapering in December. Fiscal support, if needed, should be no different than in previous waves. In Europe, the past few weeks have shown that countries increasing restrictions are just as willing to renew fiscal support measures as previously. In the US, Democrats being in control of both the House and Senate – and with an election coming up next November – should make building consensus to support the economy easier than in 2020. Restrictions have already been ramping up in Europe in response to the winter wave. New variant concerns could accelerate this dynamic. The US faces a different situation, as a new variant would require a greater shift from the status quo. China’s zero-COVID strategy would be more difficult to maintain with a more transmissible variant. Mandatory vaccination has already become more likely in several European countries, and a new variant could push more towards this step. This would have little immediate impact on markets, but could potentially be positive for 2022. Economic confidence in the eurozone dropped this month, as the jump in Covi-19 cases and higher prices hit morale. The European Union’s economic sentiment indicator dropped from 118.6 to 117.5, with consumer confidence weakening from -4.8 to -6.8 as rising infections led to new restrictions in some countries. Sekar Indran, senior portfolio manager at Titan Asset Management, says: “Eurozone economic sentiment declined in November dampened by a winter frostbite of rising inflation, supply-chain bottlenecks, and stricter Covid-19 measures. There were bright spots in France, Italy and Poland where sentiment rose while Europe’s economic powerhouse Germany weakened.” The emergence of the Omicron variant means the Bank of England is less likely to raise UK interest rates at its next meeting, in December. The markets are now pricing in a 62% chance that UK base rate remains on hold at its record low of 0.1% next month, with a February 2020 rate rise now being inked in instead. Laith Khalaf, head of investment analysis at AJ Bell, says Omicron has punctured expectations of a Christmas rate hike. Markets had really got ahead of themselves in so confidently predicting a 2021 rate rise, no doubt egged on by some hawkish rhetoric from the Governor of the Bank of England. But it was always going to be risky for the Bank to raise rates this year, with the heightened chance of a resurgence in the pandemic over the winter months, and employment data beyond the furlough scheme only just becoming available. “The emergence of the Omicron variant has now crystalised fears that we’re not out of the woods just yet as far as the pandemic is concerned, and led to a shift in monetary policy expectations. The oil price has fallen back, and gilt yields have dropped significantly, reflecting fears that Omicron may spell trouble for the global economy. It’s still early days in the analysis of the new variant, and the fact that markets have now alighted on February as the likely month for a UK interest rate rise shows there is still considerable optimism that Omicron is a stumbling block, rather than a brick wall. Ian Stewart, Deloitte’s chief economist, agrees that the emergence of Omicron creates new uncertainties for central banks. Writing for Reaction, he explains: Faced with rising inflation the US Federal Reserve made the first step to winding down, or tapering, its programme of quantitative easing last month. A week ago it looked quite likely that the Bank of England would raise interest rates for the first time in more than three years at its meeting on 16 December. Given the potential threat posed by Omicron a ‘wait and see’ approach to tightening monetary policy looks the safer path now. Certainly bond markets think that interest rates are likely to stay lower for longer because of the emergence of Omicron. India’s Reliance Industries has firmly denied that report it was weighing a bid for UK telecoms group BT (see earlier post). Reliance dismissed Economics Times’ report that it was considering a move, which sent BT’s shares soaring 9% earlier, saying: “We categorically deny any intent to bid for the UK telecoms group BT. The article is completely speculative and baseless.” BT’s shares have dipped back, but still up almost 6% today. The number of UK mortgages approved by lenders has dropped to the lowest since the middle of last year, as the stamp duty tax cut wrapped up. There were 67,199 new mortgage approvals in October, down from nearly 71,900 in September, and less than expected. It’s the lowest reading since June 2020, showing the market has cooled now that buyers have to pay the full stamp duty rate on all purchases above £125,000. The amount borrowed through mortgages tumbled too -- to £1.6bn in October, down from £9.3bn in September (the final month before the stamp duty holiday ended in England and Northern Ireland). That’s the lowest net mortgage borrowing since July (after the stamp duty holiday was made less generous at the end of June). Data last week showed that UK house sales tumbled by more than half in October, after the stamp duty tax break finished on 30th September, which also illustrated how it had distorted the market. The BoE’s report also shows that people borrowed more last month, and saved less -- in the dash to buy Christmas presents early. Consumer credit rose by £700m in October, up from £300m in September, while the amount saved in cash deposits rose by £5.5bn in October, down from £9bn the previous month. Bethany Beckett, UK economist at Capital Economics says: Overall, the data offer some encouraging signs that households’ became a bit more willing to borrow in October. But the growing risk of a resurgence in virus infections and/or tighter restrictions mean that the outlook has darkened somewhat. That threatens to put any plans by members of the Monetary Policy Committee to raise interest rates in December on ice. Britain’s manufacturers are facing a “perfect storm” crisis of rapidly rising costs and towering debts that many fear could push them over the brink, according to a new survey. The leading industry trade body on Monday urged the government to introduce payment holidays on loans, warning that thousands of firms faced a “tipping point” that could make their business models unviable. Make UK said the UK’s manufacturing sector was facing “an unprecedented combination of a post-Covid credit, cash and costs crunch”. UK’s factories are struggling with the burden of repaying debts racked up to get them through the pandemic as well as grappling with a raft of other challenges from supply chain disruption to shortages of HGV drivers and energy costs.... Airline stocks are pushing higher, with BA’s parent company IAG now up 3.5%, among the FTSE 100’s top risers. Budget airline Wizz Air has jumped 4%, with easyJet has gained 3% and Ryanair is 2% up. That’s only a moderate recovery from Friday’s tumbles, but it suggests the anxiety that gripped markets late last week is easing. Cineworld has shaken off its earlier losses too, now up almost 6%. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says investors are looking for signs of optimism. Amid the doom which took hold as doors were slammed shut on travel routes from Africa and increased restrictions were imposed, there are glimmers of hope. There are reports from doctors in South Africa that Omicron infections don’t seem more severe and the World Health Organisation’s appeal for caution also appears to have calmed some nerves. It has observed that although there appears to be increasing rates of hospitalisation, that may be due to higher numbers being infected rather than due to its specific strain. This has helped ease concerns that global trade will be severely dented if the new variant takes hold, which saw the steepest falls in the oil price in 18 months on Friday. A barrel of Brent crude has rebounded a little, rising by 4.5% initially but then falling back, hovering around $75 a barrel. The slight recovery in the oil price has helped BP and Shell which opened higher. After nosediving on Friday, British Airways owner IAG, has edged back upwards, up by more than 3% in early trading, amid hopes that travel restrictions will be limited to those rolled out over the weekend, until more is known about the virus. EasyJet and Ryanair have also caught a ride upwards. Spain’s inflation rate has hit its highest in almost 30 years, as the cost of living squeeze intensifies. Spanish consumer prices jumped by 5.6% per year this month, new figures show, driven by more expensive food and fuel. That’s the highest inflation rate since 1992. Willie Walsh, director general of airline body IATA, has criticised the travel restrictions introduced to combat the spread of Omicron. Walsh told Radio 4’s Today Programme he was “very disappointed to see this knee-jerk reaction by governments” to the latest variant, claiming: It’s clear that these measures have been completely ineffective in the past, but impose huge hardship on people who are trying to connect with families and friends, and clearly massive financial damage to the tourism and airline industry. Q: But surely a pause, while we understand the threat posed by Omicron, is sensible? Walsh, the former CEO of British Airways parent company IAG, insists that flight restrictions don’t stop waves of Covid-19, so can’t be a long-term solution. He argues that “sensible testing regimes” would be effective at controlling the virus, and that a ‘risk-based, scientific approach’ would allowing travel to keep running. Walsh says 9.1 million PRC tests have been carried out on passengers arriving in the UK, with 0.8% testing positive. At the same time, the positivity rate in the UK was over 8%. The UK’s index of medium-sized companies has jumped 1.7% this morning, recovering around half of Friday’s losses. The FTSE 250 has gained 380 points to 22,920, as traders shake off some of last week’s anxiety over the pandemic. It’s being led by cruise group Carnival (+6.6%), Wagamama owner Restaurant Group (+5.5%), and WH Smiths (+5.7%). Property stocks are also higher. Europe’s stock markets have rebounded from their worst slump in over a year. The pan-European Stoxx 600 up around 1% this morning, with the Travel and Leisure sector jumping by 3% [having tumbled to one-year lows on Friday]. Jim Reid, strategist at Deutsche Bank predicts that we will soon get a lot of information about how bad the Omicron variant is, telling clients: The reports over the weekend that numerous cases of Omicron have already been discovered around the world, suggests it’s probably more widespread than people think already. So we will likely soon learn whether these patients present with more severe illness and we’ll also learn of their vaccination status before any official study is out. The only caveat would be that until elderly patients have been exposed in enough scale we won’t be able to rule out the more negative scenarios. In the meantime, the level of restrictions have been significantly ramped up over the weekend in many countries, Reid adds: One very significant one is that ALL travellers coming into (or back to) the UK will have to self isolate until they get a negative PCR test. This sort of thing will dramatically reduce travel, especially short business trips. Overnight Japan have effectively banned ALL foreign visitors. I appreciate it’s dangerous to be positive on Covid at the moment but you only have to look at the UK for signs that boosters are doing a great job. Cases in the elderly population continue to collapse as the roll out progresses well and overall deaths have dropped nearly 20% over the last week to 121 (7-day average) - a tenth of where they were at the peak even though cases have recently been 80-90% of their peak levels. If Europe are just lagging the UK on boosters rather than anything more structural, most countries should be able to control the current wave all things being equal. However Omicron could make things less equal but it would be a huge surprise if vaccines made no impact. Shares in BT have jumped 7%, after reports that India’s conglomerate Reliance Industries is considering a takeover bid. Economics Times reported that Reliance, controlled by billionaire Mukesh Ambani, could make an unsolicited offer to buy into BT Group or try to get a controlling share in it. They say: Asia’s richest man, Mukesh Ambani, may have set his sights on the UK to expand Jio’s telecom footprint. Reliance Industries is weighing a bid for UK telecoms group, BT, formerly British Telecom, according to multiple people familiar with the matter. These sources suggest Reliance could make an “unsolicited offer to buy into the company or even stake a claim to corner a controlling share”, Economics Times adds: Alternatively, it may propose to partner networking or fibre optic arm Openreach and fund its expansion plans, even though the company had last month said it was shelving the earlier plans of roping in a financial or strategic joint venture partner to connect an additional 5 million homes. BT said it would fund the expansion and roll out itself. More here: Reliance Industries weighs bid for UK’s telco BT Group BT has already attracted the attention of telecoms tycoon Patrick Drahi, who took a 12% stake earlier this year. Drahi is free to buy more BT stock next month, when his pledge not to launch a takeover bid expires.... UK travel and hospitality stocks are inching higher this morning. IAG, which owns British Airways, has nudged up by 0.2%, after plunging almost 15% on Friday to a one-year low. while budget rival easyJet is 0.3% higher Cruise operator Carnival has gained 4.5% and WH Smiths, which operates shops at UK travel hubs, have jumped 6%. But cinema operator Cineworld have dropped around 1%. Some of the UK stocks which were worst hit on Friday have opened higher, with catering group Compass up 2.9% and conference organiser Informa gaining 2.6%. Oil giants are also a little higher, with BP up 2% and Royal Dutch Shell rising 1.5%. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has jumped 1% at the start of trading in London. The index of London’s largest listed companies is up 79 points to 7122, having ended last week at its lowest since early October. This recovers less than a third of Friday’s slump (when it lost 266 points in a wave of heavy selling. South Africa’s rand has recovered some of Friday’s losses, when it tumbled to a one-year low after the new Covid-19 variant spooked investors. Reuters has the details: South Africa’s rand firmed early on Monday, recovering from last week’s plunge to its lowest since October 2020 on concerns around the discovery of a COVID-19 variant in the country that has been described as the most concerning. Stock markets also recovered, after hospitality shares fell sharply on the news a host of countries would bar travel from southern Africa, hitting hopes of a bumper season for a tourism industry hurt badly by the pandemic. At 0630 GMT, the rand traded at 16.1250 against the dollar, 1% firmer than its close on Friday, when it sank to 16.3675. More here: South Africa’s rand, stocks recover after sinking on Omicron worries Oil has rallied today, after plunging over 10% on Friday amid fears that Omicron would hit the global recovery. Brent crude has jumped by 4%, or almost $3 per barrel, to $75.59 per barrel, up from a two-month low. Alvin Tan of RBC Capital Markets says investors are dipping their toes into risk assets after Friday’s Omicron-driven rout. Confirmed cases of the Covid variant appear to be mostly mild-to-moderate, which encouraged risk sentiment in Asia trading. US equity futures are up robustly this morning. That said, the situation is evolving, and it will be some time before we have full information about Omicron’s transmissibility and severity. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. After their biggest losses in a year on Friday, stock markets appear to be stabilising as investors seek more information about the Omicron variant that is prompting some governments to bring in new travel rules, and could threaten the global recovery. Asia-Pacific markets have dropped further today, with Japan’s Nikkei losing another 1.6%, as Tokyo’s government announced it is temporarily shutting its borders to foreign visitors. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng is down 1.1%, and South Korea’s KOSPI dipping 0.9%. Travel and hospitality stocks were hit by investor concerns over the spread of Omicron around the world, which has also prompted Israel to bar entry to all foreign nationals and Morocco to suspend all incoming flights for two weeks, Japan Airlines’s shares are down 4%, with Hong Kong’s Cathay Pacific losing 3.8%, and Korean Air dropping 2.4% Australia’s Qantas Airways slid 6% at the open, before recovering to be down just 2% Hong Kong-listed casino shares were also down on concerns surrounding the virus, and reports that an arrest warrant has been issued for the head of Macau’s largest junket group for cross-border gambling activities(Marketwatch has more details). But the futures markets is signaling that Wall Street will rebound, after the Dow fell 2.5% on Friday in its worst drop of the year, accentuated by the Thanksgiving holiday. European markets are set to rise too, after Friday’s plunge which saw £72bn wiped off the UK’s leading share index in its biggest percentage fall in over a year. The blue-chip FTSE 100 is expected to rally by over 1%, recovering a chunk of Friday’s losses. Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, says some traders are optimistic, even though we simply don’t know whether Omicron is “delta 2.0, or a more benign version”. As the week starts anew, it is a very mixed performance in Asia today. Over the weekend, the WHO said that omicron’s symptoms appear to be mild, and the head of Moderna said a newly rejigged version of their vaccine could be available by early 2022. That seems to have been enough to flush out the perpetual optimists of the US stock market, with US index futures strongly rallying this morning. Halley cautions, though, that the prospect of the pandemic resurging is hitting Having moved heaven and earth over the past six months to get vaccination rates across the region to impressive levels, the prospect of them being rendered useless and trade suffering is understandably weighing on sentiment. The first move in early Asia on Monday is often the wrong one. If that plays true today, the early optimism shown in the most illiquid time of the week for global markets, could evaporate as the day goes on. It is hard to see Europe for example, already facing another Covid-19 wave and more restrictions, suddenly finding light at the end of the virus tunnel. G7 health ministers are due to hold an emergency meeting today about Omicron, as experts race to determine the level of threat posed by the new strain. The agenda 9.30am GMT: Bank of England’s mortgage approvals and consumer credit report for October 10am GMT: Eurozone consumer and business confidence report 1pm GMT: Germany’s inflation rate for November (preliminary estimate) 3pm GMT: US pending home sales for OctoberMy father, John Sankey, who has died aged 91, was a diplomat who took up historical research, having become fascinated by the life and work of Sir Thomas Brock, sculptor of the Queen Victoria Memorial outside Buckingham Palace. Commencing his career in the Colonial Office in 1953, John received his first posting in New York at the United Nations. On his return, in 1964 he transferred to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. After postings in Guyana, Singapore, Malta and the Netherlands, he returned to London as the first head of the newly formed Central African Department. John’s final postings were as High Commissioner to Tanzania (1982-8)5, and UK permanent representative to the UN, Geneva (1985-90). He was appointed CMG in 1983. While at the Colonial Office he met Gwen Putnam, and in 1958 they got married. In the 1970s they purchased a house known as “Merrieweathers” in Mayfield, East Sussex. Intrigued by the initials TB on a stained-glass window, John discovered that Merrieweathers had been owned by Brock. This began his enduring fascination with the sculptor. In retirement, John turned his Brock research into a doctoral thesis at Leeds University, and then a book, Thomas Brock, Forgotten Sculptor of the Victoria Memorial (2012). In 2011, in his 80s, he ascended 17 ladders within scaffolding around the memorial to view refurbishment work. He continued to work on Brock until his death, donating his scholarly archive to the Worcester City Art Gallery and Museum. In 1990, John was appointed secretary general of the Society of London Art Dealers and later became a director of the Art Loss Register. Born in Woolwich, London, John was the son of Ivy (nee Millward) and Harry Sankey, a clerk and first world war veteran. He attended St Peter’s primary school, which was evacuated to Hawkhurst, Kent, in 1939, and recalled watching the Battle of Britain fought overhead. After attending the Cardinal Vaughan school, at that time evacuated to Windsor, John received a scholarship to read classics at Cambridge University. He was an enthusiastic oarsman for his college, Peterhouse, and graduated with first-class honours. He did national service with the Royal Artillery, seeing active service during the Malay Emergency. His time in Singapore and Malaya sparked a lifelong interest in people from all cultures and walks of life and a love of curry served with coconut and sliced banana. A Catholic of great dedication and faith, John supported Gwen’s work as president of St Francis Leprosy Guild and was a member of the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre. Always a fun and generous host, and a loving father, John is survived by Gwen and by four children, Caroline, Martin, Paul and me, and eight grandchildren.The UK’s minimum gap for Covid booster jabs will be halved from six months to three, after the government accepted advice from its vaccines watchdog to speed up the programme to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation said in a statement the new policy would “accelerate the deployment of Covid-19 vaccines before the peak of any impending Omicron wave”. In a statement to MPs, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said that he was accepting the JCVI proposal. But he also told MPs “if it emerges that this variant is no more dangerous than the Delta variant, then we won’t keep measures in place for a day longer than is necessary”. MPs vote on the new restrictions announced for England in response to the Omicron threat - compulsory mask wearing in shops and on public transport, isolation for close contacts of Omicron cases , and PCR tests for new arrivals - after a three-hour debate tomorrow. Scientific advisers are bracing themselves for hundreds of UK cases of the Omicron Covid variant to be confirmed in the next week or so, the Guardian has learned. Downing Street has rejected a call from the Scottish and Welsh goverments for all arrivals in the UK to be made to spend eight days in isolation to reduce the spread of the Omicron variant. (See 11.06am, 11.46am and 1.52pm.) Keir Starmer has sparked a row in the Labour party by launching a shadow cabinet reshuffle as his deputy was giving a major speech attacking “corruption” by the government. MPs should face a complete ban on working as paid consultants and ministers should be more open about any potential conflicts of interest, parliament’s internal standards watchdog has proposed among a series of new anti-sleaze rules. Senior French ministers have accused the UK of operating a labour market akin to slavery and called on London to open safe routes for migrants, as the two governments continued to deflect blame for last week’s drownings in the Channel. We have not heard much about the Labour reshuffle yet, but here are two snippets from two political editors. From my colleague Heather Stewart From the Mirror’s Pippa Crerar Head teachers welcomed the government’s announcement that children aged 12-15 will be invited for a second Covid jab, but expressed concern about capacity after problems and delays during the first round of vaccinations. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: We strongly urge the government to ensure that the health service has in place the capacity to deliver this commitment. The programme to provide a first dose of the vaccine to 12 to 15-year-olds has been beset with delays because the health teams responsible for going into schools and delivering the vaccines clearly have not had sufficient resources to be able to do this at the scale and speed required. The NHS Confederation has welcomed the massive expansion of the booster rollout - but warned that GPs and their teams who will play a key role in the delivery of third jabs are already very busy dispensing winter flu jabs and dealing with record numbers of patients seeking care. Ruth Rankine, the organisation’s director of primary care, said: The booster vaccine will offer people significant extra protection against Covid-19 and NHS leaders and staff will do all they can to ensure those eligible for booster jabs get them. But this is a significant expansion that adds to the complexity of an already challenging programme, so we would encourage the government to support front-line teams to play a critical role in ensuring the public get vaccinated as quickly as possible. Rankine stopped short of saying that finite capacity in general practice might slow the pace of the now-shortened booster programme. But GPs say that they are currently facing unprecedented demand for advice and treatment for all sorts of ailments, and are still dispensing many winter flu jabs. However, in England at least, many more pharmacies are now delivering boosters - 1,100 of the 2,600 vaccination sites are pharmacies - than when second Covid jabs were rolled out, and that has significantly increased overall capacity. Will there be enough vaccines available to administer to the many millions of people who are now suddenly eligible? Rankine asked ministers and NHS leaders to ensure there is. While vaccinators are not reporting any shortages just now, today’s announcement will mean that increased supplies are needed. Rosena Allin-Khan, the shadow health minister, angered Sajid Javid, the health secretary, when she responded to his Covid statement earlier by critising the Tories for their record on mask wearing. She has repeated the point on Twitter. The latest update to the UK’s Covid dashboard shows the total number of cases over the past seven days up 3.7% on the previous week. There have been 42,583 cases recorded today. But deaths are down 18.4% week on week, with 35 recorded today. Here is the UK Health Security Agency news release with details of the five confirmed cases of Omicron that have been found in England. (See 3.30pm.) Mark Harper, chair of the Tory lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, says he hopes the measures will lapse after three weeks. If they have to be extended, he asks for an assurance that MPs will be recalled from the Christmas recess for that purpose. Rees-Mogg says he has allocated three hours for the debate tomorrow, not the 90 minutes required, because the government takes the views of MPs’ seriously. He says he cannot say what will happen in three weeks’ time, but it was only Oliver Cromwell who made the house sit on Christmas day, he says. Chris Bryant (Lab) says the regulations have not even been laid yet (published, so that they can read by MPs) and they will come into effect before the debate tomorrow. That is wrong, he says. They should be debated first. Rees-Mogg says they are being laid at 5pm. If Bryant’s question had lasted a little longer, they would have been out before he finished. The Javid statement is over. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has just made a short business statement saying the debate on the new Covid restrictions will take place tomorrow, before the SNP debate. (See 3.37pm.) He says the Covid debate will run for three hours. And the SNP will get three hours for its debate too, he says. Pupils at a school in Nottinghamshire are being tested because of a possible link to the Omicron case found in the country, the BBC reports. Earlier, in his question to Javid in the Commons, Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the health committee, said low vaccine rates in poorer countries amounted to a “moral failure” by richer countries. He said: Whilst I recognise the enormous contribution the UK has made through Covax, through the development of the AstraZeneca vaccine and so on, is it not a moral and practical failure that richer countries have managed to vaccinate 60% of their populations when for poorer countries it is just 3%? Javid said that he agreed, but he claimed the UK cold be proud of its record donating vaccines. Dame Diana Johnson (Lab) asks Javid if he thinks all MPs in the chamber should be wearing masks. Javid says they all know what the guidance is, and it is up to them. Back in the Commons Javid says there are no plans that he is aware of to close schools early because of Omicron. That would be “very detrimental” to the education of children, he says. Humza Yousaf, the Scottish government’s health secretary, has confirmed that Scotland has welcomed and will implement the latest recommendations from the JCVI. (See 3.43pm.) Alun Cairns, the former Tory Welsh secretary, says infection rates are higher in Wales even though it has kept working from home and mask wearing in place. Javid says he thinks England has had the best approach. Chris Byrant (Lab) asks Javid to look at disinformation campaigns being carried out. Some of these are dangerous. Javid says he agrees with Bryant on disinformation campaigns. The government is trying to counter this, he says. Andrew Gwynne (Lab) asks about the transmissibility of Omicron. He says Australia has got some of the toughest entry requirements, but Omicron has got through. It is as if it got through “a concrete wall”, he says. Javid says they will learn more about its transmissibility over time. Steve Brine (Con) asks when we will have data on the effectiveness of vaccines against Omicron. Javid says after three weeks the government will have more information, from its own work and from international partners. Caroline Lucas (Green) asks why the government does not support waiving intellectual property rights on vaccines. Javid says the government does not think that would be helpful. It would give pharmaceutical companies a huge disincentive to investing in vaccine research, he says. Andrew Bridgen (Con) asks how MPs will get the chance to review the decision on these measures being takein in three weeks’ time. Parliament will be in recess. Javid says the government wants to act quickly, so a three-week review is right. He says unless people favour recalling MPs, the government’s approach is best. Javid says getting rid of almost controls in the summer turned out to be the right move. He claims that some of his European counterparts wish they had done the same. We did take measures in the summer where we set out that we were removing almost all domestic rules and controls. They turned out to be absolutely the right measures. There’s many of my counterparts in Europe that now believe that they should have taken a similar route as well. Labour opposed those moves, he says. Sir Desmond Swayne (Con) asks what evidence there is that tougher mask wearing policies in Scotland have made a difference. He suggests belief in the effectiveness of masks is “mumbo jumbo”. Over the last few months there has been a useful controlled experiment on face coverings given the different policies pursued in Scotland and England. What estimate has he made of the result? It’s mumbo jumbo isn’t it? Javid says research has shown that wearing masks has benefits. Sir Graham Brady, chair of the Conservative backbencher 1922 Committee, says he welcomes the news that the debate and vote will be tomorrow. But why not have the vote before the measures come into force. And he asks what assessment Javid has made of reports from South Africa suggesting Omicron produces a milder version of the illness. Javid, who did not say the vote would be tomorrow, says Jacob Rees-Mogg will address this later. On Omicron’s severity, Javid says South Africa has a younger population. Theresa Villiers (Con) says, if the situation deteriorates, can the government do everything possible not shut down the hospitality sector. She says it is just getting back on its feet. Javid says he agrees absolutely. Matthew Hancock, the former health secretary, asks if a new vaccine will be deployed against Omicron. Javid pays tribute to the preparatory work Hancock did on this when he was in post, and he says if it is necessary to procure vaccines, the government will do that. Mark Harper, chair of the Tory lockdown sceptic Covid Recovery Group, asks how close contacts of someone testing positive with Omicron will find out about that. Javid says the UK Health Security Agency is working out the best way to establish if a case is Omicron. He says the S-gene dropout might be used (see 10.59am), but other methods might be used. The SNP’s Richard Thomson asks why the Scottish government’s call for an four-natons Cobra meeting seems to have been dismissed by No 10 out of hand. Javid says the four nations of the UK have been working together on coronavirus anyway. Rosena Allin-Khan, a shadow health minister, responded for Labour. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, is isolating after testing positive last week. She was largely critical of the government, saying that masks should never have been made voluntary on public transport in the first place, that sick pay is still inadequate, and that there should be compulsory pre-departure Covid tests for people flying into the UK. She also criticised Boris Johnson for his record on mask wearing, saying he had put people at risk in a hospital. Javid told her, in response, that her partisan reply had misjudged the mood of the house. He joked that she might have been auditioning for the reshuffle. Javid says scientists are working quickly to discover how dangerous Omicron is. He goes on: If it emerges that this variant is no more dangerous than the Delta variant, then we won’t keep [these] measures in place for a day longer than necessary. That implies that, if the scientists decide Omicron poses no greater threat than Delta, compulsory mask wearing in shops and on public transport in England, and the new PCR tests for UK arrivals, could be abandoned within weeks. This line seems to have been included more as a sop to the Tory lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group than because there is a serious expectation that Omicron will turn out to be just like Delta. Javid turns to the online meeting of G7 health ministers he convened today. He says they all praised South Africa for its leadership, and for the openness it has shown about Omicron. Javid says he asked the JCBI to urgently review if it could reduce the gap between second doses and boosters. He confirms the changes proposed by the JCVI at its own briefing earlier. (See 3.20pm and below) And he says he has accepted the recommendations in full. He says this will be a “huge step up” for the vaccination programme. But he is confident the NHS is up to the task, he says. More information about how this will be put into action will be announced in coming days, he says. JCVI is advising all adults over the age of 18 should get a booster. The booster programme should be rolled out by age and risk group. Boosters should be given no sooner than three months after the second dose. Severely immunocompromised people should get another booster, in addition to the one they have already had. Booster vaccines should be mRNA ones, either Moderna or Pfizer. Children aged 12 to 15 should now be offered a second dose of vaccine. In the Commons Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is making a statement about Covid. He starts by confirming the measures announced over the weekend. And he says there will be a vote on these measures in the Commons. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, will give details later, he says. Tomorrow, time in the Commons has been set aside for a debate on a motion chosen by the SNP. The party has announced that it is tabling a censure motion against Boris Johnson. The motion says: That, this house censures the prime minister, the right honourable member for Uxbridge and South Ruislip, for frequently violating the sixth principle of public life, for seeking to undermine the recommendations of the standards committee on Owen Paterson, for regularly ignoring independent advice on matters such as international treaties and breaches of the ministerial code by his ministers, for putting forward proposals to diminish the powers of the Electoral Commission, for ignoring independent advice concerning the granting of peerages to Conservative party donors and nominations to public bodies such as Ofcom; and further calls for his ministerial salary to be reduced by £41,567 per year. The sixth principle of public life, as drawn up by the Nolan committee, is honesty. “Holders of public office should be truthful,” the Nolan principles say. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has identified two further cases of Covid-19 with mutations consistent with B.1.1.529 in England, officials have announced. The two cases are in addition to the previous three confirmed cases of the Sars-CoV-2 variant known as B.1.1.529 – aka the Omicron variant – on 27 and 28 November. The total number of confirmed cases in England is now five. The individuals that have tested positive are not connected to each other and are not linked to the previously confirmed cases. Both have links to travel to southern Africa. One case is located in Camden, London and one case is located in Wandsworth, London. Both individuals and their households had been told to self-isolate, the UKHSA said. It was carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to be infectious. Q: If you are reducing the gap between second doses and booster doses from five months to three months, doesn’t that imply you are panicking? Van-Tam says he is asking people not to panic. But he is also saying they should not ignore the weather forecast either. Lim says, in general, the longer the gap between a first and second dose, the better. So usually it is good to extend the duration between vaccine doses. But he also says they do not want to wait so long that they cannot precede the next wave. He says there is data from a study showing that, after three months, you still get very strong booster response. That is why the JCVI feels it is reasonable to use that timetable. They are now taking questions. Q: Will you be able to deliver these boosters before Christmas? Van-Tam says the NHS will set out in the next few days how this will be operationalised. It will be very complicated, he says. He says the NHS understands the real urgency of this, and is up for the task. He says they do not want younger people getting ahead of older people, who are at higher risk. Van-Tam is onto one of his famous football analogies. We started with 11 players, he says. With Alpha and Delta, we lost a couple of players, and had to field replacements, he says. With Omicron, it is like picking up two yellow cards. So we are at risk of going down to 10 players, he says. He says that means everyone on the pitch needs to up their game. Here is our story on the announcement, by Jamie Grierson and Rowena Mason. Lim says from what we know so far, the vaccines may be less good against Omicron than against the Delta variant, the one now dominant in the UK. He says doctors can counter this by increasing the immune response from the current vaccine. He says the immune response from the booster is higher than from the second dose. Timing is important, he says. He says you would want to deploy boosters before a new wave. He is not saying there will be a new wave. But, in case there is one, it would be best to boost vaccines in advance. Lim says JCVI is advising all adults over the age of 18 should get a booster. The booster programme should be rolled out by age and risk group, he says. This is how the first and second doses were rolled out. He says the JCVI favours this method because the variant does not seem to be affecting age cohorts in a different way to the original virus. He says boosters should be given no sooner than three months after the second dose. He says severely immunocompromised people should get another booster, in addition to the one they have already had. He says booster vaccines should be mRNA ones, either Moderna or Pfizer. He says children aged 12 to 15 should now be offered a second dose of vaccine. Raine says, even with Omicron, vaccines still have an “overwhelmingly positive benefit/risk balance”. Van-Tam starts by saying this is a technical briefing from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. He says we have always known variants would be inevitable. We have seen “many come”. Variants always cause concern, because we don’t know how they will behave, and how the vaccines will hold up. We knew one would arrive that would cause “heightened concern”. And with this one, Omicron, we are there, he says. But he says it is important to stress the degree of uncertainty. He says there is more we don’t know than we do know. He says that will change over the next three weeks. Omicron has many mutations. Some are ones we know a lot about, some are new. But, on first principles, there are enough mutations to cause a worry about the effect on vaccine effectiveness. He says Omicron is associated with an increased growth rate. But he says that is not the same as saying it is definitely more transmissible. He says it is “not all doom and gloom” at this stage, and people should not panic. He says if there is an impact on vaccine effectiveness, the biggest effect will be on likelihood of infection. There should be less impact on the likelihood of severe disease, he says. The Downing Street press conference on booster vaccines is about to start. It is taking place at 9 Downing Street, where the main government press conferences take place, but it will not feature any ministers. The attendees will be Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer for England, Prof Wei Shen Lim, chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, and Dr June Raine, chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency Jo Stevens, Labour MP for Cardiff Central, has confirmed she is moving from shadow culture secretary to shadow Welsh secretary in the Labour reshuffle. That will be seen as a demotion. As shadow Welsh secretary Stevens will replace Nia Griffith, who seems to be going back to the backbenches. This is from the Times’ Patrick Maguire. There will be a Downing Street briefing at 3pm with an update about the booster programme. It will feature Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer for England, Prof Wei Shen Lim, chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, and Dr June Raine, chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. There will be full coverage here, of course. MPs should face a complete ban on working as paid consultants and ministers should be more open about any potential conflicts of interest, the Commmons standards committee. In his story, my colleague Peter Walker goes on: Other recommendations in the report from thecommittee include an obligation for MPs to have a written contract for any outside work, available for inspection if needed, and which would spell out that they cannot lobby on behalf of the employer. Another idea, which the committee said would need cross-party support to implement, would be to limit how much time MPs can spend on outside jobs or other interests, and how much they can earn from them. It acknowledged, however, that it was difficult to see how this might work in practice. Peter’s full story is here. And here you can read the full report here (pdf). There have been three confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in England, one of which was found in Essex. On Radio 4’s the World at One Dr Mike Gogarty, Essex county council’s director of public health, said their case was linked to someone who returned from South Africa about two weeks ago. But the case was two steps removed from the South African arrival, he said. He said: “This case contracted the case from somebody else who contracted it from one of her family who had been recently to Africa.” He said the person with the confirmed case was tested on 20 November, but that genomic sequencing only confirmed it as Omicron at the weekend. This timetable explains why scientists believe community transmission could already be well established. Here are the main lines on Covid from the Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 rejected the call from the Scottish and Welsh governments for eight-day isolation for all arrivals to the UK. (See 11.06am.) Asked about the proposal, the PM’s spokesman said this would have a “detrimental effect” on the travel industry. He went on: We believe that the approach we’ve taken is the proportionate one to the evidence that we currently have available about this variant. Introducing further isolation requirements and testing requirements would have a detrimental effect on the travel individually industry and indeed those who are planning to go travelling. The spokesman also said there were no plans to convene a four-nations Cobra meeting, as the Scottish and Welsh governments have requested. Asked about this proposal, the spokesman said: We would confirm any plans for a Cobra meeting in the normal way. Currently, there isn’t one scheduled. We obviously speak to our devolved administration counterparts very regularly and we will continue to co-ordinate our response with them. The spokesman said children would not be exempt for the requirement for people who have been in close contact with a person testing positive for Omicron to isolate for 10 days. Yesterday Steve Baker, deputy chair of the Tory lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, has said this rule could “cause chaos” in schools. (See 9.26am.) But the spokesman defended the rule, saying: We believe our measures strike the balance between keeping children in face-to-face learning while ensuring education settings remain as safe as possible while we investigate this new variant. The spokesman has defended the government’s decision not to make mask wearing compulsory in hospitality venues in England. (See 12.27pm.) With almost no detail out yet as to who is moving in the Labour reshuffle, all the reporting at the moment is focusing on what Angela Rayner, the party’s deputy leader, did or did not know about the plans. ‘Whether the deputy knew or not’ would normally be an issue of little or no interest. But Starmer’s last reshuffle was overshadowed by a botched attempt to demote her, which understandably made her doubly keen to ensure the same thing did not happen again. And launching the reshuffle at a time when it would overshadow Rayner’s speech looks like a clear snub (although, to be fair, Rayner’s speech was extensively briefed overnight, which means that as a news event it was largely over before it began). This is what journalists are reporting about the briefings coming out from both sides. It is heading into ferrets-in-a-sack territory. From the Telegraph’s Harry Yorke From the Mirror’s Pippa Crerar From the Mirror’s Kevin Maguire From the Mirror’s Rachel Wearmouth From my colleague Aubrey Allegretti Nicola Sturgeon has urged people to self-test for Covid every time they leave home to mix with people from a different household, to help suppress the virus and the new Omicron variant in the run-up to Christmas. In a speech to the SNP conference, which is being held entirely online, Sturgeon said she had previously asked people to use lateral flow tests twice a week; she now wanted the public to self-test far more often. Scotland already has strict rules on wearing face-masks in shops, on public transport and in shared spaces, but has relaxed its previous use of vaccine passports to go to large sports and cultural events. In a speech pre-recorded before Scotland detected six Omnicron cases, Sturgeon said: Please - even if you are feeling fine - test yourself on each and every occasion you intend to mix with people from outside your household. That means before you go to the pub, or to a restaurant, or to someone’s house, or even to a shopping centre. And if the test shows up positive do not go. Instead, get a confirmatory PCR test and self isolate until you get the result of that. [If] we all do this, we will slow the spread. And we will maximise our chances, not just of a more normal Christmas but a safer Christmas too and, let’s all hope, a much brighter new year. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has signalled that the UK government is opposed to tightening travel restrictions, as the Scottish and Welsh governments are proposing. (See 11.06am.) At a press conference with her Israeli counterpart, Yair Lapid, at the Foreign Office, she said: On the subject of the variant, we have taken very rapid action to first of all put countries on the red list where that is a risk, but also to take domestic precautions. We don’t yet have the full information about this new variant but it is right that we take those precautionary measures while we’re investigating further. And it is important to make sure that we keep travel routes open where possible, particularly to make sure that our economy remains strong, at the same time as taking necessary action. We’ve got the balance right. Downing Street has confirmed that Sajid Javid, the health secretary, will give a statement to MPs on Covid at 3.30pm. Here is the moment when Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, was asked about the reshuffle that started around the time she was delivering a major speech at the Institute for Government. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti says Rayner was only given limited warning of what was coming. Laura Kuenssberg, the BBC’s political editor, says Keir Starmer’s failure to keep Rayner fully notified could be problematic. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman defended the government’s decision not to make mask wearing compulsory in hospitality venues in England. He said: We believe that this is a measured and proportionate approach based on the evidence that we have so far. It appears likely but not certain this variant is more transmissible than previous variants, but we don’t have any hard evidence and indeed no one has any hard evidence on its impact on things like hospitalisations and deaths and individuals that are vaccinated. So we think that this is the proportionate approach to take in the current circumstances. The Labour MP Cat Smith has confirmed that Keir Starmer has started a reshuffle. She has released a letter announcing that she is no longer shadow secretary of state for young people and democracy. She says that Starmer offered to let her remain in her current brief, implying that Starmer wanted to downgrade her role. It would not be surprising if Starmer does want to slim down the shadow cabinet. Currently it has 32 members. The full cabinet just has 23 members, although another seven ministers are invited to attend. In her letter Smith, a Jeremy Corbyn supporter, also complains that the party’s refusal to restore the party whip to the former leader is “utterly unsustainable”. Boris Johnson has “broken” the standards system and left watchdogs meant to ensure politicians who break the rules are punished “muzzled and neutered”, Anegla Rayner has said. In a major speech setting out how Labour would restore probity in public servants, the party’s deputy leader said it was important to “rebuild the regime that isn’t working”. Rayner has called for a new body to be set up - the Integrity and Ethics Commission - to replace the one meant to regulate former ministers’ new business activities, currently looked after by the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba). When asked by the Guardian whether now was the right time for a reshuffle (see 11.49am), Rayner said: “We need some consistency in how we’re approaching things as an opposition.” She stressed Labour should be “focused on getting us into power” and if the party took its eye off that, it would be letting people down. Keir Starmer is set to reshuffle his frontbench team for the second time in a year, as Labour seeks to take advantage of the government’s disarray over social care and the cost of living. With Boris Johnson facing a series of backbench revolts in recent weeks, and the poll bounce the Conservatives gained from the vaccine rollout apparently fading, Labour are keen to get on the front foot. No announcements have yet been made; but a party spokesperson acknowledged a reshuffle was imminent – and several party sources refused to deny that it was kicking off immediately. Starmer is understood to want to boost the party’s media standing, as well as promote some figures perceived to have performed strongly in recent months. He had hoped to carry out a wider reshuffle in May, in the wake of the loss of the Hartlepool byelection, but more ambitious plans were stymied by a furious standoff with his deputy, Angela Rayner, over a change to her role. Last week, when Boris Johnson wrote a letter to President Macron about possible solutions to the Channel crossings crisis and released it to the media simultaneously, the French government reacted furiously, arguing that this was little more than a publicity stunt designed to boost Johnson’s standing with British voters and that, if he were serious about trying to reach agreement with Macron, the last thing he would do would be negotiate in public. Johnson’s private reaction to the Sturgeon/Drakeford letter may be quite similar to Macron’s response to his. But in the light of what happened last week, of course he could not say that publicly. Is the comparison fair? In many respects, no. Nicola Sturgeon and Mark Drakeford are both more serious, and less provocative leaders than Johnson, and the approach they set out in their letter is entirely consistent with the approach they have taken throughout the pandemic, when they have been notably more cautious about opening up than the UK government. And, in his letter, Johnson was proposed something totally unacceptable to French voters (that they just take back people who cross the Channel on small boats). The Sturgeon/Drakeford travel proposal would probably be popular with British voters, who have consistently backed tougher restrictions than those advocated by Johnson. But Sturgeon and Drakeford may be going beyond the scientific consensus. We have not heard large numbers of Sage scientists over the weekend calling for eight-day isolation for all arrivals to the UK. And the two first ministers must know that their proposal would be unacceptable to a significant number of Conservative MPs, who are aggressively opposed to anything that they view as a move back towards lockdown. It is very hard to imagine Johnson agreeing to this without much, much stronger pressure for this from his own advisers, and so in that respect this does seem like a move likely to demonstrate how hamstrung Johnson is by the Tory right. That won’t be the main motivation, almost certainly, but for the SNP, and Welsh Labour, it will be a happy bonus. It is more probable that Johnson might agree to a four-nations Cobra meeting, although this could be downgraded to a meeting of the joint ministerial committee. At the start of the pandemic there were regular four-nations Cobra meetings. But over time No 10 lost their enthusiasm for them, partly because they thought that Sturgeon turned up and then made a point of announcing her own post-Cobra decisions ahead of the PM. Back at her press conference Sturgeon says she thinks people will “raise an eyebrow” if Boris Johnson refuses her request for a full four-nations Cobra meeting. Here is the full text of the letter that Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, and Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, have sent to Boris Johnson this morning. The bold text is from the original. The emergence of Omicron poses a potential threat to the UK. It is clear that the strain is already here and that it appears highly transmissible. We need to work collectively – and effectively – as four nations to take all reasonable steps to control the ingress of the virus to the country and then to limit its spread. We are clear that a four nations approach to issues such as border restrictions is the most effective approach. This requires that a meeting of the Cobra committee be held as soon as possible. We would wish to use that opportunity to see the latest evidence from UK government health professionals on the variant and to understand the international picture along with the implications that it might have for the UK. In particular, we believe the reinstatement of a requirement for a ‘day 8’ PCR test for travellers arriving into the UK – alongside the ‘day 2’ requirement already announced, and thereby requiring isolation for that whole period – is now necessary. Public health advice is unequivocal that this is the best and safest way to protect against the importation of this variant to the fullest extent possible. While our public health systems work hard to minimise the spread of cases already in the UK, it is imperative that we do all we can to avoid under-cutting these efforts by permitting on-going importation. We also wish to confirm that devolved financial business support schemes will be funded by the Treasury in the event more interventionist measures are required to respond to the public health situation. In our view, it would be better to consider this now, in advance of a potential escalation in the seriousness of the situation, to support effective planning. In particular, it is important for us to agree that if the conditions in a devolved nation were to require more significant interventions than in England, the agreed package of financial support would be available to that nation. We do not want to be in a position again where our public health interventions are negatively impacted by a lack of financial support, but can be switched on as required for England. Given the public interest in our working together to achieve the strongest possible response to this threat, this letter is being made public. Gregor Smith says the Omicron variant has S-gene dropout. That applied to Alpha too, although not to Delta. He says the S-gene dropout does not guarantee Omicron. But he says it is something that genomic sequencing can pick up quickly, and he suggests it is a good indicator for Omicron, which means they should get a sense of how widely it is spreading soon. He says they are already starting to see signs of S-gene dropout appearing again. Sturgeon is now taking questions alongside Scotland’s chief medical officer, Gregor Smith. Q: Are any of the Omicron cases linked to Cop26? Sturgeon says there is no evidence of that. She says that is “not impossible”, but she also says it is “not probable”. She says, given the timing, if Omicron had been at Cop26, you would expect more to be in circulation now. Sturgeon says she also wants a reassurance from the Treasury that it will fund any new business support schemes that need to be introduced in the light of the Omicron variant. Sturgeon says Scotland has beefed up travel restrictions, in line with what the UK government is doing. And she points out that, while the UK government has tightened restrictions in England, in Scotland they are already tougher. She says the Scottish and Welsh governments both think that travel restrictions should be tougher. They think people arriving in the UK should have to isolate for eight days, with PCR tests at day eight as well as at day two (which is what is required already). She says this will make it easier to identify new cases of Omicron coming into the UK. And she says a UK-wide approach is needed, because new arrivals can travel freely within the four nations. She says she and Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, have written to Boris Johnson proposing this. And she says they want Johnson to convene a four-nations emergency Cobra meeting to discuss this proposal. Sturgeon gives details of the six cases in Scotland. Echoing what John Swinney said earlier (see 9.38am), she says there might be community transmission. But she says there is no evidence of “sustained” community transmission, and no evidence that it is widespread. Sturgeon says what we do know confirms that we should take the new variant seriously, and act on a precautionary basis. This prevents “potentially the most challenging development in the course of the pandemic for quite some time”. Sturgeon stresses that there is “a huge amount that we do not yet know” about the variant. The number of mutations suggest it might be more transmissible. But more data and analysis is required, and if it is more transmissible, they will have to find out by how much. The WHO said yesterday that “preliminary evidence” suggested there was a higher risk of re-infection. And there is no evidence yet that it is more severe, she says. Sturgeon says they knew the winter would present real risks. There is much they do not know about Omicron, the new variant, she says. And she says she will set out what is known about cases in Scotland. The situation will change in the coming days, she says. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is holding a Covid briefing. There is a live feed at the top of the blog. The confirmed Omicron case in Brentwood has been linked to primary school, Essex county council has announced. Turning away from Covid for a moment, Gérald Darmanin, the French interior minister, has restated his criticism of Boris Johnson’s handling of the Channel crossings dispute. He posted this on Twitter this morning: This translates as: When Mr Johnson says that France must “take back its migrants”, what he is actually asking us is that France exempt him from any responsibility for reception. The British government must accept its own responsibilities. And in his TV interview he said: When there are serious diplomatic exchanges ... and lives that are at stake ... and some minutes later you see that a letter, which no one has ever mentioned before, is published on Twitter from the British prime minister to the president of the French Republic before the president of the Republic has received it, it’s a bit peculiar. When in this letter the English say the French should ‘take back their migrants, all their migrants’, it’s a mockery. Darmanin made similar points in an interview with my colleague Kim Willsher in which he said that, in private, British ministers were more reasonably and friendly; the provocative stuff is stuff for show, he suggests. Edward Argar, the health minister for England, was doing his best to quash alarmism in his morning interviews this morning. Here are some of the key points he made. Argar said that he did not expect Covid regulations for England to tighten in the next three weeks beyond what was announced by Boris Johnson on Saturday. Asked if he expected further restrictions over that period, Argar replied: “It’s not something I’m anticipating.” Johnson has said the rules will be reviewed the weekend before Christmas. Argar said he was “looking forward to a Christmas spent with family and friends”. He defended the decision not to make mask wearing compulsory in hospitality venues in England. Asked to explain why they were not included in the new rules, as shops are, he replied: It’s in the nature of the venue. In a pub, you’re drinking. You can’t do that if you’re wearing a mask. And in restaurants, you’re normally seated at your table to give your order, you stay at your table with your group of friends or your partner or whoever you’re there with, and similarly in pubs you are normally - even when you’re standing up rather than sitting down - you’re drinking. And therefore it’s in the nature of the hospitality industry, the hospitality trade. And therefore, we think this is a proportionate and reasonable way to put in a precaution to give us that time to better understand this variant by slowing down the seeding and the spreading of it. Labour has implied that mask-wearing should be compulsory in hospitality venues. Angela Rayner, the deputy party leader, told Sky News this morning: We think that in hospitality settings that people should be wearing a mask ... Especially if you’re moving around the pub, people should be wearing their masks in hospitality settings. If you’re [in] an indoor setting, there’s no distinction between a pub, sitting in a pub, or sitting on a train, or sitting in a hospital. It’s still a venue that’s indoors and we should be taking the necessary measures to protect people around us. Argar said that he was confident test and trace would be able to meet the challenge posed by the Omicron variant. He said: We’re confident that test and trace can meet this challenge. And just by way of an example, I think 91% of contacts, where they’re given by someone who tests positive at the moment, are being reached and contacted within the appropriate time. So it has come a long, long way from when it was first set up. And I’m confident it will be able to scale up and meet the challenge. The government has announced that, in England, it will be compulsory to wear masks in shops and on public transport from tomorrow. This will move England closer to the situation in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, where rules on mask wearing have constitently been tougher than in England. But, as the Telegraph’s Ben Riley-Smith points out, in England there are plenty of venues where masks remain voluntary. This morning Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, said the UK government should be doing more to encourage mask-wearing in England. She told: We think we should be encouraging people to wear masks when we’re all mixing indoors, as much as possible. So we would recommend that people do wear masks when they’re out and about, specially when they’re moving around venues. The prime minister unfortunately has undermined those messages in recent weeks, but wearing a mask can be a very protective way of supporting people in stopping the virus being able to spread as quickly. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, told the BBC this morning that some of the six confirmed Omicron cases in Scotland are people who have not been travelling, which means the variant is spreading in the community. Swinney said: We obviously have some travel history on some of the cases, I don’t have all of that detail available to me at this stage, but on some of the cases we are aware that there is no travel history involved on some of the cases. So what that tells us is that there must be a degree of community transmission of this particular strain of the virus in the absence of direct travel connection for some of the cases in the southern African area. So that obviously opens up further challenges for us in terms of interrupting the spread of this particular strain of the virus and that will be the focus of the contact tracing operation that is under way already. A person infected with the Omicron variant in Essex is “well” and isolating with their family, the region’s top public health official has said. Essex’s director of public health, Dr Michael Gogarty, told BBC Breakfast: Most importantly with the confirmed case is that they are well, they are isolating with their family. When I say that they are well, I mean they are not seriously ill. They have some symptoms but they do not require hospitalisation. Good morning. So far there have been only three confirmed cases of the new Omicron variant found in England. But this morning the Scottish government announced that it has six confirmed cases, and Edward Argar, the UK government health minister (which means health minister for England, in practice) told the Today programme that more cases will be confirmed south of the border. Asked if he was expecting more cases to be confirmed in England, he said yes. He went on: We’ve seen three confirmed cases in England. But I think we’ve been clear since we first knew about this new variant that we would expect to see the number of cases rise. And I think what we’re seeing in Scotland reflects that. That’s in the nature of the virus, and the likely – not certain but likely – increased transmissibility of this variant. According to Harry Cole in the Sun, government sources say there are 75 “probable” case of Omicron in the UK – with possibly more than 150 more. Here are the main UK Covid developments around this morning. Six cases of the Covid-19 Omicron variant have been identified in Scotland, the Scottish government has announced. Steve Baker, deputy chair of the Tory lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, has criticised rules saying school pupils, like other people, who are close contacts of someone testing positive with the Omicron variant will have to isolate for 10 days. He told the Telegraph this will “cause chaos including collateral harms like damage to children’s education”. Prof Anthony Harnden, deputy chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in the UK, has said that eventually everyone will be offered a booster vaccine, but that this has to be done “in a sensible order”. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has convened an urgent online meeting of G7 health ministers to discuss the Omicron variant. Here is the agenda for the day. 10.30am: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, holds a Covid briefing with Scotland’s chief medical officer, Gregor Smith. 11am: Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, gives a speech on standards in public life. As my colleague Peter Walker reports, ministers would be barred from lobbying or other paid work connected to their government roles for five years after they leave office under Labour’s plans. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. 12pm: Sturgeon is due to give her speech to the SNP’s online conference. 2pm: The Commons standards committee publishes its report proposing changes to the code of conduct for MPs. After 3.30pm: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is expected to give a statement to MPs on Covid. At some point today we are also expecting the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunization to make an announcement about extending the booster programme. I will be mostly looking at UK Covid developments today, but I will covering non-Covid politics too. For global Covid developments, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comMy father, Michael Alder, who has died aged 92, was a journalist and BBC television executive who played a key role in the development of English regional broadcasting. Born in Newcastle to Winnifred (nee Miller), an auctioneer’s daughter, and Thomas Alder, an engineer, Mike was evacuated to Yorkshire during the second world war with his younger brother. Although it was a difficult time, it was also the beginning of a lifelong love of the county. On returning to Newcastle, the collapse of the family whitesmith business and his father’s death left Mike to support his family after leaving Rutherford grammar school. He was resourceful and resilient, working in a meat factory, and keeping chickens and growing produce to sell. His natural curiosity saw him appointed junior reporter at the Newcastle Evening Chronicle in 1945, where he not only developed his journalistic skills but also married the editor’s secretary, my mother, Freda Hall, in 1955. They had a happy marriage until her death in 2009. In 1960 the BBC opened a regional station in Newcastle, and Mike made the move to television. He enjoyed the challenge and excitement of broadcasting live programmes, particularly his time producing the daily news programme Look North. After gaining the respect of his colleagues, Mike was appointed head of regional television development in 1970, based at BBC Pebble Mill in Birmingham. He proved successful in expanding local broadcasting and in 1977 was promoted to controller of English regional television, overseeing eight stations. Following his retirement in 1986 he took his skills to the charitable sector, reorganising the finances and structure of the Children in Need appeal, and becoming a board member at Relate. Mike was a socialist, proud northerner and a freeman of the City of Newcastle. He loved his garden, a place to relax and produce prizewinning flowers and vegetables, and the countryside, especially Wensleydale where he would spend his leisure time fishing and walking his spaniel. Literature, music and the theatre were ever present in his life. Renowned for his humour and stories, he maintained an unflagging interest in other people, politics and news. He was a lifelong Guardian reader, solving the daily crossword clues right to the end. He is survived by his daughters, Ann and me, four grandchildren and a great-granddaughter.Fashion designer Virgil Abloh, who has died at the age of 41, changed the perception of what “luxury fashion” was, according to a leading black fashion expert. Abloh, who was the creative director of Off-White and menswear creative director at Louis Vuitton, elevated streetwear into luxury wear and in the process altered the perception of blackness within the fashion industry. “His way of elevating street clothes so closely adjacent to the black experience into a realm of fashion that historically negated it was quite astounding,” says Darnell Lisby James, fashion historian and curator. “If you look at the past 40 years of fashion, you see this transition, and when Virgil comes into the industry, he really takes the ball running, cementing what many of us from the black community always saw as luxurious into [elite] mainstream luxury and Paris fashion. Essentially, his brand, among others before him like WilliWear or even Sean John, proved that luxury can be a state of mind rather than solely focused on price point and brand exclusivity.” Lisby James said that as a leading black designer in the industry, Abloh “undoubtedly broke down a few doors that hopefully will make things easier for up and coming designers and other designers of colour.” He also said that Abloh “wasn’t just a notable black fashion designer. He was an artist who experimented with various techniques, technological methods and inspirations to push fashion forward.” Like Willi Smith, Abloh’s legacy will be multifaceted. “[Smith] was an artist as [much] as he was a designer, dabbling in various disciplines from architecture, contemporary art, dance and digital art to extend his legendary Williwear brand to audiences,” says Lisby James. “Willi became the most successful black designer of his generation. Virgil was certainly in a very similar category today as Willi was back in the 1970s and 1980s.” He adds that Alboh’s “legacy will certainly be steeped in the fact that he was a black man who transformed how audiences engage with fashion and allowed more people to join in on the joy”.The Omicron variant of coronavirus has been detected in several more countries, prompting nervous governments to impose tough travel restrictions to try to keep it at bay while scientists race to establish how dangerous it might be. Joe Biden said on Monday that the variant was “a cause for concern, not for panic”. He urged Americans to get vaccinated – including with a booster shot – as soon as they were eligible, and to wear masks in public places. “Sooner or later we are going to see new cases of this new variant here in the United States and we’re going to have to face this new threat just as we have faced the ones that came before it,” Biden said, but he added that further travel bans were unlikely. As cases of the variant appeared from Hong Kong to Australia and Scotland to Sweden, several countries opted for caution. Japan, which has not yet detected any Omicron infections, said on Monday it was reimposing border controls. “We are taking the step as an emergency precaution to prevent a worst-case scenario,” said the prime minister, Fumio Kishida. In Israel, a ban on foreign arrivals took effect overnight, while Morocco said it would suspend all incoming flights for a fortnight. Australia said it would delay reopening its international borders by two weeks after reporting its first Omicron cases, and India enforced mandatory on-arrival testing for flyers from a dozen countries including South Africa and Britain. Scientists have said it could take weeks to determine the severity of Omicron, which was first identified in southern Africa, but its emergence has already sparked a wave of responses among governments concerned that it could hinder economic recovery. The EU is expected to hold a summit on the situation at the end of this week or early next week, according to senior officials, in an effort to hammer out a common approach on several issues, including booster vaccine doses. Despite warnings that border closures can have limited effect and wreak havoc on lives, livelihoods and economies, countries opting to impose tighter travel curbs argued that the restrictions would provide valuable time to analyse the variant. Prof Salim Abdool Karim, a South African infectious diseases expert, said Omicron appeared to be more transmissible, including among vaccinated people, but that it was too early to say whether it was more virulent. Several experts have suggested the new variant may be more contagious, but may produce milder symptoms. South Africa has strongly criticised the restrictions that a growing number of countries have placed on travel from the region. President Cyril Ramaphosa said it was being unfairly punished for detecting the variant early. In a speech on Sunday night that was well received across the domestic political spectrum, Ramaphosa described the bans imposed by the UK and other governments as “not informed by science, nor effective in preventing the spread of this variant”. He said they would only serve to “further damage the economies of the affected countries and undermine their ability to respond to, and recover from, the pandemic”, adding that they went against promises made by G20 nations in Rome last month. Ramaphosa announced that South Africa would not move into a stricter lockdown, but the government would explore ways to make vaccines mandatory. “Government has set up a task team that will undertake broad consultations on making vaccination mandatory for specific activities and locations,” he said. South Africa and Botswana have fully vaccinated less than 25% of their populations. Omicron cases in Europe had already been reported in Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands before Portugal identified 13 infections among members of the professional football team Belenenses. One had recently travelled to South Africa. Dutch authorities said they had found another case, bringing the country’s total to 14 – all among 61 passengers who tested positive for coronavirus out of 621 on two flights that arrived in Amsterdam from South Africa on Friday. Poland said on Monday it would ban flights to seven African countries, extend quarantines for some travellers, and further limit numbers allowed into places such as restaurants amid concerns over the new variant. “We must appreciate the importance of this phenomenon and the risk that a new mutation emerging poses,” said the health minister, Adam Niedzielski, adding that Omicron was “a potential game changer”. The World Health Organization said any surge in cases could have severe consequences but noted that no deaths linked to Omicron had yet been reported. Its director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said the situation remained “perilous and precarious”. The UN agency urged its 194 member states to accelerate the vaccination of high-priority groups. “Omicron has an unprecedented number of spike mutations, some of which are concerning for their potential impact on the trajectory of the pandemic,” it said. “The overall global risk related to the new variant … is assessed as very high.” Some countries, however, were more relaxed. New Zealand said it would restrict travel from nine southern African nations, but insisted it would press ahead with plans to reopen internally after months of shutdown. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said she did not anticipate any further restrictions and that bars, restaurants and gyms in Auckland could reopen, ending a coronavirus lockdown that began in August. “We’ve come through the past two years of Covid in better shape than nearly anywhere in the world,” Ardern said, pointing to low death rates, a growing economy and high vaccination rates.In the days after Philip Jansen was named as the next chief executive of BT, taking on the herculean task of reviving the fortunes of the then beleaguered telecoms group, enthusiastic investors gave its shares a rare boost that sent its market value to more than £26bn. Just over three years later, Jansen, despite making good on his vision, helms a business that investors now value at about £16bn, and faces the prospect of a showdown with his new largest shareholder over what the future should look like. Patrick Drahi, the French-Israeli telecoms billionaire and founder of Altice, is known an aggressive investor with a penchant for cost-cutting at businesses he controls. He is free to make his next move from 10 December with the expiry of a no-bid clause that was triggered under UK takeover rules when he took a 12.1% stake in BT through his Altice in June. But to date Drahi has played the benevolent investor card with words of support for BT’s management and strategy, and hired Flint, the business advisory firm co-founded by the former Ofcom chief executive Ed Richards, to assuage the concerns of MPs and regulators regarding his intentions toward one of the UK’s nationally strategic assets. “Drahi is an activist private equity investor,” said one City source. “While there may or may not be an immediate move when he is free to make one, by that definition he is not there to sit on the sidelines.” While BT’s share price remains stubbornly depressed, down 70% since 2015 when Gavin Patterson was chief executive, low valuations and the promise of future profits from the rollout of full fibre broadband and 5G networks means the telecoms sector has got its mojo back for bargain-hunting opportunists. Last week the US private equity firm KKR proposed a “friendly” €10.8bn (£9.2bn) buyout of the struggling Telecom Italia, which, like BT, is a former state monopoly playing a key role in the rollout of next-generation infrastructure, and is trying to pull it off with the blessing of a government that indirectly holds about a 10% stake. On Monday BT’s share price rose 6% after a report that Reliance Industries, the India-based conglomerate controlled by the billionaire Mukesh Ambani, was weighing up either a takeover move or buying a stake to become the controlling shareholder. However, hours later Reliance put out a statement “categorically denying” the “baseless” report. BT shares are down by about 30% since Jansen became chief executive in February 2019, but they have rallied in the last year as his strategic plans have started to pay off. The regulatory path has been cleared to guarantee solid long-term returns from a £15bn investment in full fibre rollout, a new £2bn cost-cutting plan is in place after the previous target was hit 18 months early, and last week its subsidiary Openreach told analysts it expected to remain in growth mode over the next decade despite increased competition from rivals such as the newly merged Virgin Media O2. “We call it UK on sale,” said Neil Campling, a media and tech analyst at the Swiss financial firm Mirabaud. “There are so many UK public companies that are trading at valuations well below peers in other countries that makes them extremely attractive to many, and BT certainly ticks that box as well.” Tim Höttges, the chief executive of Deutsche Telekom (DT), BT’s second-largest shareholder, recently said he was “entertaining all options” regarding the UK company. An “easy option” for Drahi to pursue in the short term, according to one analyst, would be to build his stake, potentially looking to acquire the 12% controlled by DT. DT has held the stake in a passive capacity as a legacy of BT’s takeover of the mobile operator EE in 2015. The German telecoms group, which moved the stake to its pension fund in 2018, previously decided against taking up an option to raise it to 15%. For Drahi, who could look to increase his direct influence by joining DT with a seat on BT’s board, a full-blown takeover would probably prove to be the hard option to take. There are growing concerns about the threat to Britain’s economy and national security from a string of recent takeovers of UK companies by foreign rivals and private equity firms. The government has ordered investigations into deals including the $54bn (£40.6bn) takeover of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its US rival Nvidia. From January the government will gain tougher powers to block the takeover of key national assets under the National Security and Investment Act 2021. “I view BT as an operation of strategic national importance,” said Carl Murdock-Smith, a co-head of telecoms research at the German investment bank Berenberg. “I would be surprised if politicians would be comfortable with it being taken private by Patrick Drahi. If you are trying to do it, you want it done holding hands with the government. But would the UK government look to take a stake in BT like Italian state lender CDP does in Telecom Italia? No, but it would still not be comfortable with Drahi becoming a majority shareholder.” Rumours that a defensive BT has explored radical ideas including a spinoff of its consumer arm EE seem unlikely to materialise, or at the least would be complicated to realise, given it is locked into an asset-backed plan to reduce Openreach’s £4.6bn pension deficit. The intermittently speculated potential sale of a stake in or spinoff of Openreach, which controls most of the UK’s broadband network, is likely to be viewed as a longer-term prize. “In the very long term Openreach is a spinoff candidate,” said Murdock-Smith. “But in the near and medium term the pension deficit continues to be an issue.” While BT has moved to a war footing, the former Royal Mail and ITV boss Adam Crozier officially takes over as chair on Wednesday, and the boutique bank Robey Warshaw has been drafted in as defence advisers, Jansen has previously thrived working within the auspices of the private equity ownership model. In 2010, Bain Capital and Advent plucked him from running the European operations for the catering group Sodexo to head the UK food delivery company Brake Bros. Three years later he moved to WorldPay, again owned by Bain and Advent, going on to make an estimated $100m from the flotation of the company in 2015 and subsequent buyout by a US rival in 2019. “Jansen hasn’t had a problem working with PE before,” said Campling. “He has done a good job laying the groundwork, BT is on a good path, there is definitely frustration with the share price but he is executing well. If there was a stage two of that, away from the public eye, I don’t think he would have a problem doing that. Why not take it private, get paid for the deal, improve it, bring BT back to the market three years later?”Excerpts from previously unpublished documents directly linking China’s crackdown on Uyghur Muslims and other minorities in Xinjiang province to speeches by the Chinese leadership in 2014 have been put online. The documents – including three speeches by Chinese president Xi Jinping in April 2014 – cover security, population control and the need to punish the Uyghur population. Some are marked top secret. They were leaked to the Uyghur Tribunal – an independent people’s tribunal based in the UK. In the documents, the highest levels of the Chinese Communist party (CCP) leadership call for Uyghur re-education and relocation to rectify an imbalance in the Uyghur and Han population in Xinjiang. Dr Adrian Zenz, the German academic who was asked by the tribunal to authenticate the documents, said the top secret and confidential papers are significant because they show multiple links between the demands of the Chinese leadership of 2014 and what subsequently happened in Xinjiang, including mass internment in re-education camps, coercive labour transfers and optimising the ethnic population by increasing Han population shares. Zenz alleges that the documents show the leadership’s long-term intent to commit cultural genocide with the specific purpose of safeguarding the rule of the CCP. The documents were handed in full in digital form to the tribunal in September, but have not been published in full in order to protect the source of the leak. Instead transcripts from some of the documents, lengthy quotations, summary and analysis have been published. The original documents were peer reviewed by Dr James Millward, professor of inter-societal history at Georgetown University Washington, and Dr David Tobin, lecturer in east Asian studies at the University of Sheffield. Some have been redacted to remove reception stamps. The leak covers 11 documents and 300 unique pages. They range from April 2014 to May 2018. Zenz said some of the documents were drawn upon by the New York Times in a report in 2019, but that the leak also comprises previously unseen information. In late 2016, just before the implementation of a set of unprecedented measures in Xinjiang, the leaders’ statements were handed to Xinjiang’s cadres as crucial study material, preparing them to implement the measures. In one 2014 speech covered by the leak, Xi argues that the belt and road initiative, his signature foreign policy project, requires a stable domestic security environment. He asserts that the entire country’s national security and the achievement of China’s major goals in the 21st century will be in jeopardy if the situation in southern Xinjiang is not brought under control. The speech was delivered weeks after Xi called for “all-out efforts” to bring to justice assailants who murdered 31 people and wounded more than 140 with knives and machetes in a bloody killing in the south-western city of Kunming on 1 March. Beijing blamed Xinjiang separatists for the attack. In the speech Xi demands that the region engage in an all-out battle to “prevent Xinjiang’s violent terrorist activities from spreading to the rest of China”, argues that “stability across Xinjiang and even across the whole country depends on southern Xinjiang”, and calls for “a crushing blow to buy us time”. He notes that since violent acts had already spread to other regions of China, “therefore we propose that Xinjiang is currently in … a painful period of interventionary treatment”. Religious extremists, he says, are “devils who will kill without blinking an eye”. He also warns religious extremism is “a powerful psychedelic drug”, and calls for reform through education, as opposed to a practice of arrest and release – a reference to re-education and detention camps. In another document, Xinjiang’s party secretary, Chen Quanguo, personally commands officials to “round up all who should be rounded up” and says the region’s vocational re-education facilities should be “unswervingly operated for a long time”. In one of Xi’s speeches, he argues that “population proportion and population security are important foundations for long-term peace and stability”. This statement was later quoted verbatim by a senior Xinjiang official in July 2020, who then argued that southern Xinjiang’s Han population share was “too low”. Other classified documents lament “severe imbalances in the distribution of the ethnic population” and a “severely mono-ethnic” population structure (an over-concentration of Uyghurs) in southern Xinjiang. They mandate that by 2022, 300,000 settlers (mostly Han from eastern China) are to be moved to regions in southern Xinjiang administered by the Xinjiang Construction and Production Corps, also known as “bingtuan”, a paramilitary entity, with the explicitly stated aim of increasing Han population shares in the region. Xi himself ordered the abolishment of preferential birth control policies for ethnic groups in southern Xinjiang that had previously allowed them to have more children than the Han. He demanded that birth control policies in the Uyghur heartland were to be made “equal for all ethnic groups”. The fresh leak was first mentioned at a special session of the UK-based tribunal on Saturday. Government reports indicate that in February 2017, just weeks prior to the start of an internment campaign, leading cadres in prefectures and counties were subjected to an intensified study schedule of two of Xi’s speeches for at least two hours every week. Zenz has been denounced by defenders of Beijing as a Christian fundamentalist determined to destroy Chinese communism. The Chinese government has imposed sanctions against him. It has always maintained that political, economic and religious freedoms in the Xinjiang region are “fully guaranteed”. Zenz claims the new material shows that top Chinese leaders viewed the achievement of “stability maintenance” and related goals such as religious “de-extremification” in Xinjiang to be a matter of China’s national security, crucial to achieving primary long-term political goals. • This article was amended on 30 November 2021 to clarify that the documents were leaked to the Uyghur Tribunal, which asked Dr Adrian Zenz to authenticate them; also Dr James Millward and Dr David Tobin peer reviewed the original documents, not the transcripts as an earlier version said. A reference to sanctions against Zenz was clarified.Life Between Islands is an exhibition of protests and pleasures, celebrations and insurrections. Several years in the making, and as important as it is timely – as well as long overdue – it is also an exhibition of arrivals, departures and returns. Filled with variety and complexity, the well- and lesser-known, the overlooked or rarely shown in this country, it takes us from pre-war London and the carved figures of Ronald Moody, to digital animation and an examination of successive regimes of punitive and restrictive immigration law from the 1800s to the present government’s hostile environment policies, in a work by the Otolith Group. An extensive catalogue fleshes out this milestone exhibition of around 50 artists. We visit the home of fictional political activist Joyce, in Michael McMillan’s simulacra of a 1970s West Indian front room. On the TV, Horace Ové’s 1976 film Pressure plays. The first UK feature by a black director, it is a gritty appraisal of lives of the Windrush generation, and the difficulties faced by their British-born children. Ové’s photographs of the rise of the black power movement, as well as Neil Kenlock’s images of riot shields and racist graffiti, and Vron Ware’s photographs for the anti-fascist Searchlight magazine, documenting the Black People’s Day of Action in 1981, following the New Cross arson attack, which left 13 young people dead, are sobering reminders of a period of casual racism, bleak prospects of resistance and defiance and pleasures taken against the odds. In a painting by Denzil Forrester, Winston Rose is dragged and half-carried through the street by uniformed police, hurried to his death in custody in 1981. Rose was a family friend. In Tam Joseph’s painting of the night following the death of Cynthia Jarrett during a police raid on her flat in 1985, we see figures at the lighted windows, and protesters silhouetted against a fire beneath the buildings. Joseph’s The Sky at Night is as much reportage as history painting, an event seen and grasped, as redolent as any documentary film or photography. Another young man is beaten on a bed by his father, for speaking Creole rather than English, during a wonderfully evoked 1960s London house party, in a vertiginous scene from Isaac Julien’s three-screen 2002 Paradise Omeros. With its scenes of the heavilypoliced Notting Hill carnivals of 1976 and 84, of riot and surveillance, with its voiceover and heavily mixed sound-system dub, Julien’s earlier Territories, made in 1984 while he was still a student, is still haunting and filled with memorable images, more than 35 years since I first saw it. Protest and resilience, anger and pleasure come together throughout the exhibition. The paintings by Aubrey Williams are filled with broken things, dismembered vertebrae and burned-out nature. Here, even the abstractions are deceptive – the maps of Guyana and South America barely surface in Frank Bowling’s paintings, and an entirely black, impassive painting by Donald Locke turns out to be an abstracted view of regular gridded fields in Guyana, part of the plantation structure imposed by Dutch and then British colonial rule. This is a geometry of oppression. Tremors and violences are present throughout, although the exhibition is not without humour. In Lookalook, queer Barbadian artist Ada M Patterson stalks the streets of Bridgetown, dressed as a kind of mythological creature draped in black, their head-dress decorated with shells, inviting stares and comments, insults and laughter. This public masquerade is a taunt, in a deeply conservative society where colonial-era, anti-LGBTQ+ laws are still in place. In another work, they pose as a sea urchin, or possibly an echidna. It looks painful either way. Blue Curry plays on the stereotypes of the Caribbean as a dumbed-down “site for leisure and consumption”. Curry’s row of airline seats soiled with spews of beach sand and shells, the fanciful headrests adorned with braided synthetic hair, is a giddy transport to a fantasy destination. Zak Ové’s carnivalesque faces and figures, constructed from beached rope, mops and antique masks, play on the transgressive figures of Junkanoo carnival, as do Hew Locke’s decorated busts – one has the head of King Edward VII festooned in masonic regalia, almost to the point of smothering the monarch entirely in his decorations. Chris Ofili’s taunting blue men, and his Napoleonic-era horsemen who morph into uniformed cops populate a threatening, saturated blue world. Both Ofili and Peter Doig have lived in Trinidad for well over a decade, and there’s a beautiful section of the show highlighting Doig’s creative dialogue with Derek Walcott, whose poems also inspired Julien’s Paradise Omeros, and appears in the film. Dialogues with the Caribbean are increasingly two-way. Throughout the exhibition’s run, Ofili’s 2003 Union Black flag, with the union colours replaced by the Pan-African red, black and green, will hang over Tate Britain. In part, it is a reminder of what has been called the “Caribbeanisation” of British culture and society, a society that grew out of an empire whose riches were derived from slavery to the Caribbean, which curator Alex Farquharson calls the economic and military centre of Britain’s first age of empire. Salutary, sobering, rich and rewarding, what a great and necessary show this is. Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s – Now is at Tate Britain, London, from 1 December to 3 April.Politicians need an answer to every problem, even when there isn’t one. Pretending to be omniscient and omnipotent is in the job description – though the result is that public trust leaches away, since some problems don’t have politically acceptable solutions. There is no politically satisfactory answer to asylum seekers arriving in Britain when many voters feel “controlling borders” is the definition of nationhood. So impossibilism rules. Politicians could point to net migration plummeting last year to 34,000, far below David Cameron’s original 100,000 promise; the net number of EU nationals coming to the UK even went negative, caused by a combination of the pandemic and Brexit. Or they could show that less than half the number of asylum seekers arrived in the UK compared with the early 2000s peak. Numbers of asylum applications are very low compared to France and Germany, while around 85% of refugees worldwide are camped in the poorest countries. We make a disproportionate fuss over taking just 1% of the world’s 26 million refugees. But pollsters will tell you none of that cuts any ice with voters. Blame Shakespeare’s John of Gaunt, with his preposterous eulogy to English exceptionalism: “This other Eden, demi-paradise / This fortress built by Nature for herself / Against infection and the hand of war…” As infection and refugees from war arrive here, John Donne’s better truth, “No man is an island entire of itself”, is a more reliable guide for our times: it illustrates the failure to enable poor countries to access vaccines rebounding on the rich world like an avenging angel, through the Omicron variant. Or take our failure to help to staunch the flow of refugees at source, made harder by the fact that Britain is cutting foreign aid and has shuttered its development department. Berate this country’s age-old inability to compare ourselves rationally with any other country, but as one pollster warns me, for politicians, being seen to be complacent about immigration is “not a hill to die on”. The Tories, alarmed at “losing their grip” on borders, as on so much else, take fright at Nigel Farage’s threatened return to politics. He may never win a seat, but he has demonstrated his power to deny them a host of seats in the past. He has them in such a lather that the cabinet is engaged in a circular firing squad, blaming each other for the dinghies in the Channel. Priti Patel’s allies berate the cabinet for doing “sweet f*** all”, reports the Sunday Times. She blames a do-nothing Foreign Office for failing to negotiate a return of refused asylum seekers. “The one thing they’re supposed to do is to speak to foreigners and foreign countries,” says a friend of Patel. They rail against Ben Wallace for offering no military barracks as asylum detention centres. A cabinet minister retaliates, saying that “she has over-promised and underdelivered”: her plan for processing asylum seeker applicants in Albania disintegrated when that country found out about it, crying, “fake news!” “Stick with Prit,” the prime minister said of his home secretary over her breaking of the ministerial code – and why not, when Cruella draws all the flak for the brutality and ineffectiveness of this government’s migration policy? She rails against Border Force for refusing to turn around fragile boats, but captains don’t want to break international maritime law. Her nationality and borders bill’s penalty of up to four years in prison for “inadmissibles”, asylum seekers who arrive unlawfully, is another fantasy. Boris Johnson met the Common Sense Tory MPs group, reports the Express, promising some new wheeze: “He has a plan but didn’t want to reveal the details yet,” as his cabinet “wets” would wreck it. What seems to be brewing is an attempt to derogate or abrogate the 1951 refugee conventions obliging signatories to harbour those fleeing persecution. The UN refugee agency says the bill already breaks the convention by penalising asylum seekers for arriving through safe countries. That’s how the wind blows when even someone seen as a liberal Tory like Matthew Parris advocates abandoning the Geneva convention. You could say the convention belongs to a cold war era, suitable for encouraging the escape of communism’s dissidents, not a mass exodus from poverty-stricken and often gangsterised perpetual war zones, where the lines blur between overlapping terrors. But I’ve never been clear on the human rights difference between a family fleeing so their children don’t starve, and a family escaping their children’s murder for ethnic or political reasons. Government figures show that 55% of applicants are granted asylum but Peter Walsh of Oxford University’s Migration Observatory says “of 10,000 refused, at least a half never leave. The backlog of assessments is 88,000, some waiting three years or more.” January’s “tough” new law labelling arrivals “inadmissibles” if they came through safe countries does nothing to solve this. How they arrived is unprovable since Brexit Britain lost access to Eurodac, EU fingerprint data. Of 4,500 “inadmissibles”, says Walsh, “only seven have been returned, with so few agreements with countries to take people back”. What happens to those who are refused? Most stay, living lives of limbo, vanishing into an underground economy. That’s why all this “tough” stuff is bogus. It would be better by far to admit the truth and let asylum seekers live, work and integrate legally. On this issue, hardline Tories such as Steve Baker and the public agree they should be allowed to earn their living. With a million vacancies, we need workers – and they are not going anywhere anyway. Nor is there any evidence that the ability to work is a “pull” factor, with not one study finding that asylum seekers shop around according to best work and benefits regimes. Easing asylum numbers takes international cooperation, not treaty breaking or gesturing rudely at the French with undiplomatic tweets. The public may not accept that stopping all arrivals is impossible, because no one dares tell them that truth. Instead we may see rhetoric ratchet up and further policy cruelty. The only actual penalty for reneging on the refugee convention is international opprobrium: no other country has done this. But that might cause enough public shame to stir a patriotic sense of harm done to national pride and honour. Voters also harbour a contradictory idea of Britain as a country that keeps its word, plays by the rules and sees justice done. Besides, in practical terms, reneging on a treaty we helped draw up would make it even harder to strike deals with other countries to return their citizens. If this didn’t work, what next? No one really knows. This squalid government could do anything. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistA son who felt he had been subjected to years of unfair treatment by his mother and her partner, the millionaire businessman Sir Richard Sutton, took revenge by launching a “ferocious and sustained” knife attack on them at their Dorset mansion, a murder trial has heard. Thomas Schreiber, 35, who was frustrated at having to live with the pair because of a Covid lockdown, killed Sutton, 83, a hotelier and landowner, and inflicted “severe and life-changing injuries” on Anne Schreiber, 66, Winchester crown court was told. The month before the attacks, Schreiber wrote to a friend: “I’m so sad to report that my mind is consumed with hatred of the very worst kind towards my family. They really hurt me, betrayed me and destroyed all trust. Simply put, I contemplate murdering them all morning, day and night. It’s not what I want to think about but it’s the truth. I want them to suffer.” He described his mother as “toxic” and “gold-digging” and said he “couldn’t stand” Sutton and did not have a good word to say about him. Adam Feest QC, prosecuting, said there was no dispute that Schreiber killed Sutton and badly injured his mother, but said the jury would have to consider his state of mind. Schreiber denies murder and attempted murder. The court was told that armed police raced to Sutton’s home on the night of 7 April after a number of people reported that Schreiber had attacked his mother and her partner and was going to take his own life. Police smashed their way in through the conservatory and found Anne Schreiber barely conscious on the floor of the kitchen. She had slash wounds to her face and front and more than 10 wounds to her back. Police carried her out of the house and she was airlifted to hospital, where her life was saved, the jury heard. Officers found Sutton’s “motionless and bloodied body” at the end of the upstairs landing just outside his bedroom. He had five stab wounds under his left armpit, one of which had pierced his heart. Spots of his blood and bloodied footprints were found downstairs in the kitchen, study and pantry. The court was told that after the attack, Schreiber allegedly went to his part of the property, an annexe above a garage, changed some of his clothing, collected personal items and escaped in a Range Rover. He was arrested a few hours later in London after a police chase and a “hard stop” manoeuvre. He had left a kitchen knife with Sutton’s blood on it in an upstairs kitchen sink. Another knife with his mother’s blood on it was found under the kitchen table downstairs. Feest said that in the months before the attack, Schreiber had been harbouring “increasingly strong feelings of resentment and hatred” towards his mother and her partner. The prosecutor said: “Built upon a foundation of many years of feeling isolated and unfairly treated by all his family, and fed by being forced to live at Moorhill [the family home] due to the pandemic – this was the second lockdown period – and the many injustices he felt had been perpetrated against him, these feelings had led the defendant to repeatedly consider revenge and violence.” Feest said: “Whatever it was that started the incident, the defendant attacked Sir Richard and his mother with a knife in the kitchen, perhaps having attacked Sir Richard in the study. This, the prosecution say, is a clear case of murder.” The trial continues.My friend, mentor and analyst, Julian David, who has died aged 88, was a psychoanalyst in the UK and in South Africa, where he worked with Sir Laurens van der Post to set up a Jungian training institute for medical professionals at the end of apartheid. Julian was born in London to Phylis (nee Neeley) and Aubrey David, a naval officer. The couple had seven children of their own and and fostered children from a Catholic orphanage in London. They also took in refugees and ex-prisoners right up to the end of their lives. From Ampleforth college, North Yorkshire, Julian went to Oxford University, gaining a history degree in 1959. After that he lived at a Benedictine monastery in London for a while and then taught religion and history at Dartington Hall school (1960-73). Driven by an interest in Jung, dreams and the unconscious, in 1977 he went to Zurich to train in psychoanalysis at the CG Jung Institute. Following his graduation in 1982 he practised in London for 15 years and co-founded the Independent Group of Analytical Psychologists, a training institute. He also spent periods in Devon and South Africa, eventually consolidating his practice in those two places. In London through friends and colleagues he met Laurens van der Post, who invited him to help set up a training institute in Cape Town towards the end of apartheid, introducing medical professionals to Jungian psychology. When it opened, he taught at the South African Association of Jungian Analysts full time from 1989 to 1995. He then returned to the UK and continued to see private patients, teach, write and lecture in both the UK and South Africa. In 2006 he became chairman of the CG Jung Club in London and editor of its journal, Harvest. He gave open lectures in a number of countries and published many articles and books, including Interweaving Symbols in African Fairy Tales (1990). In A Brief History of God (2021), Julian examines the history of patriarchal religion and its devastating effect on western culture, women and nature. Julian was a loving analyst and teacher, and shared his knowledge of the language of dreams, myth and fairytale during wonderful retreats at his home. He continued to see clients and train analysts in both Devon and South Africa until the end of his life. He remained at his home in Devon and loved architecture, art galleries, opera, theatre and classical concerts. In 1961 Julian married Yasmin Wishart, the daughter of Laurie Lee, who as a painter exhibited as Yasmin David; she died in 2009. He is survived by their children, Esther, Gabriel and Clio, and seven grandchildren.A 14-year-old boy has been jailed for at least 16 years for the murder of schoolboy Keon Lincoln, who was stabbed and shot outside his home. Keon, 15, was fatally wounded in a “short and brutal” attack by a group of youths in Handsworth, Birmingham, on 21 January, the trial heard. The judge at Birmingham crown court lifted restrictions on naming the 14-year-old boy who was accused of firing the fatal shot as Yussuf Mustapha. Three others were also sentenced for murder. Tahjgeem Breakenridge, 18, from Balsall Heath, and Michael Ugochukwu, 18, from Edgbaston, were both sentenced to life with a minimum term of 19 years. A 16-year-old from Walsall, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was also convicted of Keon’s murder and ordered to be detained for at least 17 years. And Kieron Donaldson, 19, of Perry Barr, was sentenced to a 12-year custodial term for Lincoln’s manslaughter, having supplied weapons to those involved in the killing. Lincoln’s mother, Sharmaine, had been at home when her son was attacked. She called his killers “heartless, evil monsters”. In a victim impact statement, she said: “I’m in a nightmare I cannot wake up from. My heart is broken beyond repair. A piece of my soul has been taken from me. I miss my boy so much, it physically hurts. I can only hope the day will come when the senseless murder of children will end.” Passing sentence on Monday, Lord Justice William Davis said the murder had been “carefully planned and executed” using a revolver and a stolen car. “It’s quite clear that all who came from the car were party to the use of the gun,” he said. The judge went on: “[Keon’s mother] heard the shots. She went out to find her son dying on the pavement. Not only has she been robbed of her son when he was only 15, but also she had to experience the trauma of watching him die. “When a 15-year-old boy is killed in that way, the first question will be why? That question has never been answered.” Jurors heard Lincoln was repeatedly stabbed by a group who chased him after getting out of a stolen car. He was then shot in the abdomen as he lay on the ground, and died two hours later at Birmingham children’s hospital. Prosecutors said a Ford S-Max with a false registration plate was used. It was later involved in a crash on Wheeler Street in Birmingham, where investigators found forensic evidence including a hunting knife. Detectives have previously said it was unclear whether Lincoln had been targeted by the group or if he had been attacked “by chance”. But the judge said the lack of clarity did “not mean that the murder of Keon was motiveless”. He said: “It simply means that neither the jury nor I have any notion of what the motive was.”Retailers have said they cannot be expected to police the reintroduction of mandatory mask wearing in shops in England from Tuesday because of the potential threat of abuse for their staff. Richard Walker, the boss of the Iceland grocery chain, said he was supportive of the change in mask policy introduced in response to the Omicron variant, but said: “My store colleagues can’t be expected to police those who refuse.” The Association of Convenience Stores, which represents thousands of independent shopkeepers, said its members were concerned about potential abuse when asking customers to mask up. A spokesperson, Chris Noice, said: “The first response from retailers was that this would lead to a lot of abuse from people refusing to wear face coverings. There could be an issue as there is a bit more of a backlash around Covid regulations than there has been in the past. “We know from previous lockdowns that reminding people about face coverings and social distancing is a big trigger for abuse and [store workers] are hesitant about challenging people.” Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the British Retail Consortium, which represents most big retailers, said: “It is vital that we do not place hardworking retail staff in harm’s way, and enforcement of face coverings must remain the duty of the authorities.” Mike Cherry, national chair of the Federation of Small Businesses, said: “It’s vital that [shop owners] feel supported by government at every level and by the police, if necessary. “We do hope that customers will recognise, like they did during previous restrictions, the government’s new guidelines when visiting their local independent shops. We’re urging shoppers to make sure they show respect to the shop owners and staff of every business they go to.” Retailers said they expected to be ready for the new set-up as they had already begun sending out masks for staff and posters communicating the new rules in time for Tuesday. Only those workers dealing directly with shoppers are expected to have to wear face coverings, with those in storerooms and warehouses exempt. Full guidance published on Monday afternoon said that all those entering shops, shopping centres, banks and public transport over the age of 11 must wear a face covering. Those adults who do not comply face an immediate £100 fine with penalties rising to £6,400 for repeat offences, in line with the system operated last year. A spokesperson for the police said that enforcement should not necessarily mean involvement by officers, adding that businesses and local authorities would be expected to resolve the majority of incidents. Retailers were told on Monday afternoon that other measures to mitigate the spread of the virus in public places, such as social distancing markers and clear plastic screens, would not be reintroduced. The shopworkers’ union, Usdaw, said the government must be “absolutely clear” that it was a legal requirement in England for shoppers to wear face coverings in order to reduce problems for those working in retail outlets. Paddy Lillis, Usdaw’s general secretary, said the government was wrong to have eased the rules on protective measures in shops in July, when it told the public they could decide for themselves when and where to wear a face covering in England. Face coverings have remained mandatory in Wales and Scotland in shops and on public transport. “This flip-flopping on basic and sensible Covid measures and the different rules across the UK create confusion, reduce compliance and can lead to conflict,” Lillis said. He urged the public to wear masks to protect themselves and those working in stores and added: “The government must be clear and consistent on it being mandatory and that shopworkers are not expected to enforce the law on face coverings.” The British Independent Retailers Association, another trade body for local stores, welcomed the latest measures. Andrew Goodacre, its chief executive, said: “We support the wearing of face coverings in shops in England and we are pleased that a decision has been made to keep everyone safe and stop the spread of this new variant. “Our members are now well used to these measures and we now have time to implement them again. Fortunately, indie retailers followed our advice and left measures such as Perspex screens in place. We now hope that the general public will be as responsible as the shop owners and staff and wear face coverings without any objections.”The federal government has been ranked last behind all Australia’s states and the Northern Territory in the move toward clean energy, with a new report showing Tasmania, New South Wales and South Australia are leading the transition to renewables. World Wide Fund for Nature - Australia’s second “renewable superpower” scorecard ranks Australian governments on their progress in switching to clean energy and developing new renewable export industries. The environment group’s energy transition manager, Nicky Ison, said the rankings showed state and territory governments were leading the way on climate policy. She said the Morrison government had missed its opportunity to use the Cop26 climate summit to announce it would do more and, combined with not replacing the renewable energy target (which ended in 2020), saw it drop from seventh to eighth place. “We are certainly seeing the states leading the transition to renewables and opening up new industries,” Ison said. Governments were scored across 10 categories, including renewable energy targets, renewable energy zones and transmission, energy storage, renewable energy industrial precincts and renewable export strategies. Tasmania, which topped the first scorecard in March, again ranked number one with a score of 61 out of 100 for policies including a “world-leading” renewable energy target of 200% by 2040. The state was also given high marks for other actions including the establishment of a new department responsible for climate policy and growing new industries in a green economy. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The NSW government scored 59 out of 100, moving into second place – from equal third in the previous report – after making substantial policy announcements for green hydrogen and decarbonising transport and industrial sectors. South Australia, with its proposal for a 500% renewable energy target by 2050, was third and Queensland moved into fourth after investing $2bn in a renewable energy and hydrogen jobs fund. The ACT, because of its unique situation as Australia’s smallest and only landlocked jurisdiction, could only be scored on six of the 10 categories and was therefore excluded from the final rankings. But it was the leader in some categories, including equal first with Tasmania and South Australia for legislated renewable energy targets, and equal first with NSW for its work to increase demand for renewable exports. Victoria placed fifth, Western Australia sixth and the Northern Territory seventh. Ison said the federal government had failed to develop a new renewable energy target for 2030 and beyond and had missed “opportunities to announce a renewable energy industrial precincts policy supporting clusters of heavy industry to be powered by renewables”. She added there was a need for all jurisdictions to announce clean export strategies and Cop26 would have been a “ripe opportunity” for the Morrison government to unveil one. Before the summit, the federal government was widely criticised for releasing a net zero plan that contained no new policies to rapidly cut greenhouse gas emissions, as climate scientists say is necessary. It instead relied on unspecified technology breakthroughs, global trends, and carbon offsets for more than a third of the abatement task. When the summit was under way, a group of state and territory governments announced a cross party agreement to help each other work towards reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions. Ison said all jurisdictions would be better placed with committed federal direction, policy and funding. “We don’t just want NSW or Queensland to become a renewable superpower,” Ison said. “We want Australia as a nation to achieve this status and show global markets we will be a resilient and reliable export partner as the world transitions to a clean energy future.” Head of policy and research at Beyond Zero Emissions, Tom Quinn, said the scorecard showed most Australian governments were lifting their performance and “the building blocks are being put in place for a clean commodity future”. He said the organisation’s own modelling had found renewable energy industrial precincts would help create a new green export market worth $333bn a year for Australia’s economy by 2050. “The progress on establishing renewable energy zones and connecting that to industry, these are the attributes that will unlock a clean export boom,” Quinn said. A spokesperson for the federal energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, said the report downplayed the scale of government investment and failed to recognise “many important initiatives that are having an impact across the country”. The spokesperson said the report failed to mention the government’s $464m “clean” hydrogen hubs program or “the more than $1.2bn the federal government has already committed to developing an Australian clean hydrogen industry”. Clean hydrogen can include green hydrogen or blue hydrogen made with fossil fuels and backed by carbon capture and storage. Taylor’s spokesperson said the government was also supporting “every major priority project” in the Australian Energy Market Operator’s 2020 integrated system plan, had committed $150m to support microgrid projects, and was “investing more in pumped hydro and batteries than every Australian jurisdiction combined”. “The fact is, it is the federal government’s policies and investments – enabling and accelerating action by the private sector and other levels of government – doing the heavy lifting on practical action to reduce emissions around the country.”The UK government has accepted advice from its vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccines and Immunisation (JCVI), for one of the biggest immediate changes in the Covid jabs programme. Here is what has been decided and why. What changes have been announced for booster jabs? There are two: the age range and the time gap. When boosters – a third dose to top up people’s immunity – were first introduced in September, they were restricted to those over 50 or with clinical vulnerabilities. Earlier this month the age limit was extended to 40. In time, all adults over 18 will be eligible. Under the original plans, boosters were not supposed to be given until at least six months after the second jab, though people were recently allowed to start booking them after five months. Now the minimum interval has been cut to three months. So when can I get my booster? That depends in part on your age and how quickly they can be given. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, confirmed in the Commons that they would be carried out in age order, with 30-39-year-olds expected to be up next. This should be confirmed within days. Even if there is a successful speed-up of the rollout, if you are say, 19, it is likely to be months rather than weeks before you can get your third dose. What about children aged 12 to 15? The JCVI has confirmed the widely expected plan for this age group to get a second jab at least 12 weeks after their first. So far in England, the vaccination rate for this age group is 39.1%, against 80.4% of adults aged 18 and over who have had at least one dose. A similar second jab approach for teenagers aged 16 and 17 was agreed earlier this month. And younger children? A number of countries have approved Covid vaccinations for children aged five to 11, and this is something the UK could follow. However, the JCVI faces a potentially tricky decision given the limited health risks of Covid to the bulk of younger children. First of all, the medicines watchdog, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, would need to approve vaccines for use by the age group. And people with suppressed immune systems? People whose immunity is compromised by conditions such as blood cancer are already eligible for three vaccine doses, although some charities say the rollout has at times been chaotic. They will now be eligible for a booster jab, which will be their fourth dose. A third dose and booster are not necessarily the same – for example, if someone is given the Moderna vaccine, they will get a full dose for a third injection, but usually a half dose for a booster. Does the UK have enough vaccine doses for this ramp-up? Officials involved in the vaccination programme said they expect there will be sufficient doses. A bigger challenge has been trying to encourage uptake among those already eligible. One official who runs a Covid vaccination site in London said they had experienced a “significant rise” in walk-ins in the last 72 hours, however, with people coming forward for first, second and booster doses. The NHS will still need to carefully stagger when it invites certain age groups to come forward for a booster, the official said, warning that if everyone came forward at once, “that’s when you could run into supply problems”. Will we need to change the pace of the rollout? Almost certainly. Javid told the Commons that while he had previously planned for 6m booster jabs to be administered in England over the next few weeks, with the emergence of Omicron he wants “to go further and faster”. The NHS is currently administering about 350,000 booster vaccines or third jabs a day, or about 2.4m a week across the UK, official figures show. It will have to increase the daily number of jabs to 500,000 a day in order to hit 30m boosters by Christmas Day, according to Guardian analysis. Has the Omicron variant prompted these changes? Yes and no. Ministers have long viewed an extended booster programme as a way to reduce winter pressure on the NHS. Second jabs for 12-15-year-olds and boosters for people with compromised immune systems were both expected. But Omicron greatly increased the pace of decision-making at the JCVI, a regulator that is used to a longer deliberation process. JCVI members were called to an emergency meeting on Saturday and the decision was fast-tracked amid intense government pressure to find ways to limit the impact of the variant. The JCVI is a UK-wide body and it is up to each devolved nation to accept advice, but they almost always do. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to clarify that the vaccination rates given for 12- to 15-year-olds and for adults who had had at least one dose were for England only; and to correct the figure for the latter to 80.4%, not 67.4%, which was the figure for all people who had had at least one dose.Putting off the crunch meeting of the ministerial World Trade Organization won’t defer the chronic malfunctions of the world economy. The currency and debt crises experienced by developing nations, the eurozone’s turn to austerity and the great financial crash are symptoms of a broken trading system built on the global role of the dollar. Deeply embedded within the world’s trade and capital regime is a hierarchy where cheap labour goods from developing nations keep rich world wages down. Meanwhile, elites in the developing world run their nations in order to be able to consume in the manner of the developed world. Greed sees income hoovered away from most of the population by a wealthy layer. The extensive trade liberalisation of the 1990s did not lead to higher economic growth rates. This should raise serious concerns for backers of globalisation. Are wealthier nations interested in raising the living standards in poorer countries? Or are they only really bothered about ensuring that debtor nations pay back their loans and open their economies to international trade and finance? The evidence suggests the latter: since the 1950s the evidence is that poor countries are financing rich ones through net resources transfers, rather than the other way round. What is needed is international transfer of real resources in support of economic development and the elimination of poverty. This means not just cash but technology transfer in both climate and vaccine intellectual property. As the economist Ndongo Samba Sylla writes, without innovations being shared with the developing world “the Green New Deal in the global north might translate into a ‘Grey New Deal’ in the global south: a further outsourcing of ecological damage and economic costs from the global north to the global south.” No wonder there are growing calls for the developing world to give up on the WTO if it won’t budge on Covid vaccine patents. Without access to technology, the thinking goes, developing countries cannot ascend the value chain, obtain industrial knowhow and ultimately become wealthier. To gain such insights they are forced, however, into throwing open their doors to foreign investment and embracing the damaging macroeconomic orthodoxy of western-backed institutions. In choosing this path, the developing world becomes locked into a global economic system that deepens inequality. Surely there must be an alternative to this? The global middle class shrank by 54 million people in 2020 – mainly in Asia – from the number projected before the pandemic. Perhaps it would be better for developing countries to eschew imports and use state power to stimulate local production instead – thus obviating the need for external finance. Social spending on health and education could be encouraged, as well as strong support for the agricultural sector, combined with restraints on export of raw materials. India and China grew by opening up their economies gradually, not with shock therapy. So-called free-market economies hide the fact that states have a long history of economic intervention to direct economic growth. But wealthy nations should not be able to keep poor countries poor with theories that deny the very factors that made them rich.It is by now fairly well known that the most serious cases of Covid-19 in the UK, and other rich countries, are increasingly concentrated among unvaccinated people. Between January and September, there were 34,474 deaths from Covid in England of unvaccinated people aged 10 or over, compared with 4,308 deaths of those who had received two vaccine doses (an alternative set of figures, also published by the Office for National Statistics and based on a different dataset, gives the totals of 40,966 unvaccinated deaths, compared with 5,104 double-vaccinated). The UK Health Security Agency has been careful to stress that the data “do not show causal links between vaccines and risks of mortality”. Other differences between vaccinated and unvaccinated groups could contribute to their differing death rates. But the contrast is dramatic, as are data relating to hospitalisation, with one recent analysis showing that of 40,000 Covid patients hospitalised, 84% were unvaccinated and just 3% double-vaccinated. Already, the relatively low take-up of vaccines among some groups was a cause for concern, not least among doctors who have described their distress when confronted by dying people who have deliberately avoided vaccines. Among 12- to 15-year-old children in England, the vaccination rate is 39.1% (compared with 80.4% of adults aged 18 and over who have had at least one dose, although the risk posed to children by Covid-19 is lower). But concerns associated with the arrival of the Omicron variant, against which the current vaccines may be less effective, make the issue of vaccine take-up more urgent – and the gaps more alarming. At a press conference led by Professor Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer, it was announced on Monday that children aged 12 to 15 would now be eligible to receive second doses 12 weeks after their initial jab. A decision on whether to vaccinate younger children is likely to be made before Christmas (in the US, the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine has been approved for those aged five to 11). All adults will be offered boosters, where a fortnight ago these were mostly reserved for over-40s. Those with suppressed immune systems are also eligible for an additional (fourth) booster jab. Advice to pregnant women to get vaccinated has been belatedly strengthened. The purpose, as Prof Van-Tam and others have explained, is to try to “get ahead” of the mutating virus, and behave according to precautionary principles (around a dozen Omicron cases have been detected in the UK so far, with hundreds more expected). New rules about mask-wearing, including in secondary schools, are sensible in this context. Ventilation has been overlooked in the past and requires further attention. It is possible that the Omicron variant may turn out to be no more dangerous than the Delta variant. But ministers should seize this moment and use it to improve their vaccine messaging, starting with the prime minister himself. With vaccines now compulsory for care home workers, and causing problems where staff have left jobs rather than be jabbed, it is incumbent on senior politicians to set an example, allying themselves with scientists instead of the libertarians on their backbenches. They must also do more to combat vaccine misinformation online, both by demanding in public that Facebook and other platforms clamp down on the dangerous anti-vaxx propaganda that they allow to spread unchecked, but also by countering the lies with their own words and actions. The pandemic is not over. Once again, the level of danger may be on the rise. Along with delivering boosters, boosting the vaccination rate must now be the government’s domestic priority – while internationally, it should do everything it can to promote efforts to vaccinate the world. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to clarify that the vaccination rates given for 12- to 15-year-olds and for adults who had had at least one dose were for England only; and to correct the figure for the latter to 80.4%, not 67.4%, which was the figure for all people who had had at least one dose.The charismatic actor, mesmerising dancer and cultural icon David Gulpilil is finally going home. Gulpilil, of the Mandhalpuyngu clan in Arnhem Land, spent his final years battling lung cancer in the care of his friend Mary Hood in Murray Bridge, in South Australia. He often said how much he missed his country but understood his deteriorating health made it impossible to travel. With his trademark dry humour, Gulpilil told film-maker and friend Molly Reynolds in 2020 that he was “going back to country on a one-way ticket”. He died on Monday aged 68. Gulpilil said he was born “under a tree” and grew up steeped in his culture. A gifted young performer, he used the rangy elegance of his frame to tell a story, a skill that he adapted to his film career. “I don’t have to go and act. I just jump in and stand there and the camera sees me,” Gulpilil told Reynolds. My Name Is Gulpilil was their final collaboration, a powerful film he called “my story of my story”, released earlier this year to wide acclaim. At 15, he was already an accomplished hunter, tracker and ceremonial dancer. In 1969 when English film director Nicolas Roeg toured to Arnhem Land scouting locations for a forthcoming film, he asked elders – no strangers to film-making thanks to visits from the anthropologist Donald Thomson – who was their best young dancer. According to Gulpilil, they all pointed at him. He was 16 when Walkabout was released, his first film. For the role he added English to the many Indigenous languages in which he was already fluent. Gulpilil became an instant global celebrity. As a fresh faced, besuited young man he went from Arnhem Land to London, where he met the Queen, then Paris and beyond. He mingled with John Lennon and Muhammad Ali. He hung out with Bruce Lee, played yidaki (didjeridu) with Jimi Hendrix and Bob Marley. His role in Walkabout is credited with helping bring an end to the use of blackface in Australian cinema. Until his arrival on the screen, with the exception of Rosemary Kunoth-Monks and Robert Tudawali in Charles Chauvel’s Jedda (1956), the custom had been for white actors to play Indigenous characters. Aboriginal people had been portrayed by non-Aboriginal actors, including Ed Devereaux and Kamahl (Journey Out of Darkness, 1967). Gulpilil also experienced the wild Hollywood lifestyles of his co-stars. At the age of 20, he was filming Mad Dog Morgan (1976) with Dennis Hopper and John Meillon. “If you’re working with people like Dennis Hopper and Meillon, well, you gotta learn all about drinking and drugs,” he said in his 2004 one-man stage show. “It was the 1970s. I thought well, I got to join in this whitefella corroboree. But I tell you, I’d never seen anything like this before.” Gulpilil had a string of successful roles in the 1970s including in Storm Boy (1976) and The Last Wave (1977). But his longest creative collaboration was with the director Rolf de Heer, with whom he worked for more than 15 years. Together they crafted The Tracker (2002) for which Gulpilil won an Aactar award, Ten Canoes (2006) and Charlie’s Country (2014) for which Gulpilil won best actor in Cannes’ Un Certain Regard section. De Heer described Gulpilil as a “consummate actor”, who rarely required direction. “When I first met David, I didn’t know how I would ever direct him in a film,” De Heer told the ABC in 2015. “We were so culturally far apart. “I didn’t know how to talk with him. David said, ‘You have to come to my country; you have to come visit me in my country. I did, and we shared experiences that we can still talk about.’” In The Tracker (2002), Gulpilil embodies silence. He brings an economy of movement and subtle reactions, and uses Aboriginal sign and body language. It was important to Gulpilil to bring a true representation of his country’s people and their inner lives to the screen. He told Reynolds that films would tell the story of his life, of Aboriginal life, for future generations to see. History couldn’t rub it out. “Acting came natural to me,” he said. “I know how to walk across the land in front of a camera, because I belong there.” This story was amended on 3 December 2021 to reinstate the name Gulpilil following a respectful period after David Gulpilil’s death and in line with the wishes of his family and community.Postponement is not an option for the European Champions Cup as rugby union finds itself on the frontline in dealing with the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Organisers of club rugby’s elite northern hemisphere tournament are to insist teams do all they can to stage fixtures, when the Champions Cup group stage begins in 10 days’ time. This could include listing academy scholars in matchday squads if positive Covid tests and quarantine measures limit player availability. In the event of a club being unable or unwilling to raise a side, it is understood they will forfeit the match 28-0. The prospect of an interrupted schedule loomed on Monday, with fallout from the postponement of two rounds of fixtures in the South African leg of the United Rugby Championship continuing to reverberate. Cardiff Rugby remain stranded in South Africa after reporting two positive Covid cases. A new round of tests have discovered no new cases among the players but quarantine rules mean the team must stay in South Africa, a situation club officials are hoping to rectify. A similar fate has befallen Munster who recorded one positive case this weekend. Cardiff are due to host Toulouse in the Champions Cup on 11 December, while Munster are scheduled to travel to Wasps a day later. Two more URC teams, Scarlets and the Italian side Zebre, have managed to leave South Africa, with the Welsh side quarantining in Belfast. Their Champions Cup opener is on 11 December at Bristol. URC organisers said: “Having helped to repatriate two teams, [we continue] to support the two remaining teams in South Africa. There is a widespread network of stakeholders working vigorously to ensure the safe return of both Cardiff Rugby and Munster Rugby as soon as possible and keep them comfortable at this time.” A spokesperson for European Professional Club Rugby, organisers of the Champions Cup, said: “We are monitoring the situation and are in contact with the clubs.” A lack of flexibility in the calendar means that EPCR cannot rearrange and are faced with two options – ensure matches go ahead or enforce forfeits – but any decisions may be left to the last minute as much remains uncertain about the threat posed by Omicron, including what measures governments will take to limit its spread. Many countries have added southern African nations to their travel red lists. In Europe, Switzerland has also placed restrictions on UK nationals, with vaccinated travellers expected to quarantine for 10 days in the country. That has already caused problems for Manchester United. They are due to host Young Boys of Bern in the Champions League next week, but it is unclear whether the players will be exempt from quarantine on their return from England. Under Uefa rules, if a match cannot be staged in the designated country then it falls to the host club to find a neutral venue. In domestic football, the Premier League remain confident of the schedule continuing as planned, with no intimation of new measures on player protocols or supporter restrictions coming from government. On Monday, the English top flight announced seven positive Covid tests among players and staff, the highest one-off total since August.Surviving family members of the Gucci fashion dynasty have expressed unhappiness with their representation in the new film House of Gucci. In a statement issued on Monday, the heirs of Aldo Gucci – who ran the fashion house for 33 years until the mid-1980s – said they were aggrieved by the lack of consultation by film-makers, as well as their portrayal as “thugs, ignorant and insensitive to the world around them”. Ridley Scott’s film stars Al Pacino as Aldo Gucci, Jeremy Irons as his brother Rodolfo, and Adam Driver as his nephew Maurizio, who took over the firm until he was murdered in 1995 by a hitman hired by his ex-wife, Patrizia Reggiani (played by Lady Gaga). Based on the 2000 nonfiction book The House of Gucci: A Sensational Story of Murder, Madness, Glamour, and Greed, the film, said the Guccis, attributes “a tone and an attitude to the protagonists of the well-known events that never belonged to them”. The statement continued: “This is extremely painful from a human point of view and an insult to the legacy on which the brand is built today.” The statement went on to protest not only at the film itself, but also “statements from cast members” seemingly defending Reggiani, who they say is “indulged” as “a victim trying to survive in a male and male chauvinist corporate culture”. Rather, says the statement, the fashion house was “an inclusive company” during its 70-year history under the direct control of the Gucci family, and in the 1980s, when the film is largely set, there were several women in senior positions. The statement ended by denouncing the film as an insult. “Gucci is a family that lives honouring the work of its ancestors, whose memory does not deserve to be disturbed to stage a spectacle that is untrue and which does not do justice to its protagonists.” However, despite asserting that “the members of the Gucci family reserve the right to take action to protect the name, image and dignity of themselves and their loved ones”, no legal action appears to be under way. Patricia Gucci, the only daughter of Aldo, has previously accused Scott of “stealing the identity of a family to make a profit”. The director has dismissed such criticism, citing the Gucci family’s chequered history. “You have to remember that one Gucci was murdered and another went to jail for tax evasion, so you can’t be talking to me about making a profit,” Scott told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme last week. “As soon as you do that, you become part of the public domain.” Reggiani, who was released from prison five years ago, has also expressed opprobrium that those involved in the film did not attempt to consult her. Lady Gaga has said she felt this unnecessary: “I only felt that I could truly do this story justice if I approached it with the eye of a curious woman who was interested in possessing a journalistic spirit so that I could read between the lines of what was happening in the film’s scenes,” she told Vogue. “Meaning that nobody was going to tell me who Patrizia Gucci was. Not even Patrizia Gucci.” The film, Scott’s second release this autumn following The Last Duel, attracted mixed reviews from critics but has exceeded expectations at the box office. It took $22m (£16.5m) over its first weekend in the US and $3.4m (£2.5m) in the UK.Donald Trump’s “fact-free” approach to the presidency created unprecedented challenges for intelligence officials responsible for briefing him, according to a newly released account from the CIA. The 45th president’s chaotic and freewheeling style, and his disinclination to read anything put in front of him, resulted in the presidential daily briefing, or PDB – a crucial security update including information about potential threats to the US – being delivered more regularly to Vice-President Mike Pence instead, the report states. By the middle of Trump’s term in office, his briefings were reduced to two weekly sessions of 45 minutes each. Briefings were discontinued altogether after the deadly insurrection of 6 January, which was sparked by Trump urging his supporters to march on the US Capitol in a failed attempt to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden. The analysis comes in a 40-page unclassified update to the CIA’s Getting to Know the President, a publication that chronicles efforts to brief presidents-elect through transition periods and into office for every administration since 1952. “For the intelligence community (IC), the Trump transition was far and away the most difficult in its historical experience with briefing new presidents,” the new chapter, posted to the CIA website, concludes. “Trump was like [Richard] Nixon, suspicious and insecure about the intelligence process, but unlike Nixon in the way he reacted. Rather than shut the IC out, Trump engaged with it but attacked it publicly.” Nixon, who resigned in 1974 after the Watergate scandal, refused to accept any intelligence from the CIA and received briefings instead from trusted insiders such as his national security adviser and later secretary of state, Henry Kissinger. Trump regularly assailed intelligence officials and famously chose to believe the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, over agencies including the CIA which concluded that Russia meddled in the 2016 election. The CIA report’s author, retired career intelligence officer John L Helgerson, said briefers achieved “only limited success” in their mission to deliver timely and relevant intelligence to Trump and to establish a working relationship with him. Pence, by contrast, “was an assiduous, six-day-a-week reader” who made efforts to try to keep Trump focused. The vice-president urged briefers to “lean forward on maps” in graphics-heavy presentations much shorter than those presented to Trump’s predecessors, and “would sometimes ask leading questions” during joint sessions with Trump “so the president would hear his concerns”. Pence’s efforts were largely unsuccessful, Helgerson suggests. James Clapper, a former director of national intelligence, said Trump “was prone to fly off on tangents”, according to the CIA report, and said “there might be [only] eight or nine minutes of real intelligence in an hour’s discussion”. Additionally, Clapper said, while “the IC worked with evidence, Trump ‘was fact-free – evidence doesn’t cut it with him’.” Helgerson writes: “Trump preferred that the briefer take the lead and summarise the key points and important items from the days since they had last had a session. The PDB was published every day, but because Trump received a briefing only two or three times a week, he relied on the briefer to orally summarize the significance of the most important issues.” Perhaps unsurprisingly, the subjects to which Trump paid most attention were China and developments involving Russia and Ukraine. The first of the former president’s two impeachments was for pressing Ukraine to investigate Biden, then his likely 2020 election opponent. He was also investigated for allegedly colluding with Russia. “A few subjects and areas of the world were notable by their relative absence,” the CIA report states. “Regarding Europe, only Nato budget issues, Turkey and approaching elections in France and Germany stimulated much discussion. Latin America, Africa, and south-east Asia received almost no attention.” Overall, Helgerson believes, the briefing process barely survived Trump’s presidency. “[He] publicly criticised the outgoing directors of national intelligence and the CIA, and disparaged the substantive work and integrity of the intelligence agencies. From the outset, it was clear that the IC was in for a difficult time. “The system worked, but it struggled.”Jack Dorsey likes to keep things simple, at least for a 45-year-old multibillionaire. He eats one meal a day, fasts at weekends, and tries to meditate for two hours daily. The post that launched Twitter, and ultimately a million pile-ons, was equally austere: “just setting up my twttr”. Dorsey was born in St Louis, Missouri, in 1976 and was a self-taught computer programmer, using a Macintosh computer that his father bought for him. In 1999 he dropped out of New York University and moved to California, where he dreamed up the idea of a Twitter prototype while co-founding an online courier and taxi dispatch firm. The company later failed. The Twitter story began to take shape when Dorsey was hired as a coder at Odeo, a podcasting startup run by a future Twitter co-founder, Evan Williams. This is where Dorsey appears in Sarah Frier’s award-winning history of Instagram as one of the peripheral figures in the story, trying to make his way in Silicon Valley like so many others. “Dorsey, a 29-year-old New York University dropout with an anarchist tattoo and a nose ring, considered himself to be more of an artist. He would sometimes dream, for instance, about becoming a dressmaker. He was an engineer, but only as a means to an end – to create something out of nothing, with code. Also, so he could pay rent.” There was enough hard-edged business sense within Dorsey, however, for him to co-found Twttr – soon renamed Twitter – with Williams, Biz Stone and Noah Glass in 2006. Dorsey became chief executive for the first time in 2007. Indeed, Dorsey’s artistic mindset was cited, pointedly, when he was removed as chief executive for the first time in 2008. According to Nick Bilton’s book Hatching Twitter, Williams said to him: “You can either be a dressmaker or the CEO of Twitter. But you can’t be both.” Dorsey would apparently intersperse his chief executive duties with breaks for hot yoga and sewing classes. Dorsey came back as executive chairman in 2011, having set up payment company Square – today worth $100bn – in the meantime. Twitter struggled in the wake of its 2013 flotation, which made Dorsey a billionaire, and he replaced Dick Costolo as chief executive in 2015 while relinquishing the executive chairman role. Dorsey leaves the company with 210 million daily active users and annual revenues of $3.7bn. According to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, he is worth $12.3bn, ranked 174th among the ranks of the world’s super-wealthy. He still owns 2.3% of Twitter. But unrest had been building about Dorsey’s priorities. In 2019 Dorsey surprised staff and investors by announcing plans to move to Africa for up to six months a year. Announcing the move during a month-long trip to the continent, he tweeted, from Addis Ababa: “Sad to be leaving the continent … for now. Africa will define the future (especially the bitcoin one!). Not sure where yet, but I’ll be living here for 3-6 months mid 2020. Grateful I was able to experience a small part.” Dorsey, who remains a cryptocurrency enthusiast, dropped the plan after coronavirus arrived. But it wouldn’t have dissuaded the activist investor firm Elliott Management from its view that Twitter was a business in need of more focus at the top. Elliott took a stake in Twitter last year and is still the 13th largest shareholder in the business, according to the financial data company Refinitiv, with a stake of just over 1%. At the time of the stake-building move, Elliott’s billionaire owner, Paul Singer, was reported to have been concerned by the fact that Dorsey had two chief executive jobs, at Twitter and Square. By the end of last year it appeared that Dorsey had survived the pressure. In November a committee of Twitter directors said it had “confidence in management and recommended that the current structure remain in place”. Much of the innovation shown by Twitter under Dorsey’s leadership in recent months has been more to do with safety than making money, however. It has launched trials warning users that they are about to enter a heated conversation and is testing a “safety mode” that blocks accounts for seven days if the tech firm’s systems spot them using harmful language or sending repetitive, uninvited replies and mentions. In the context of Frances Haugen’s Facebook revelations and the upcoming Online Safety Act in the UK, social media companies know they have to focus on protecting users. On the money-making side, in the US the company launched Twitter Blue, a product that for $2.99 a month offers a range of services including a 60-second grace period to amend a tweet before it is fully posted. Expect more money-making initiatives under the new boss, the chief technology officer Parag Agrawal, who has to hit ambitious targets: to increase the company’s daily average users by more than 50% to 315 million, and more than double revenue to $7.5bn by 2023. According to one California-based analyst, now is a good time for Dorsey to leave, with the social media industry becoming ever more competitive. “Dorsey is a pillar of the social media world,” said Dan Ives, the managing director of the investment firm Wedbush Securities. “These are big shoes to fill.”Day one. Ralf has entered the chat. There will be a note of relief about the news, announced on Monday morning via a club release, that Manchester United have formally appointed their latest interim manager, follow-up to the previous interim-to-permanent, who was in turn replaced by the previous interim, who has been replaced now by the current interim. First things first. Ralf Rangnick is a great “get” for United’s executive tier. The annual Premier League sacking season is not soundtracked by gruff-voiced middlemen pinging the phones of Premier League CEOs saying things like: “Ralf is very, repeat very, interested.” Rangnick is above all an ideologue. He has to like, and believe in, the thing you’re offering. But his appearance now does raise two important points. First, how is it possible for this vast global brand, this huge public commercial entity, to be so appallingly random in its recruitment of its most important employee? Rangnick is United’s fifth semi-permanent manager in eight years. At least José Mourinho and Louis van Gaal had something – arrogance, the past, angry pronouncements – in common. The lurch from Ole-era United to Rangnick’s academic stylings has a kind of Partridge TV-pitch element to it: arm‑wrestling with William Shatner, gegenpressing with Cristiano Ronaldo, Phillip Schofield talks Chekhov. Which is all fine, and quite predictable. But there is also the second thing about Rangnick’s arrival. Never mind how they got here. Cut away the noise. This is a genuinely mouthwatering prospect. Much depends on how much influence he manages to wield. But in terms of scale and methods Rangnick to United is arguably the most radical managerial appointment the Premier League has seen. It is Rangnick’s personality as much as his background that makes this such a startling turn. There has already been a great deal of poring over his familiar lines, quotes and quips in the last few days. What emerges from that patchwork is a slightly comedic figure, something along the lines of Evelyn Waugh’s German modernist architect professor Otto Silenus, who sees human beings as flawed mechanical designs, who says things such as “the only perfect building must be the factory, because that is built to house machines not men”. Going by his pre-publicity it would be no surprise to see Rangnick take his first press conference standing motionless behind a synthesiser wreathed in dry ice and mumbling about being a robot. Except, of course, he is in reality a coach who feels this sport passionately, who sees coaching and theory as a kind of intellectual calling. Rangnick has been called the godfather of modern German pressing football but his own chief influence came from further east. “We didn’t even have the vocabulary to describe the things that were happening on the pitch. But we did know that this was the future.” Rangnick has described his first sight of Valeriy Lobanovskyi’s Dynamo Kyiv, in February 1983, on the Coaches’ Voice website. He was managing FC Viktoria Backnang in the sixth tier of West German football when Dynamo came to play a friendly. “A few minutes in,” Rangnick recalled, “I had to stop and count their players. Something was wrong. Did they have 13 or 14 men on the pitch?” Lobanovskyi, with his concrete jowls, his worker’s cap, had been a decorated colonel in the Red Army. He built the wonderful USSR teams of 1986 and 1988, pioneered the use of pre-modern computers in football, the obsessing over numbers, metrics, distances run, seeing players as mobile fluid human units. Kyiv were the first team Rangnick saw “systematically press the ball”. His own mixed and varied sporting life has been lived in pursuit of that lightbulb moment, chasing that feeling, and notable for his ability to inspire and illuminate others the same way. This is Rangnick’s obsession, not cups or trophies but shapes and space and systems. Likes: team play, theory, old dead silent Soviet-era geniuses. Dislikes: ego, star players, inefficiencies. And now here he is at Old Trafford. Hmm. How’s this going to work out? And it is here that his appointment at a club that has been run so aggressively, and so clumsily, as a commercial machine becomes fascinating. It isn’t hard to see the potential for disaster. What is the worst possible thing you can do with Rangnick? How about hurling him into a mid-season rescue job at a hysterically hungry club obsessed with its own marketing arm? Welcome, Mr Process, to a place where there is no process. Now get to work. There is also something slightly grim about United reaching out for Ralf, scrabbling for the nearest “thoughts guy” when branding and celebrity have failed. We lack a culture. We lack a vision. Let’s go and buy one. Let’s take this careful, disciplined thing and apply it to this sloppy, careless, cash-drunk thing. Maybe one will overwhelm the other. Who knows which? And yet, for all that, there is every reason to believe this could turn out to be a masterstroke. Rangnick’s job here, his role, is simply to be Rangnick: to instil discipline, a system, small but simple improvements. There is so much low-hanging fruit here, a group of players, a club that is crying out not just for his tactical smarts but for a kind culture‑management. Rangnick is not a “cold” figure in that sense. He has two sons the same age as his players. He wants to understand how these players think and work, how they can be happy. “I see it as my duty to help them deal with all the temptations and the fake reality they’re faced with as young men making a lot of money.” It is a delicious prospect. United have so many players operating below capacity, so many lost-looking young men, ghosts in the machine. Rangnick loves bright, energetic, biddable footballers. What might he do with Mason Greenwood and Jadon Sancho? What other levels can he draw from that tier of vaguely spooked-looking regulars, a Fred, a Wan-Bissaka, a McTominay? And in the end all of the obstacles Rangnick may face along the way seem to dissolve a little. The idea that English football is a strange new frontier is a little dated. Rangnick has personally influenced at least four of his fellow managers. This is not 1995. There are no secrets here. Can United’s players learn new things now, adopt a system mid-season? Well, yes they can. Footballers absorb huge amounts of detail and planning between gamesin any case . It is part of the brief now to be flexible, to understand systems, to be tactically aware. If the players are willing, significant changes can be made. Ralf against the machine starts here.Keir Starmer has carried out a wholesale overhaul of his shadow cabinet, bringing Yvette Cooper back on to the frontbench as part of a ruthless shakeup widely viewed at Westminster as accelerating Labour’s shift to the centre under his leadership. Cooper, who served in the last Labour government, will shadow Priti Patel as home secretary, resuming the spiky interactions the pair have had in Cooper’s current role as chair of the home affairs select committee. Other significant moves on Monday include a promotion for David Lammy to shadow foreign secretary, while Lisa Nandy will face Michael Gove as shadow levelling-up secretary. The radical reshuffle, which blindsided Starmer’s own deputy, left almost no senior role untouched. “The Labour party I lead is focused on the priorities of the country,” Starmer said. “With this reshuffle, we are a smaller, more focused shadow cabinet that mirrors the shape of the government we are shadowing. We must hold the Conservative government to account on behalf of the public and demonstrate that we are the right choice to form the next government.” He lavished praise on Nandy, whose shift from shadow foreign secretary to the levelling-up brief would traditionally be regarded as a demotion – though levelling up is politically prominent because it is at the heart of Boris Johnson’s agenda, and the Wigan MP has previously been a strong voice on tackling regional inequalities. “After 11 years of Conservative mismanagement of our economy, delivering prosperity to all regions and nations in the UK will be a defining mission of the next Labour government, and there will be nobody better than Lisa to lead this work,” Starmer said. Ed Miliband loses his responsibility for the business portfolio, which goes to Jonathan Reynolds. Starmer underlined the importance of Miliband’s new role as shadow secretary of state for climate change and net zero, calling him “a powerful, internationally well-respected voice on the issue”. But Miliband will have no department to shadow directly. He and Starmer had clashed at Labour’s annual conference over whether the big six energy firms should be nationalised. The promotion of key figures from the right of the party – including Bridget Phillipson and Wes Streeting, to education and health respectively – with the demotions of several on the soft left, including Miliband, Kate Green, who will return to the backbenches, and Nick Thomas-Symonds, moved from Home Office shadow to international trade, appeared to point to a fresh shift towards the political centre. However, Starmer’s team insisted the reshuffle was focused on promoting the best people for the job, and laying the political groundwork for the next general election. Streeting inherited the shadow health secretary role from Jon Ashworth, who is moving to work and pensions, while former leadership contender Emily Thornberry switched from international trade to become shadow attorney general, replacing the peer Charlie Falconer. Starmer moved Jo Stevens from the digital, culture, media and sport brief to be the shadow Welsh secretary, replacing Nia Griffiths, who had remained in the shadow cabinet since Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership. Former shadow housing secretary Lucy Powell will take over at culture, while Hove MP Peter Kyle is promoted to the shadow cabinet at Northern Ireland, with Louise Haigh moved to transport. Cat Smith, a shadow Cabinet Office minister, quit with a barb at Starmer, saying she was “one of our few remaining ‘red wall’ Labour MPs”. She also raised concerns that Corbyn still had the party’s whip suspended. Former shadow chancellor John McDonnell criticised the reshuffle, tweeting, “reviving the careers of former Blairite ministers and simply reappointing existing Shadow Cabinet ministers to new posts does give the impression of Christmas Past not Christmas Future.” Starmer’s deputy, Angela Rayner, was blindsided by the overhaul on Monday morning, with the Labour leader informing her that he was reshaping his team in a brief chat as she moved between a media round and a major speech on standards in public life. Her spokesperson later clarified she had been told by Starmer that morning it would happen that day, though not when. Speaking as the reshuffle got underway, she said: “I don’t know the details of the reshuffle or the timing of it. But six months ago I said again we need some consistency in how we are approaching things as an opposition and I want to see us as a government in waiting, doing that job.” An ally of Rayner said Starmer would have been fully aware the move would “blow up” her bid to lay out plans for reforming the standards system and said it was “not fair”. Starmer’s team believed it was the right moment for a reshuffle, however, with the prime minister under pressure after a series of backbench revolts, and the vaccine bounce in the polls apparently waning. Allies say he is enjoying the job more than he has for some months, while Labour MPs have been cheered by the recent modest shifts in the polls in their favour, and strong performances at prime minister’s questions. The reshuffle was Starmer’s second in nine months, after he moved Rayner from her role as elections coordinator in the wake of the loss of the Hartlepool byelection in May. At that time, he replaced Anneliese Dodds as shadow chancellor with the more high-profile Rachel Reeves. But plans for a wider reshuffle, which were rumoured to include a demotion for Nandy, were put on hold after a lengthy standoff with Rayner.