Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.For several months now, policymakers at the Bank of England have been agonising about wages. They ask themselves how workers will react when they see rising prices in the shops and, worse, the rocketing cost of petrol, which last week jumped to its highest level on record. Will they march into their boss’s office and demand a pay rise of 10%? Or, more likely, will they march down the road to a rival employer prepared to increase wages by double digits to attract new staff? In such a scenario, when forced to pay ever-higher wages, employers will need to increase shop prices further. It’s a wage-price spiral that gives BoE officials sleepless nights and makes them think they have lost control of an economy that is supposed to glide forward with inflation anchored for the foreseeable future at about 2%. On Tuesday, figures for the three months to the end of September from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) are expected to show a slide in annual wages growth from 7.2%, including bonuses, to somewhere nearer 5%. The reason for the drop can be found in the large distortion of wages figures last year following the first lockdown. Cuts in hours meant wages fell – and fast. That meant the economic recovery would always bring with it a steep increase in pay. In August, the official figures put wages growth at more than 8%. Quite rightly, Bank of England officials discounted the artificially inflated increases that appeared in the monthly figures, and agreed with the ONS that a truer figure could be found in the underlying wage rises – of about 3% to 3.5%. Many industries have also paused production or delayed processing orders to cope with staff shortages and delays to vital imports, especially of components such as computer chips. Demand may be high, both domestically and from abroad, for British goods and services, but the figures show UK firms struggling more than their counterparts in other countries to meet that demand. There is an argument that this is all about to change. The ONS is expected to report that unemployment fell again in September, and HMRC data for October could show that most people still on furlough at the end of the scheme were retained by their employers. A tighter labour market and still record high levels of vacancies could, after a decade of false starts, begin to push average wages much higher. Inflation figures to be published by the ONS on Wednesday will also play a part. Many City analysts have forecast an increase to about 4% in October, showing that a dip to 3.1% in September was a brief interruption to a relentlessly upward trend. Once workers begin to see inflation surging past 4%, average wages growth could head back towards 10%. In areas where there is a chronic shortage of skilled staff, such as among computer engineers, there is every likelihood that pay will increase. The same goes for hotel staff and other areas of a hospitality industry sideswiped by the pandemic and the exodus of EU workers following the government’s hard Brexit deal. The UK has not seen such low numbers of unemployed people for every vacancy since the 1960s – the days when a construction worker could hand in their notice in the morning and cross the road to another building site for a 10% pay rise. It’s possible this form of worker power will re-emerge in the manufacturing and construction sectors. But if it does, it will probably be short-lived. And it will largely bypass service industries, where most people work, and where the impact of the pandemic is still uncertain. Forecasts of a temporary spike in pay should mean Bank officials stick with the current low rates of interest. If they do put rates up, it won’t be long before they put them down again.“Cash, coal, cars and trees” to keep the world to 1.5 degrees – that was the catchy mantra coined by Boris Johnson’s spokesperson before the Cop26 conference, summarising the UK’s strategy of attacking the climate crisis on several fronts, to reverse the rise in greenhouse gas emissions and stave off climate breakdown. That push was expressed in a carefully orchestrated string of initiatives covering those four key elements, and a few more, spread across the two weeks of the conference. The choreography was a key part of the UK’s plan: the Cop talks are dominated by backroom technical discussions over the fine details of the Paris agreement. Slow-moving and impenetrable to outsiders, these can give the (correct) impression of stalling and delay in the face of a global crisis. So to gain a sense of momentum, the UK plan was to launch the summit with world leaders, then keep up a steady stream of “wins” that would cover aspects of the climate crisis that lie outside the scope of the annual UN talks but are no less vital to its resolution. World leaders brought their glamour to the start, when Joe Biden of the US and his counterparts Fumio Kishida, the prime minister of Japan, the leaders of EU member states, Australia’s Scott Morrison and India’s Narendra Modi flew in among the 120 heads of state and government. Missing were Xi Jinping of China and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, but the leaders’ summit at the start gave the strong impetus the UK wanted. There were some fireworks among the leaders: Morrison faced embarrassment as France’s Emmanuel Macron accused him of lying, in answer to a Guardian journalist’s question. Biden picked a fight with Xi when he remarked: “They didn’t show up … How do you do that and claim to have any leadership mantle?” Modi made the surprise announcement that India would pursue net zero emissions – by the late date of 2070, but significant nonetheless, according to experts. As the leaders left the stage, the UK’s plan for cash, coal, cars and trees kicked in. The raft of announcements served two purposes: they addressed major sources of greenhouse gas emissions, or major elements of the solutions to the climate crisis; and they gave an impression of momentum, while the talks themselves were locked behind closed doors in interminable discussions over the minutiae of the final text. The UK’s strategy bore fruit, said Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics. “The contributions of the world leaders, particularly Narendra Modi, and the important announcements of stronger action on deforestation and methane, for instance, did provide positive momentum and had real substance. This was important as negotiators moved on to the hard grind of hammering out agreed text for the final decision.” First among the initiatives was an agreement to halt deforestation by 2030, signed by more than 130 countries, on the second day of the talks. Forests act as carbon sinks but the loss and degradation of the rainforests of the Amazon, the Congo Basin and south-east Asia has vastly diminished their carbon-absorbing potential. Stemming the losses, restoring degraded land and planting new forests is essential to any attempt to limit temperature rises, and would strongly benefit nature and biodiversity. Cash refers to the need for climate finance, from rich to poor countries to help them cut greenhouse gas emissions and cope with the impacts of the climate crisis. This has long been a key issue at the talks, one that dominated the closing discussions with developing countries deeply unhappy at the failure of the rich world to meet a promise made in 2009 that $100bn a year would flow to them from public and private sources by 2020. On the third day, more than 450 banks and financial institutions with a capitalisation of $130tn announced they would align their investments with net zero emissions by 2050, in a deal spearheaded by the former Bank of England governor Mark Carney. He told Cop: “When the UK assumed the Cop presidency in partnership with Italy two years ago, $5tn of private financial assets were committed to net zero. Today, as part of the Glasgow financial alliance for net zero, over 450 major financial institutions from 45 countries are committing to manage their balance sheets totalling over $130tn in line with net zero. Make no mistake: the money is now there if the world truly wants to address climate change.” Coal is the dirtiest fossil fuel, and continuing dependency on it is the biggest reason why greenhouse gas emissions are set to climb again next year, according to the International Energy Agency. On the fourth day of Cop26, more than 40 countries agreed to phase out coal power in what Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, hailed as “a milestone moment in our global efforts to tackle climate change, as nations from all corners of the world unite in Glasgow to declare that coal has no part to play in our future power generation … the end of coal is in sight”. Finally, in the second week of talks, the UK announced a deal on cars, by which more than 24 countries and several leading manufacturers committed to ending fossil fuel engines by 2040 or earlier, with Ford, Volvo and Mercedes-Benz among them. As well as these carefully choreographed initiatives, the US and the EU came forward with a deal, involving scores of countries, to cut emissions of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas that comes from animal husbandry, fossil fuel exploration and waste. If successful, the pledge to cut methane by 30% by 2030 would knock an estimated 0.2C off global heating, a valuable contribution with temperatures currently 1.1C above pre-industrial levels and rapidly heading towards the 1.5C threshold. But as the days wore on, and the announcements started to repeat or grow smaller in scope and impact, the hosts also came in for a barrage of criticism, as delegates suspected the announcements were not all that they seemed. First the forestry deal began to unravel, as Indonesia’s environment minister claimed the country was not intending to keep to its target of ending forest loss this decade. Then the finance deal also appeared overblown. Although the 450 banks and institutions signed up have a capitalisation of $130tn, only a small slice of their investments will be devoted to low-carbon efforts in the crucial next decade. These banks are also allowed, under the terms of the deal, to carry on pouring money into fossil fuels. Simon Youel of Positive Money said: “Banks may be preparing to scale up investment in ‘green’ activities, but this announcement said nothing about financial firms’ investments in new fossil fuel projects.” When the spotlight fell on coal, the claim that the end of coal was in sight quickly fell apart. The full list of countries signing up to phasing out coal was not at first released to journalists – when it was, only 18 countries were found to have agreed to it, with most of the world’s biggest users, including China, India and the US, missing. And when the cars announcement finally came in the second week of the conference, it was found that many major manufacturers – including Volkswagen, Toyota and BMW – had failed to sign up. The end result was for some delegates an appearance of spin, even greenwash. Mohamed Adow, director of the thinktank Power Shift Africa, accused the UK of “dressing up empty promises as climate leadership”, by pursuing fossil fuels at home – through new oil and gas fields, a potential new coalmine – and cutting overseas aid while exhorting other countries to provide more climate finance to the poor. He said: “It’s clear that rich nations would rather make pre-planned announcements and launch new schemes rather than get around the negotiating table with countries on the frontline of the climate crisis and commit their decisions to enhanced [national plans for emissions cuts] or the delivery of the promised $100bn by 2020.” Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, said: “Most host governments dabble in a bit of media management but the UK’s communications strategy in Glasgow is something different. It seems designed to dampen transparency and integrity. We actually want to find things to celebrate but it’s hard when there is a constant concern that everyone is getting played.” For the UK, if these deals produce tangible outcomes in the coming months and years, it will be vindication of a strategy that sought to spread the push for climate action beyond the narrow confines of a Cop meeting, where the focus is on the legalese and minutiae of a dry text – and where the discussions over the “rulebook” for the Paris agreement alone have taken six years, with some aspects still not fully resolved. If the “side deals” prove to bear fruit in lower emissions, concerns about spin will be quickly forgotten. A Cop26 spokesperson said: “We saw real momentum for climate action in the first week of Cop26, including major new commitments on ending our reliance on coal, increasing climate finance, tackling deforestation and plans to cut emissions. These were clearly communicated, showing the level of ambition at the summit and providing a firm foundation for further productive negotiations as we worked towards a final agreement.”The New South Wales government will rename Ben Boyd national park on the state’s south coast due to the pastoralist’s association with blackbirding. The environment minister, Matt Kean, announced the move on Sunday after an independent report showed Boyd’s involvement in blackbirding in the mid-1800s was viewed by many at the time as a form of slavery. “There are many people from NSW’s early history who are worth remembering and celebrating but it is clear from this historical analysis that Ben Boyd is not one of them,” Kean said. Blackbirding involved deceiving or kidnapping Pacific Islanders to force them into unpaid or lowly paid work in distant lands including Australia. Boyd, a wealthy Scottish immigrant with huge landholdings in Australia, was considered an early proponent of the practice. The Ben Boyd national park, created in 1971, will be renamed in the language of traditional custodians. NSW will now work with Indigenous elders and Aboriginal community representatives to find a new name. The NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service has a policy to source the names of all new parks from Aboriginal communities. Sunday’s announcement follows a report last year, conducted by independent historian Dr Mark Dunn, who confirmed Boyd’s involvement in blackbirding and found it was viewed as a form of slavery at the time. Boyd arrived in Australia in 1842 with the clear purpose of building a pastoral and business empire, Dunn’s report states. Boyd quickly amassed a huge property empire, with landholdings throughout the Riverina and Monaro regions, as well as central and south-west Victoria. He became one of the largest landholders in Australia, outside of the Crown, and complained frequently about the lack of available workers, particularly for his pastoral operations. In 1847, five years after his arrival in Australia, he sent ships to Vanuatu and New Caledonia to source workers. He brought a total of 192 men and women to NSW to work on his estates and ships that year. “His schemes were controversial at the time and viewed as a form of slavery by many of his contemporary critics,” Dunn wrote in his report. “His methods used in securing the labourers were considered to be coercive and the second voyage descended into extreme violence when his ships bombarded the villages, killing numerous Islanders.” Two years later, his businesses failing, Boyd left for the California goldfields and then returned to the Pacific, where he was killed in 1851 in what is now Solomon Islands. A number of areas are still named after Boyd. Sydney’s Neutral Bay, a wealthy inner city suburb, has a road named Ben Boyd Road, while the Ben Boyd dam and Ben Boyd reservoir in the Bega Valley were named after him in 1997. In his report, Dunn found Boyd’s actions were the “beginnings of the idea” of blackbirding, which was later taken up at far greater scale in Queensland after his death. The decision to rename the park has been welcomed by local Indigenous communities. Yvonne Weldon, chairwoman of the Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council and the first Aboriginal candidate for lord mayor of the City of Sydney, said the questioning of public space names showed “we are moving forward as a society”. “We must be secure enough in our identities to continue to talk about our public spaces,” she said on Sunday. “Questioning who and what we remember, even when it throws up contradictions, is a sign that we are moving forward as a society and repairing relationships with our communities.” Weldon said she had been campaigning to have Aboriginal leaders recognised across Sydney without success. “There are 25 publicly funded statues of the colony’s early leaders around the CBD. Among them are Captain Cook, Governor Arthur Phillip, Lachlan Macquarie, Queen Victoria, explorer Matthew Flinders and even his cat Trim,” she said. “But there isn’t one that recognises Indigenous leaders.” BJ Cruse, the chair of the Eden Local Aboriginal Land Council who campaigned for Ben Boyd national park to be renamed, told the Sydney Morning Herald: “We appreciate this special gesture of respect. We are keen to promote Indigenous heritage in the local area and the name change will go a long way to allow us to achieve that.”Under-12s won’t receive their first Covid vaccination jab until early next year and the government has no plans to change the definition of “fully vaccinated” for older Australians to include a booster shot, the health minister says. Children aged between five and 11 will not be able to access a vaccine until at least early 2022, Greg Hunt said on Sunday, arguing the federal government saw no reason to rush the program. Smaller doses of the Pfizer mRNA vaccine have been recommended for under-12s meaning Australia has had to order new batches which contain the correct dosages. Those 5m doses aren’t expected to arrive until at least January, Hunt suggested. “At this stage, to the best of my knowledge, only the United States has provided an emergency approval for children 5-11. And our medical regulator, the TGA, and the technical advisory group led by the Victorian principle vaccines adviser to the premier, Prof Allen Cheng, said they do not want to cut corners on the study and data for children,” the health minister told ABC TV’s Insiders program. Hunt said the rollout for children was “ready to go when our regulators are convinced it’s safe and effective for children”. A third dose of the vaccine for older Australians, six months after the second dose was administered, has been recommended to cover any “waning” in the vaccine’s effectiveness. Australia initially rolled out third doses – or “boosters” – for people with compromised immune systems. The program was recently expanded to include those who are due for a top-up. “So our medical advice is that booster shots are just that – they are an important booster,” Hunt said on Sunday. “They add to the capacity of an individual to have immunity and to have a strong immune response. We’ve been one of those to start a whole-of-nation booster program, one of the first after Israel. We’ve already reached 250,000 boosters only a week into the full program … [and] we’re at 257,000 boosters at this point.” But there are no plans to change the definition of “fully vaccinated” against Covid to include a booster shot – including for aged care workers and in other settings where vaccination is mandatory. Hunt said the third vaccine was “recommended” but there would be no change to exisiting advice. “Everything is always under review, but there’s no plan to change that requirement at this stage,” he said. “As we’ve done throughout, we’ll continue to follow the medical advice. That’s how we’ve had one of the lowest rates of loss of life in the world, one of the highest rates of vaccination, and now one of the earliest whole-of-nation booster programs.” While the over-16 Australian population as a whole has reached a double-dose vaccination rate of just over 80%, Indigenous Australians have not received vaccinations at the same rate, with just 55% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians having received two shots. Hunt on Sunday dodged a question on whether it was safe to open borders while Indigenous vaccination rates remained lower than the general population. “Well, it is important that we open these borders, and the Doherty [Institute] modelling has shown these state figures help protect everybody,” he said. “But we want every individual to come forward – Indigenous and non-Indigenous.” Hunt also pushed for Western Australia to open its border to the rest of Australia “as soon as possible”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning WA is about to reach the 70% double-dose threshold but the premier, Mark McGowan, has previously said he won’t open the state until it reaches 90% fully vaccinated, which is not expected until 2022. The fifth Ashes cricket Test is scheduled for Perth in January with players subjected to just five days quarantine so the match can go ahead. Hunt said all Australians should be able to travel to WA. “I want to see not just cricketers but children reuniting with parents,” he said on Sunday. “I want the same rules for children and cancer and cardiac patients, as for cricketers, and to do that as quickly as possible.”After days of painful wrangling, the Cop26 summit finally delivered a watered-down climate deal on Saturday night. While some activists were firmly unimpressed with the result, Sunday’s papers delivered verdicts ranging from “Still on the road to hell” to a more sanguine “Climate deal for the world”. The story found its way on to most front pages. The Observer splashed on Boris Johnson offering to help Jennifer Arcuri’s business, with a smaller story on Cop26 reporting that a deal had been struck after last-minute drama. The Independent devoted the entire front page to the story, headlining on UK minister Alok Sharma, president of the summit, apologising for the watered-down deal reached after pressure from India and China. The Sunday Times also emphasised the role of India and China in shaping the deal. The Telegraph also went with Sharma apologising for the coal ‘climbdown’, but put it far down the front page, below Liz Truss telling Vladimir Putin to end the migrant row on Poland’s border and a main image of England once again defeating Australia in the rugby. The Scottish edition of the Mail had the most positive take, hailing a “climate deal for the world” that it described as the most “ambitious ever seen”. By contrast, Scotland on Sunday did not leave its readers wondering about its feelings on the outcome of the summit, splashing with “Make no mistake, we are still on the road to hell”.The ABC chair, Ita Buttrose, has accused the Morrison government of political interference and attempting to intimidate the public broadcaster after the Senate established an inquiry into the ABC’s complaints handling process. Buttrose, in a blistering statement, called on the upper house to act to “defend the independence of the ABC” by passing a motion to terminate or suspend the government inquiry until an independent process commissioned by the ABC Board last month has been completed. The government inquiry was announced last week after the ABC’s complaints division told Fox News it had not upheld any of the complaints made in a lengthy submission about a Four Corners program on Fox News aired in August. “This is an act of political interference designed to intimidate the ABC and mute its role as this country’s most trusted source of public interest journalism,” Buttrose said in a statement on Sunday. “Any incursion of this kind into the ABC’s independence should be seen by Australians for what it is: an attempt to weaken the community’s trust in the public broadcaster. “If politicians determine the operation of the national broadcaster’s complaints system, they can influence what is reported by the ABC.” The Labor opposition criticised the “wasteful and duplicative inquiry” as “yet another attempt at political interference from this government”. “Meanwhile, the Morrison-Joyce government has overseen funding cuts to the ABC, misled the public about these cuts, attacked the ABC board in response to a Four Corners investigation, and failed to act on the recommendations of two inquiries into press freedom in the wake of AFP raids on journalists at the ABC and News,” Labor’s communications spokesperson, Michelle Rowland, said. In her strongest statement as chair, Buttrose said the inquiry, set up by Liberal senator Andrew Bragg on Thursday, “appears to be a blatant attempt to usurp the role of the ABC board and undermine the operational independence of the ABC”. “As senator Bragg is aware, in October the ABC Board initiated an independent review of the ABC’s complaints system by two eminent experts, Prof John McMillan, former commonwealth and NSW ombudsman and Jim Carroll, former SBS director – news and current affairs. The terms of reference for the review are comprehensive and wide-ranging.” Buttrose said the power to develop codes of practice for the ABC lay with the board, not the government, and that was a key pillar of the ABC’s editorial independence. Bragg announced the inquiry into the complaints handling arrangements of the ABC and SBS three weeks after the ABC established an external review and after he had been interviewed by reviewers about his concerns. “Instead of respecting the integrity of this process, the Senate committee under the leadership of senator Bragg has decided to initiate a parallel process,” Buttrose said. “I will leave it to senator Bragg to explain his motives, but the impact of this action is clear. As chair of the ABC board I am duty-bound to call out any action that seeks to undermine the independence of the national broadcaster. “A fundamental democratic principle underpinning the ABC has been its independence from interference by those motivated by political outcomes. “Politicians, like all citizens, are welcome to criticise anything they find wrong or objectionable that is published by the ABC, but they cannot be allowed to tell the ABC what it may or may not say. “Transparency and accountability are important, and the Senate committee performs a vital role. The ABC attends Senate estimates hearings on multiple occasions every year and answers hundreds of questions on notice.” It is the second time in 12 months the ABC has accused the Morrison government of political interference. In December 2020, Buttrose accused the government of a pattern of behaviour which “smacks of political interference” and earlier warned of an escalating campaign targeting the public broadcaster. She labelled claims it pushed agendas and campaigns against free enterprise as “malicious garbage”. She also threw her support behind a media freedom act and declared 2019’s Australian federal police raids “clearly designed to intimidate”. Buttrose accused the Morrison government of using News Corp Australia to attack its journalism last year after the Australian was briefed about a series of government questions for the broadcaster before the ABC received them. After Four Corners spoke to former Fox News insiders who claimed the right-wing channel became a propaganda outlet for the former president under the watch of Rupert Murdoch himself, News Corp went on the offensive, publishing 45 articles attacking the public broadcaster in two days. “The episode clearly violates the basic tenets of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s published standards by exhibiting bias and a failure to maintain any level of impartiality in the presentation of news and information,” a Fox News spokesperson said at the time. Bragg told Sky News Australia the ABC complaints system was akin to a kid “marking their own homework”. “At the moment if you lodge a complaint with the ABC it’s not dealt with by an independent person,” he said on Tuesday. “It’s a bit like Dracula and the blood bank. They basically mark their own homework.” Bragg suggested a “litany” of people were unhappy with the ABC including veterans, multicultural communities and Jewish groups. Bragg told Guardian Australia a parliamentary review was necessary because there had been “extensive community concern over a number of programs and posts and the associated complaints handling”. He denied the ABC review was external even though the board appointed two independent experts to undertake it. “It is not an external review, it’s an internal review and I believe the Senate inquiry will be a stronger mechanism,” he said.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting to you from Sydney, Australia. Nations will be asked to return next year to strengthen their targets on emissions cuts, which are so far inadequate, and to accelerate the phase-out of coal power and fossil fuel subsidies. Make sure to follow along with all our Cop26 developments as reactions will no doubt continue to pour in. After two long weeks of talks and negotiations, a deal has finally been struck that for the first time targets fossil fuels as the key driver of global warming, despite last-minute wrangling over coal objections. The goal of limiting global heating to 1.5C, the key threshold of safety set out in the 2015 Paris agreement, may still be within reach. Key talking points included provisions on phasing out coal, cutting greenhouse gas emissions and providing money to poor and vulnerable nations. The global community responded with both praise and disappointment as smaller island nations most vulnerable to the consequences of climate change fought to be heard and larger more developed nations agreed to take some compromises onboard. India defended its last-minute revision to reject a clause calling for the “phase out” of coal-fired power. The nation’s environment and climate minister, Bhupender Yadav, said the revision reflected the “national circumstances of emerging economies.” European Commission president Ursula don der Leyen declared the agreement “a step in the right direction”. UK prime minister Boris Johnson said “serious breakthroughs” were made. European Commission vice-president Frans Timmermans said humanity must now “learn to live within planetary boundaries” while praising the ambitions made. The UN secretary general António Guterres urged those who may be disappointed in the agreements made to “never give up” on the fight for climate action. “I know you might be disappointed. But we’re in the fight of our lives and this fight must be won,” he said. Cop26 president Alok Sharma called the outcome of discussions “a fragile win” while praising the “hard work” and “great cooperation” from negotiators, ministers and all the parties. US president Joe Biden said his administration’s Build Back Better framework “will be the largest effort to combat climate change in American history”. Amnesty International described the outcome a catastrophic failure and a betrayal to humanity. Canada’s minister of environment and climate change Steven Guilbeault pledged to do more with “public and private sectors are accelerating their actions” in the fight against climate change. Fiji’s prime minister Frank Bainimarama called the outcome a “compromise” and said the 1.5C target leaves Glasgow “battered, bruised, but alive”. The leader thanked Pacific negotiators for their “heroic effort” to secure a path away from coal and fossil fuel subsidies in the final deal. Tina Stege, climate envoy for the Republic of the Marshall Islands, one of the countries in the world most vulnerable to climate change, described the deal as “not perfect” but acknowledged elements of the agreement are “a lifeline” for the country. A senior Australian minister has welcomed the summit outcome but sidestepped questions on updating the 2030 emissions target as required under the Glasgow Cop26 agreement and instead quoted Shakespeare. Greg Hunt has refused to say whether Australia under a Scott Morrison government will update its 2030 emissions target as required under the Glasgow Cop26 agreement and instead quoted Shakespeare. Australian foreign minister and emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor said in a joint statement on Sunday: “Australia’s 2030 target is fixed and we are committed to meeting and beating it, as we did with our Kyoto-era targets.” However, Hunt dodged a series of questions when he appeared on the ABC’s Insiders program. He said Australia “welcomed the outcome at Glasgow” as “important progress for the world” but would not answer questions on whether Australia would update its 2030 target next year. Read the full story here. Australia failed to rise to the challenge during Cop26 talks, the nation’s Climate Council, an organisation comprised of some of the country’s leading climate scientists, health, renewable energy and policy experts, has said. Dr Simon Bradshaw, head of research at the organisation, says 140 countries lifted their game at Cop26 but Australia wasn’t one of them. “The federal government showed up empty-handed to a pivotal moment in the fight for our future,” he said. “They’ve let down our Pacific neighbours, as well as Australians who do not deserve to endure more frequent and severe bushfires, floods, droughts and heatwaves. “As our allies and trading partners rise to the climate challenge, we’re stuck in a polluting past with a handful of countries including Russia and Saudi Arabia.” Mexico has voiced its disappointment at the new agreement, saying they were “sidelined” in the deal. “We believe we have been side-lined in a non-transparent and non-inclusive process,” the nation’s envoy Camila Isabel Zepeda Lizama said in a statement to Reuters. “We all have remaining concerns but were told we could not reopen the text … while others can still ask to water down their promises.” However, the north American country said they would let the revised agreement stand. India’s last-minute revision to reject a clause calling for the “phase out” of coal-fired power has been supported by the nation’s environment and climate minister. Bhupender Yadav said the revision reflected the “national circumstances of emerging economies.” “We are becoming the voice of the developing countries,” he told Reuters, saying the pact had “singled out” coal but kept quiet about oil and natural gas. “We made our effort to make a consensus that is reasonable for developing countries and reasonable for climate justice,” he said, alluding to the fact that rich nations historically have emitted the largest share of greenhouse gases. Tina Stege, climate envoy for the Republic of the Marshall Islands, one of the countries in the world most vulnerable to climate change, has described the deal as “not perfect” but acknowledged elements of the agreement are “a lifeline” for the country. “This Package is not perfect. The coal change and a weak outcome on loss and damage are blows,” she said. “But it is real progress and elements of the Glasgow Package are a lifeline for my country.” Stege has pushed for stronger climate action by campaigning with the High Ambition Coalition (HAC), a grouping at the UN talks comprising many of the poorest and most vulnerable developing countries. “We are a small nation, but we have moral authority – our position on the frontline gives us that,” she said. “We need to raise our voice, as these changes will affect the whole world in time.” Fiji’s prime minister Frank Bainimarama has said the 1.5C target leaves Glasgow “battered, bruised, but alive”. The leader thanked Pacific negotiators for their “heroic effort” at Cop26 to secure a path away from coal and fossil fuel subsidies in the final deal. “The compromise we’ve struck will only count if nations now deliver,” he added. After more than two weeks of intense negotiations, here are the biggest achievements of the deal. Governments have been urged to strengthen their targets to cut emissions of planet-heating greenhouse gases by the end of next year, rather than every five years, as previously required. Targeting fossil fuels: The pact for the first time includes language that asks countries to reduce their reliance on coal and roll back fossil fuel subsidies. The wording was contentious, though, with India requesting that the deal call on countries to “phase down”, instead of “phase out” unabated coal. Payments to poor and vulnerable nations: The deal made some headway on the demands of poor and vulnerable countries that wealthy countries responsible for most emissions pay up. The deal, for example “urges developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from 2019 levels by 2025.” It also, for the first time, made mention of so-called “loss and damage” in the cover section of the agreement. Rules for global carbon markets: Negotiators also closed a deal setting rules for carbon markets, potentially unlocking trillions of dollars for protecting forests, building renewable energy facilities and other projects to combat climate change. Companies as well as countries with vast forest cover had pushed for a robust deal on government-led carbon markets in Glasgow, in the hope of also legitimising the fast-growing global voluntary offset markets. Under the accord, some measures would be implemented to ensure credits are not double-counted under national emissions targets, but bilateral trades between countries would not be taxed to help fund climate adaptation - that had been a core demand for less developed countries. Negotiators also reached a compromise that sets a cut-off date, with credits issued before 2013 not being carried forward. That is intended to ensure too many old credits don’t flood the market and encourage purchases instead of new emissions cuts. Canada’s minister of environment and climate change has pledged to do more. “We know we need to do more and that the world needs to do more. Canadians gave us a mandate to go further and faster in our fight against climate change and there is no doubt that we have our work cut out for us,” Steven Guilbeault said in a statement. “As someone who has been at this for almost 3 decades, I will say that we haven’t and won’t be able to win every single battle in the fight against climate change. But I want Canadians to know that I have never seen more momentum or desire to beat climate change. “The public and private sectors are accelerating their actions Canada is at the forefront and countries are working to keep 1.5C within reach. We can and we will pass down a planet to our kids and grandkids that is in better shape than how we found it. The fight continues in earnest and Canada will keep pushing.” What is ‘loss and damage’ and is it included in the final deal? The bitterly fought-over issue of compensation for poor countries over the destruction wreaked by the climate crisis, otherwise known as “loss and damage”, did not make it into the final deal. Vulnerable and poor countries, which did little to cause the climate crisis, sought a commitment from rich nations to compensate them for this damage. Although the deal did make some headway on the demands that wealthy countries responsible for most emissions pay up, developed countries have essentially just agreed to continue discussions on the topic. The deal, for example “urges developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties from 2019 levels by 2025.” Activist groups respond, dismissing the deal as “weak” and “cunningly curated”. Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, said: “It’s meek, it’s weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending - and that matters. “While the deal recognises the need for deep emissions cuts this decade, those commitments have been punted to next year. Young people who’ve come of age in the climate crisis won’t tolerate many more outcomes like this. Why should they when they’re fighting for their futures?” Tanya Steele, chief executive at WWF, said: “This summit has seen the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5C become the North Star guiding us all but a clear pathway is far from certain and we still have a long way to go.” Gabriela Bucher, international executive director of Oxfam, said: “Clearly some world leaders think they aren’t living on the same planet as the rest of us. It seems no amount of fires, rising sea levels or droughts will bring them to their senses to stop increasing emissions at the expense of humanity.” Rachel Kennerley, climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “The road to 1.5 just got harder when these talks should have cleared the way to making it a whole lot easier. “The UK government cunningly curated announcements throughout this fortnight so that it seemed rapid progress was being made ... Here we are though, and the Glasgow get-out clause means that leaders failed to phase out fossil fuels and the richest countries won’t pay historic climate debt.” Greenpeace Australia Pacific CEO David Ritter said that while the final text of the agreement is far from perfect, the message to Australia and other fossil fuel producers is clear. “The momentum is in the right direction,” Ritter said. “The task ahead is relentless pressure on the fossil fuel corporations and reckless governments such as Australia’s.” Australia’s minister for health, Greg Hunt, believes the UN climate change summit in Glasgow has made important progress for the world. “We welcome the outcome at Glasgow. It’s important progress for the world. It’s important protection for Australia,” Hunt, a former environment minister, told ABC’s Insiders program. Australia has set out a net zero emissions by 2050 target. It also set a 2030 target of minus 26 to 28% emissions but with a projection of minus 35%. The UN agreement also calls on all countries to return the negotiation table next year to set stronger 2030 targets. Repeatedly asked whether Australia would be updating this target, Mr Hunt said: “We’ve set our target. But what we’ll continue to do is update our projections.” “We’re doing it without higher electricity prices and higher petrol prices.” Police have arrested Extinction Rebellion protesters who blocked the lord mayor’s show in central London on Saturday. The demonstrators say Cop26 talks failed and called on City banks to stop funding fossil fuel projects The group put on a number of performances to express their disappointment with the Cop26 deal, including a ‘funeral procession’ they held for “failed COPs” outside an entrance to the summit in Finnieston Street. Footage shared on social media showed officers dragging demonstrators out of the road after they disrupted the procession. Environmental activists could be seen blocking the route in the City of London, while forcing riders on horseback and the new lord mayor’s golden state coach to stop. My colleague Tom Ambrose has the latest on that story here. “Bitterly disappointing,” Amnesty says. Here is the full statement from Amnesty International, provided to the Guardian, below. “It is bitterly disappointing to see the many loopholes in the COP26 agreement which bow to the interests of fossil fuel corporates rather than our rights. The agreement fails to call for the phasing out of all fossil fuels and all fossil fuel subsidies – demonstrating the lack of ambition and bold action needed at this critical time. In addition, the focus on carbon offsetting by rich countries, without even putting in place adequate environmental and human rights protection measures, ignores the threat to Indigenous peoples and communities who risk being evicted from their land to make way for these schemes. It is a hollow and unacceptable substitute for real zero emissions targets. “The decisions made by our leaders in Glasgow have grave consequences for all of humanity. As they have clearly forgotten the people they serve, the people must come together to show them what can be achieved. Over the next 12 months, we must stand together to call on our governments to take ambitious action on climate change that puts people and human rights at its centre. If we do not put our hearts and minds into solving this existential threat to humanity, we lose everything.” Amnesty International reacts to Cop26 outcome, calling it a catastrophic failure and a betrayal to humanity. “Leaders have catastrophically betrayed humanity at large by failing to protect people most affected by the climate crisis and instead caving into the interests of fossil fuel and other powerful corporations,” the organisation said. Amnesty’s Secretary General, Agnès Callamard added that the conference “failed to deliver an outcome” that protects the planet or people. “Instead it has betrayed the very foundations on which the United Nations was built – a pledge first not to countries, nor states, but to the people. Throughout their negotiations, our leaders have made choices that ignore, chip away or bargain away our rights as human beings, often discarding the most marginalised communities around the world as expendable collateral damage,” Callamard said. “Their failure to commit to maintaining the global temperature rise at 1.5°C will condemn more than half a billion people, mostly in the global south, to insufficient water and hundreds of millions of people to extreme heatwaves. Despite this disastrous scenario, wealthy countries have failed to commit money towards compensating communities suffering loss and damage as a result of climate change. Neither have they committed to providing climate finance to developing countries primarily as grants, a decision that threatens poorer countries – the least equipped to cope with the climate crisis - with unsustainable levels of debt. High-profile initiatives were planned for the crucial summit. But as it went on, the lack of engagement with the toughest issues started to tell. The Guardian’s environment correspondent Fiona Harvey provides insight into how Britain kept Cop26 alive. US president Joe Biden has weighed in following formal agreements being made, noting his administration’s Build Back Better budget reconciliation bill. Build Back Better focuses on a long list of social policies and programs ranging from education to healthcare to housing to climate. “The Build Back Better Framework will be the largest effort to combat climate change in American history—and through this effort, we’ll grow industries here in the United States; create good-paying union jobs; and combat environmental injustice,” Biden said. The Observer’s view on the Cop26 agreement is in. “Countries still lack the radical ambition to avert disaster – this accord goes nowhere near far enough,” the piece states. Read the editorial below. Watch Cop26 president Alok Sharma’s statement following the deal below. Cop26 president Alok Sharma has just addressed the media, calling the outcome of discussions “a fragile win”. Sharma praised the “hard work” and “great cooperation” from negotiators, ministers and all the parties. “I would say, however, that this is a fragile win,” he said in a statement. “We have kept 1.5 alive. That was our overarching objective when we set off on this journey two years ago, taking on the role of the COP presidency-designate. “But I would still say that the pulse of 1.5 is weak. “That is why, whilst we have reached, I do believe, a historic agreement. What this will be judged on, is not just the fact that countries have signed up, but on whether they meet and deliver on the commitments.” The UN secretary general urges those who may be disappointed in the agreements made to “never give up” on the fight for climate action. “I know you might be disappointed. But we’re in the fight of our lives &amp; this fight must be won,” António Guterres said in a statement over Twitter. “Never give up. Never retreat. Keep pushing forward. I am with you.” European Commission vice-president Frans Timmermans says following through with promises made from the talks means humanity must “learn to live within planetary boundaries” while praising the ambitions made. “If we do what we promise here, humanity will learn to live within planetary boundaries,” he told the conference. “We have almost 200 countries coming together on an agenda of such ambition that we have not seen since Paris. And I’ll give you one promise. It doesn’t stop here. It only starts.” Hi I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from my colleague Alan Evans to guide you through the final developments in Glasgow. After two weeks of talks, a climate deal has finally been struck which may take us a step closer to holding temperatures to a rise of 1.5C. It’s been a long ride for most of us, including COP26 president Alok Sharma. Asked about being emotional in the meeting, Sharma said he had six hours’ sleep in three days. “It is emotional - collectively we have achieved what I suspect very many people doubted until the last few days.” Stay tuned as the world reacts. UK prime minister Boris Johnson says “serious breakthroughs” have been made “We’ve kept 1.5 alive and made huge progress on coal, cars, cash and trees,” he said late Sunday. And while there is still so much that needs to be done to save our planet, we’ll look back at COP26 as the moment humanity finally got real about climate change.” Ursula don der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, has hailed COP26 as “a step in the right direction” in a statement listing the positive outcomes from the past fortnight. “COP26 is a step in the right direction. 1.5 degrees Celsius remains within reach; but the work is far from done,” she tweeted. “The least we can do now is implement the promises of Glasgow as rapidly as possible and then aim higher.” The European Commission president reiterated the three objectives, noting progress has been made. “First, to get commitments to cut emissions also during this decade, to keep within reach the goal to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees. “Second, to reach the target of 100 billion dollars per year of climate finance to developing and vulnerable countries. “And third, to get agreement on the Paris rulebook. “We have made progress on all three objectives,” she said. After two weeks (and a day) of talks and two years of preparations, Cop26 has finally come to an end with the adoption of what is being called the Glasgow Climate Pact - though the reaction is only just beginning. Here’s a roundup of what’s happened so far today: 25 hours after the original deadline, the gavel came down on an agreement that will see some progress on keeping the world habitable Language on “phasing out” coal was watered down to “phasing down” coal after a dramatic late intervention by India Countries will come back at Cop27 in Egypt next year with improved pledges Poor countries are angry that their demand for a “loss and damage facility” - essentially, compensation for climate-induced damage - did not make it into the final text Reaction to the pact has been mixed - some have hailed progress on key issues, while others have accused leaders of kicking the can down the road. Things are calming down at the SEC conference centre, but no doubt the reaction will continue to pour in. My colleague Samantha Lock will be taking over shortly, and you can reach her as samantha.lock@theguardian.com or find her on Twitter at @samantha__lock A representative of environmental NGOs is given one minute to speak. He is furious: he describes the agreement as “an utter betrayal of people”. He attacks leaders for offering “empty words”, accuses them of “prioritising profits over black and brown lives”, and says they have “utmost disdain for the science”. Joeri Rogelj, director of research at Imperial College London, said: “As a scientist and citizen of this planet, I see reasons to be proud, to be hopeful, and to be deeply concerned. I’m proud because never before has science featured so strongly in the Cop decisions. I’m hopeful because many decisions make critical steps forward. “Finally, I’m deeply concerned, because climate change is raging and is worsening each year we wait. The progress at Cop26 was the best the world was willing to do at this stage, but it is not enough, not by far. Global emissions need to decline, immediately, rapidly, and extremely urgently.” Sharma said that the appearance of loss and damage in the text indicated a newly collegiate approach. “For the very first time in any one of these processes, loss and damage has appeared in the text. And that again demonstrates both the change and the way that people are approaching this, being more collegiate. “And yes, there is work to be done and we will contribute to that. But I think the key issue is to recognise that loss and damage is an issue that deserves a lot of consideration.” Asked what the consequences should be for countries like Australia which suggested they might refuse the call back to the table next year, Sharma said simply that “all countries signed up to this and it’s an international agreement”. Sharma was asked how he felt about climate vulnerable communities for whom this deal was not enough. He said: “I’ve seen for myself that when people talk about 1.5 to keep alive, that’s precisely what it means. So I understand the sense of disappointment. But what was really important for me was to get a deal over the line.” “Of course I wish that we had managed to preserve the language on coal that was originally agreed. But nevertheless, we do have language on coal on phase down, I don’t think anyone at the start of this process thought that would be retained but it has”. “That is down to the flexibility and the goodwill shown by many of the parties here today.” He said he wanted to thank “ all the parties who showed such grace in agreeing to it.” Asked about being emotional during the meeting, he said he had had about six hours’ sleep in the past three days. “You know, it is emotional in the sense that, collectively as a team we have achieved what I suspect very many people doubted probably up until the last few days. So of course, it’s emotional but the hard work starts here”. Cop26 president Alok Sharma has been asked about countries who complained they were not able to reopen to text around coal. He explained: “Having heard about what was coming down the line, I thought it was important that we try and build some consensus. I apologise if people felt that the process that took place was was somewhat opaque. “I did go around and test the language with a whole range of groups and parties. It is because of the trust that the UK has built up in the past few years that people were able to accept the language at the end of the day, very reluctantly of course.” “The weakening of the text regarding coal and fossil fuels is a clear failure for humanity,” says the Panamanian delegate. “A failure to science, and a failure to future generations.” “Shame on us.” Patricia Espinosa, the executive secretary of the UN climate convention, under which Cop26 took place, said: Negotiations are never easy and while we seek an outcome that is acceptable to all, few return home completely satisfied. But this is the nature of consensus and inclusive multilateralism. We are disappointed the $100bn pledge remains outstanding and I call upon all donors to make it a reality as by next year. The road to climate action does not end in Glasgow. Despite [Cop26] accomplishments, we are still far off the trajectory of stabilising global temperature rise at 1.5C. It’s imperative we see more climate action this decade to achieve it. There can be no doubting the urgency of this task. This is a question of the long-term survival of humanity on this planet. India’s delegate delivers a statement on behalf of the Basic bloc of countries - Brazil, South Africa, India and China. He says they have shown “maximum flexibility” to arrive at an outcome that is acceptable to all, and that wealthy countries must now deliver on their pledges. He says they are deeply concerned about finances for adaptation, saying not enough public money is being pledged and that the private sector cannot supply the necessary funds. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has commented on the outcome of Cop26. Frans Timmermans of the EU, who has given several powerful and emotive speeches over the past days, has commented on the last-minute change of language on coal: He said: “Let’s be clear, I’d rather not have the change. I was very happy with the language we had.” But he added it was “like going from 24 carat gold to 18 carat, it’s still gold.” “We are now making concrete steps to eliminate coal … and that countries that are so dependent on coal are willing to be part of that agreement is astonishing.” The delegate from Egypt - where Cop27 will be held next year, in Sharm-el-Sheikh - thanks the UK hosts with a statement written in the form of a UN resolution, which is very much one for the wonks. At Cop26, EU vice president Franz Timmermans is quoting a famous Glaswegian, comedian Billy Connolly: “Connolly says Scotland has two seasons: July and winter.” Timmermans says he has not been able to verify that. But points to the “miracle transition” of Glasgow from the depressed post-industrial 1980s to the delightful city of today as evidence that transformations can happen, then says the work to reach 1.5C begins now. Kevin Rudd, former prime minister of Australia calls out the current government: “While Glasgow has shown the ambition mechanism at the heart of the Paris Agreement is beating, survival for those on the frontline of this climate crisis is still not certain. “Countries like my own which refused to update their 2030 targets have not simply been granted a leave pass to do nothing for another five years — they will now need to come back to the table by COP27 next year.” International activists for Extinction Rebellion have condemned the summit as a waste of time. Winnie, 30, from Brazil say: “The problem with COP26 is that the tone is exactly the same of the other 25. It is all about the optimistic promise of a better, and yet abstract, future. As if we still have time to think and plan and don’t yet have to act. Climate change effects were present in the lives of people of Global South even before the COP1! And yet, they keep talking about this unrealistic future.” Ornella, a representative from Argentina, said: “COP26 was a waste of time and resources. They didn’t listen to the best science available: we should act now to reduce emissions and there aren’t real commitments towards a drastic decrease of emissions caused by fossil fuels”. John Jonathan Olwenyi, a climate and environmental activist from Uganda, said: “The indigenous people who are most affected were not fully represented, there was inequality and imbalance at COP26 to me. I feel it was COP for the rich not the poor. It was yet another registered failure because the same promises that our leaders always make were repeated again.” “I think we can say credibly that 1.5C is alive. But its pulse is weak,” says Sharma. “History has been made here in Glasgow.” The delegates give him a warm round of applause - many rise to their feet. “This is real progress in keeping 1.5 within reach,” Sharma says but adds: “A gulf remains between short term targets and what is needed to reach the Paris goal. That work must start now” Alok Sharma thanking all the people who have made this happen now. “This multilateral process can deliver.” “This package sets course for the world to deliver on the promises made at Paris,” he says. Action Aid’s US director of policy and campaigns is not blaming India for the late watering down of the coal resolution: The prime minister of the host nation of Cop26, Boris Johnson, has yet to comment on the deal in Glasgow, but the leader of the Labour Party Keir Starmer has: It is welcome that an agreement has been reached at Cop26. There has been modest progress toward the challenges we face, which is important. But we have seen too many promises for tomorrow, not the action that the climate emergency demands today. Boris Johnson bears some responsibility for that. Glasgow has been a missed opportunity - a summit too often of climate delay not climate delivery. Of course global politics shape these summits, but the Prime Minister has hindered not helped. Boris Johnson never treated this summit with the seriousness it deserved, nor built the trust so critical to its success.” There has also been reaction from the first minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon: Glasgow should be very proud of the warm welcome that it has given to Cop26. The Glasgow Climate Pact does not contain everything that every country wanted and there is understandable disappointment that key issues were watered down in the final hours, but there can be no doubt that the Glasgow summit has made progress on some important issues. Over the course of Cop26 Scotland has put £2 million on the table for loss and damage and, in doing so, we have become the first developed country to step up. Our action has already galvanised $3 million dollars of philanthropic funds to add to our contribution and a further one million euros from Wallonia. Developed countries can no longer in good conscience ignore this pressing moral issue. The demand for financial support for loss and damage must be met. Alok Sharma now getting a warm round of applause after UN executive secretary Patricia Espinosa thanked him for all the hard work he has put in this year. Shout out to Glasgow too from Espinosa. She says how welcome they’ve all been made to feel and how often she has been told: “The people here are so nice. It really warmed our hearts”. Some reaction here from UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who says: “The approved texts are a compromise. They take important steps, but unfortunately the collective political will was not enough to overcome some deep contradictions.” Guterres refers in particular to the argument over the wording around fossil fuels and coal in the document, where the original intention to call for the eventual ‘phase out’ of coal was replaced at the last minute with ‘phase down’. “I reaffirm my conviction that we must end fossil fuels subsidies. Phase out coal.” But we do have some building blocks for progress, he says. “Finally, I want to close with a message of hope and resolve to young people, indigenous communities, women leaders, all those leading the climate action army. I know many of you are disappointed.” But, he says, “the path of progress is not always a straight line. Sometimes there are detours. Sometimes there are ditches.” “Cop27 starts now,” he concludes. My colleague Fiona Harvey has some more reaction on the issue of coal that has dominated this evening’s discussions with India’s late watering down of the final text. One of the most contentious clauses in the final decision was a vaguely worded resolution to accelerate the phase-out of coal and “inefficient” fossil fuel subsidies, which was weakened to “phase down” by India at the last minute. Energy experts are clear that phasing out coal completely will be essential to stay within 1.5C of global heating, but the opposition to the inclusion of the reference to a phase out – particularly from major coal-using countries including China, India and South Africa – showed how hard it will be to gain a global end to the dirtiest fossil fuel in time to avoid a 1.5C rise. Fatih Birol, executive director of the International Energy Agency, said that more than 40% of the world’s existing 8,500 coal plants would have to close by 2030, and no new ones could be built, to stay within the limit. He said: “I would very much hope that advanced economies take a leading role and become an example for the emerging world. If they don’t do it, if they don’t show an example for the emerging world they shouldn’t expect from emerging world to do it. Read the story in full Climate activist Greta Thunberg has given her verdict on Cop26 in Glasgow. Here’s a brief summary: Blah, blah, blah. But the real work continues outside these halls. And we will never give up, ever. Global Witness director of campaigns Seema Joshi, has said: The fight to save humanity is on. In the words of Ugandan activist Vanessa Nakate, anything above 1.5C global warming will be a “death sentence” in many parts of the world, with indigenous communities, people of colour and the poorest being hit hardest. It is difficult not to conclude the global political system is broken when over 500 fossil fuel lobbyists were given access to Cop26 and so many of those with the ideas and solutions for protecting our planet, including people whose lives and communities are already being devastated by the climate crisis, were left outside. We will not stop holding political leaders to account for the company they keep and the promises they make. Scottish Greens co-leader Patrick Harvie MSP, has said: The influence of fossil fuel companies is clear. We know that fossil fuel companies had more representation at this summit than any single nation, and the outcome has reflected that. The Scottish Greens, along with our colleagues in Europe and across the globe, will continue to push for more action. 1.5C cannot just be an ambition it is a necessity. We will keep fighting for greater action from now, to Cop27 in Egypt and beyond. Alden Meyer, senior associate, E3G: We saw a call here in Glasgow for emergency actions to deal with the existential threat of climate change, and some important initiatives were launched, but whether enough countries raise their 2030 ambition enough to keep 1.5C in reach [when they return in 2022] will be the real test of the success of this Cop26. As a lifelong optimist, I see the Glasgow outcome as half-full rather than half-empty. But the atmosphere responds to emissions -- not Cop decisions -- and much work remains ahead to translate the strong rhetoric here into reality.” José Gregorio Mirabal Díaz, elected leader of COICA (an umbrella organization that includes Indigenous leaders from all nine nations of the Amazon): We will always have the hope that we can stop the climate crisis with the support of all, but until now the extractivism development model has deceived the world. This must change now. If the solution is to protect nature to avoid climate change, this can only be done with giving land titles for Indigenous peoples, allowing us to self-demarcate our territories so that external invasions do not come, whether of oil, gold, mining or any type of extractive exploitation.” Some more reaction to the final agreement coming in now, collated by my colleague Damian Carrington. Laurence Tubiana, one of the architects of the 2015 Paris deal and now CEO of the European Climate Foundation: Paris is working. Despite the COVID-19 crisis, we have accelerated action, responded to the [scientists’] call to close the gap towards 1.5C, and coal is in the text. But there is a lot more to do. The commitments and claims of the first week on finance, forests, end of public finance for fossil fuel, methane and cars must now be translated into real policy and oil and gas production still to be addressed. This COP has failed to provide immediate assistance for people suffering now. I welcome the doubling of adaptation finance as climate impacts are every year stronger, [but] loss and damage must be at the top of the agenda for COP27. Vanessa Nakate, climate activist from Uganda: Even if leaders stuck to the promises they have made here in Glasgow, it would not prevent the destruction of communities like mine. Right now, at 1.2 degrees Celsius of global warming, drought and flooding are killing people in Uganda. Only immediate, drastic emissions cuts will give us hope of safety, and world leaders have failed to rise to the moment. But people are joining our movement. 100,000 people from all different backgrounds came to the streets in Glasgow during COP, and the pressure for change is building.” Mohamed Adow, director of Power Shift Africa: This summit has been a triumph of diplomacy over real substance. The outcome here reflects a COP held in the rich world and the outcome contains the priorities of the rich world. We are leaving empty handed [on loss and damage] but morally stronger and hopeful that we can sustain the momentum in the coming year to deliver meaningful support which will allow the vulnerables to deal with the irreversible impacts of climate change created by the polluting world who are failing to take responsibility.” On India’s late change to the text on ‘phasing down’ rather than ‘phasing out’ coal, Greenpeace International executive director Jennifer Morgan, has said: They changed a word but they can’t change the signal coming out of this COP, that the era of coal is ending. If you’re a coal company executive this COP saw a bad outcome. It’s in the interests of all countries, including those who still burn coal, to transition to clean renewable energy, and richer countries need to do more to support the shift. Our future depends on it. Ukraine has intervened to say they are disappointed but accept the text. The delegate from Antigua and Barbuda, speaking on behalf of many developing nations, demands their “grievance” is registered over the failure to establish a loss and damage facility - a formal mechanism for the delivery of funds to nations hit by climate impacts. She said the group had considered asking for changes to the text, but will not so as to reach agreement. Alok Sharma tells her the grievance will be recorded. Delegates gave a Alok Sharma a round of applause after his emotional apology. “I understand the deep disappointment but it’s vital that we protect this package,” he says calling for the revised text (with India’s change of wording on coal) to be agreed. Marshall Islands and Fiji Islands are both raising their astonishment and disappointment at the fact that, despite having been told that they could not reopen the deal, it has now, at this very late moment, been reopened and changed. The representative for Antigua and Barbuda seconds that point. All will, however, accept the text. Many countries are really angry about the last-minute watering down of the “phase out” to “phase down” of coal by India. Liechtenstein says they are “deeply disappointed”, and says it is not ambitious or in line with 1.5C. “But for the greater good we must swallow this bitter pill.” Mexico says: “We have been sidelined by a non-inclusive and non-transparent process.” The Marshall Islands are “profoundly disappointed” and Fiji “immensely disappointed. An emotional Alok Sharma apologises for the way the process has unfolded: “I am deeply sorry.” Switzerland has registered its profound disappointment about the decision to “water down” the language around fossil fuels and coal. “We don’t want to phase down coal, we want to phase out coal”. But they will still accept the text. Frans Timmermans says that it is disappointing to water down the language but this should not stop the text. The EU will work within the EU and with all partners to phase out coal. The partnership with South Africa should be a model. India has just asked to change the final text of the agreement to say, ‘phase down’ rather than ‘phase out’ unabated coal power. And then to ‘phase out’ inefficient fossil fuel subsidies while providing targeted support to the poorest and most vulnerable in line with national contributions and recognising the need for support for a just transition. Alok Sharma thanks the conference for agreeing “something meaningful for our people and our planet’ and that keeps 1.5C alive. Alok Sharma has just started the final session of Cop26 talks in Glasgow Friends of the Earth climate campaigner Rachel Kennerley, has said: The road to 1.5C just got harder when these talks should have cleared the way to making it a whole lot easier. The Glasgow get-out clause means that leaders failed to phase out fossil fuels and the richest countries won’t pay historic climate debt. With the Cop moment over, countries should break away from the pack in their race for meaningful climate action and let history judge the laggards. The UK, as a country with huge historical responsibility for emissions, can end support for a mega-gas project in Mozambique, pull the plug on the Cambo oil field, stop the new coal mine in Cumbria and drilling for oil in Surrey. After all the Prime Minister talked a big game at the beginning of the fortnight. Alok Sharma has just asked delegates to take their seats and says the final session will start shortly. As a final agreement appears near, there is praise from some commentators: But the lack of ‘loss and damage facility’ in the final agreement has been criticised. “Loss and damage” is the phrase for the destruction already being wreaked by the climate crisis on lives, livelihoods and infrastructure. And this from Oxfam International executive director Gabriela Bucher: Clearly some world leaders think they aren’t living on the same planet as the rest of us. It seems no amount of fires, rising sea levels or droughts will bring them to their senses to stop increasing emissions at the expense of humanity. The request to strengthen 2030 reduction targets by next year is an important step. The work starts now. Big emitters, especially rich countries, must heed the call and align their targets to give us the best possible chance of keeping 1.5 degrees within reach. Despite years of talks, emissions continue to rise, and we are dangerously close to losing this race against time. Developing countries, representing over 6 billion people, put forward a loss and damage finance facility to build back in the aftermath of extreme weather events linked to climate change. Not only did rich countries block this, all they would agree to is limited funding for technical assistance and a ‘dialogue’. This derisory outcome is tone deaf to the suffering of millions of people both now and in the future. For the first time, a goal for adaptation finance was agreed. The commitment to double is below what developing countries asked for and need, but if realised it will increase support to developing countries by billions. It’s painful that diplomatic efforts have once more failed to meet the scale of this crisis. But we should draw strength from the growing movement of people around the world challenging and holding our governments to account for everything we hold dear. A better world is possible. With creativity, with bravery, we can and must hold onto that belief. Reaction to what appears to be the final text now coming in. Greenpeace International executive director Jennifer Morgan said: It’s meek, it’s weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending. And that matters. While the deal recognises the need for deep emissions cuts this decade, those commitments have been punted to next year. Glasgow was meant to deliver on firmly closing the gap to 1.5C and that didn’t happen, but in 2022 nations will now have to come back with stronger targets. Cop26 saw progress on adaptation, with the developed countries finally beginning to respond to the calls of developing countries for funding and resources to cope with rising temperatures. There was a recognition that vulnerable countries are suffering real loss and damage from the climate crisis now, but what was promised was nothing close to what’s needed on the ground. This issue must be at the top of the agenda for developed countries as the Cop goes to Egypt next year. The line on phasing out unabated coal and fossil fuel subsidies is weak and compromised but its very existence is nevertheless a breakthrough, and the focus on a just transition is essential. The call for emissions reductions of 45% by the end of this decade is in line with what we need to do to stay under 1.5C and brings the science firmly into this deal. But it needs to be implemented. The offsets scam got a boost in Glasgow with the creation of new loopholes that are too big to tolerate, endangering nature, Indigenous Peoples and the 1.5C goal itself. The UN Secretary General announced that a group of experts will bring vital scrutiny to offset markets, but much work still needs to be done to stop the greenwashing, cheating and loopholes giving big emitters and corporations a pass. Meanwhile, on the topic of fossil fuels, in London today police have been arresting Extinction Rebellion protesters blocking the lord mayor’s show. Demonstrators say Cop26 talks have failed and called on City banks to stop funding fossil fuel projects. Footage shared on social media showed officers dragging demonstrators out of the road after they disrupted the procession. Miranda Duncombe, a mother and member of the XR Families group, told PA Media: Cop has failed to deliver the transformative changes needed to keep us at 1.5C of warming, a complete betrayal of our children. If the City of London was a country, it would be the ninth largest emitter in the world. The City’s banks and asset managers provide loans and investments for the projects and companies that are killing us. It seems the final agreement will be known as the ‘Glasgow Climate Pact’... It’s 10 pages in total if you fancy reading it. The wording on fossil fuels (I’ve added the bold formatting) is as follows: ‘Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies, and the adoption of policies, to transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the deployment of clean power generation and energy efficiency measures, including accelerating efforts towards the phase-out of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, recognizing the need for support towards a just transition.’ Alok Sharma concludes his remarks saying the “text is imperfect” but that there is “consensus and support for it”. He then adjourns the meeting to give everyone a little break, but promises to start the final session very shortly. His advisor has just posted on Twitter confirming that the next session will be the closing one of the conference. Cop26, it seems, will not be extending into Sunday. Time to pack your bags and grab a last souvenir folks (in Glasgow). I can wholeheartedly recommend veggie haggis. Alok Sharma now wrapping up the session. As my colleagues have reported, it appears an agreement is imminent. I hope we can leave this conference united having delivered something significant for our people and planet together as one. These outcomes constitute an extremely delicate balance. If any of us tug at that it will all unravel. That is the sentiment I have heard this afternoon. Nicaragua says it will support the draft agreement. Guatemala also lends its support, saying it takes a “glass half full” perspective on it. The New Zealand delegate is downbeat and calls the agreement “the least worst outcome”. He says: Is it enough to hold temperatures to 1.5C? I don’t think I can say it does? But he says more talking and delay would be worse and supports the text. Oil-rich Iran’s delegate is not happy with the landmark text in the Cop26 deal that requires the phase out of fossil fuel subsidies. “As a developing nation we need to use fossil fuels for economic development. We request you modify this paragraph.” I suspect that is not going to happen, given the widespread support for the text from other nations. As negotiations come to an end at Cop26, what has been the perspectives of the thousands of activists who have been in Glasgow over the past two weeks of talks? The Guardian spoke to activists on the ground to find out their verdicts on the conference. The representative for Trinidad and Tobago believe the package represents balance: there has been progress on adaptation finance, and on returning to the table next year, although the moves on loss and damage could have been stronger. He finishes by calling for everyone to return home now to begin implementation. Hear hear! Indonesia, similiarly, sees some flaws but is prepared to support the text in the “spirit of collaboration” which has been mentioned by so many of the other delegates. The Colombian delegate says: “This agreement is keeping 1.5C alive, although it is not perfect.” That goal - keeping that temperature target within reach and avoiding the worst impacts of the climate crisis - was the key ambition of the UK presidency of Cop26. The Iceland representative says that there is a lot of encouragement here today, and most importantly there is hope. “We’re keeping 1.5 alive,” he tells the plenary, and it will be continued in the spirit of cooperation. “The next time we meet, we’ll do better, and the time after that, even better.” After him, the representative for Chile points out that the negotiations have been under way for months and now is too late to make substantive changes. It is imperfect, he says. But Chile supports it. With the end seemingly in sight, the reaction to Cop26 has already started: A number of country representatives – Nigeria, Palau, the Philippines and Turkey – have now all spoken saying that although they see imperfections, they broadly support the text. The Japanese delegate is enthusiastic by the standards of COP speeches. He lauds the “tremendous results” here in Glasgow, and calls it a “brave new start”. The developing nations do not see it that way. Alok Sharma now politely asking countries only to make new points - he wants to get this done. The Maldives delegate delivers a bittersweet speech in accepting the deal. It is an “incremental step forward [and] not in line with the progress needed. It will be too late for the Maldives”. “This deal does not bring hope to our hearts,” she said. “We are putting our homes on the line while other [nations] decide how quickly they want to act. The Maldives implores you to deliver the resources we need to address the crisis in small islands in time.” “This is a matter of survival.” Brazil, widely seen as an environmental villain under its president, Jair Bolsonaro, talked of “crossing the finish line” – we must be getting close to the end of COP. The representative said they did not get what they wanted in the carbon trading rules, but that while the deal “is not perfect, it is workable”. John Kerry speaks for the US now. He points out that if it’s a good negotiation then all the parties will be uncomfortable, and this, he thinks, has been a good negotiation. The US is poised to accept the text: “This is good, this is a powerful statement.” He adds assurance that the US will engage constructively in dialogue on loss and damage and on adaptation. “It is time to come together for our future generations in a way that many of us really never thought we’d have a way to do,” he says. There is pretty unanimous backing for the text, meaning Cop26 is looking likely to finish today. Grenada’s delegate calls the text “imperfect” but calls for it to be adopted. “It is the best chance at this moment to keep 1.5C – we must move forward today. Then let us continue the fight tomorrow and in the days, months and years ahead until the job is done.” Australia have spoken now (they won fossil of the conference yesterday) and said that they support the text. They highlight a few things that will need to be discussed – they’re particularly concerned about transparency, and making sure that rules are finalised. But they look forward, they say, to working with others. Peru, who spoke just before them, have also accepted the text – they are also speaking on behalf of Chile, Colombia and a number of other Latin American countries. Bhutan’s delegate describes the huge loss and damage harming her country already and her disappointment over the lack of a loss and damage facility. But, she says: At this hour it is the time to unite around our shared commitment [to act on climate change]. The [deal] is not enough but we can take an incredibly important step forward today. The representative from Bolivia says they still have issues and deep concerns about the text, but they have reflected deeply and “in the spirit of compromise we are able to support the document”. He goes on to raise a number of concerns, particularly around loss and damage. He says, also, that net zero is an illusion. “Real cuts are needed.” Costa Rica keeps it simple: “It’s not the perfect package, but it’s the possible package.” The representative raises a couple of points. But this is a deal, she says, they can live with. Switzerland grumbles but says it will accept the deal on the table in the spirit of compromise. “It is not abnormal that we have a COP text that leaves everyone a little unhappy, but we are afraid people are more than a little unhappy.” Gabon’s delegate is concerned. “We do not have a guarantee within the $100bn [finance] that the debt burden on [developing countries] will not increase.” He wants grants, not loans. He also says plans for a proportion of carbon trading money to go to vulnerable nations are now weaker than the compromise agreed in 2019 in Madrid. “Africa’s red line on share of proceeds has been rubbed out,” he says. The real issue for Africa is scaled-up finance for adaptation and loss and damage, he says. “Africa risks being destabilised by climate change. It is already in certain countries a matter of life and death. Some nations are failing.” We cannot go home without reliable finance, he says, adding that he needs more reassurance about proposed voluntary measures. A major hold-up at the Cop26 talks appears to be over Article 6, the Paris agreement provisions on carbon trading which wrecked agreement at the last Cop negotiations in Madrid in 2019. This is disappointing, as multiple parties told the Guardian in recent days that a deal on Article 6 was close and that key parties were prepared to compromise in the interests of getting a deal through. Now many are pointing the finger of blame at a single delegate: Kevin Conrad, who represents Papua New Guinea. The issue is over REDD+, a system of carbon credits awarded for keeping forests standing. But these credits are based on avoided deforestation, which is controversial to many, and some argue that any carbon trading system under Article 6 should be more stringent in how it applies to such offsets. Nat Keohane, a respected observer from the US, said: “[Conrad] is trying to blow up a strong Art 6 deal.” Greenpeace also piled in: “Papua New Guinea – represented by New York lawyer Kevin Conrad is holding up the whole plenary at COP26. PNG want REDD+ credits put back into Article 6 rules on offset markets. REDD+ offsets are avoided deforestation – so a company might say they can keep polluting because they’ve paid for a forest that would have been chopped down to be saved. It doesn’t add up.” Greenpeace said: “REDD+ was taken out of the Article 6 text overnight after countries who wanted to close the loopholes managed to get this offsetting scam out. REDD+ has done next to nothing to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions or rein in the big food and agribusiness companies driving deforestation - and has faced severe criticism from Indigenous leaders.” Conrad told the Guardian in an email: “Dirty tricks. I don’t own any tropical forests, am not involved in any forest projects, and don’t have any financial interests. I do manage a non-profit that provides free capacity building and tools to comply with the Paris Agreement. We are audited annually. What I am fighting for is credit for the developing countries that have actually reduced rates of deforestation. And most countries do want to include forests.” An assessment on what we’ve heard so far in this session from an experienced climate reporter for the Thomson Reuters Foundation: The representatives from Fiji and the Marshall Islands both say that although they have caveats and reservations, the text also contains tangible progress. The Fiji representative points to the inclusion of fossil fuels and coal, while the Marshall Island representative notes the financing for adaptation has been doubled. This is important, writes my colleague Damian Carrington, the delegate from Antigua and Barbuda, representing AOSIS (small island states) and G77 + China (130 nations) has conceded their demand for a “loss and damage facility” will not be in the final deal. “We are extremely disappointed and we will express our grievance in due course.” But she said they will move ahead in the spirit of compromise. Timmermans himself has now spoken. “Embrace this text” he implores delegates, speaking on behalf of the European union. He is concerned that people still want to change a sentence here and there but he says that over the last few months the presidency of Cop26 has listened to everyone and the text reflects that respectful listening process. “Think of one person you know who will still be alive in 2050,” he says, asking people to put aside national concerns. “We’re only at the beginning” on finance and loss and damage he concedes. “But don’t kill this text.” The Tuvalu negotiator has just shown delegates a photo of his grandchildren as he spoke at Cop26, referencing a similar gesture yesterday made by the European Commission’s Vice President Frans Timmermans [see post in yesterday’s live blog by my colleague Damian Carrington] Glasgow has delivered a message of hope and ambition,” say the Tuvalu representative. He warns that delegates must not act here on the basis of whether their actions will get them reelected at home. Acting on climate change is “critical to the survival of our communities”. South Africa’s delegate joins India and China in criticising paragraph 36 in the text - that is the potentially landmark part that mentions a phase out of coal and fossil fuel subsidies for the first time ever in a COP text. South Africa’s delegate does not like it: “One size fits all is not a good solution,” he says. He asks to be heard, but does not specify alternative text. Guardian columnist George Monbiot has left Cop26 unhappy at what he has seen, he says: If they were serious about preventing more than 1.5C of heating and, potentially, systemic environmental collapse, they would decide to burn no more fossil fuels after 2030, and to launch today an emergency programme of fullscale economic transition. But they are not serious. India’s delegate is not happy: “I am afraid consensus remains elusive ... Climate justice is the key to solving climate change.” India’s delegate is pointing to how rich nations have benefited from fossil fuels: “They have enabled some parts of the world to attain a high standard of life” He says: “Every country has the right to its share of the carbon budget.” He says India and other developing countries should be able to use fossil fuels responsibly and says fossil fuel subsidies can be useful, such as gas replacing solid fuels in indoor cooking. He is kicking back against the mention of coal and subsidies in the text. The representative from Tanzania has made a strong call – supported by Mali – to include the term “systematic observation” in the text. This is basically good data and information on weather, etc, in order to help with adaptation and support early warning systems, particularly in countries that are suffering very badly from extreme weather events. An Associated Press reporter has said this leaflet was left lying outside the national delegation offices at the conference. China’s delegate has now taken the floor and says: “The text is by no means perfect but we do not intend to reopen the text.” He does suggest some edits, stressing the need for “balance” – that usually means one part of the deal is stronger or weaker than China wants. “We should meet each other halfway,” he says. The Guinea representative has just taken the floor and spoke on behalf of G77 + China, saying that the spirit of the negotiations has been extremely good, with solidarity and compromise sought. Although they were extremely disappointed with some of the paragraphs on loss and damage, and felt the text was very far from the concrete calls for a facility to manage this issue, in the spirit of compromise they would view this as steps in the right direction. Last bit from Sharma: Please ask yourselves, whether ultimately, these texts deliver for all our people and our planet. We know that the climate crisis is a truly global challenge, and ensuring the cop 26 outcomes match the scale and urgency of our situation is our shared responsibility. So I invite you to join together this afternoon to bring this collective effort to a successful conclusion. It is clear Sharma has no interest in Cop26 taking the record for the latest finish time, currently held by Cop25, which took place in Madrid in 2019, finishing just before 2pm on the Sunday. Here is the list of closing times for every previous Cop conference dating back to 1995 in Berlin, in order of lateness. Sharma continues: We have arrived at what I believe is the moment of truth. And this is the moment of truth for our planet, for our children, and our grandchildren. And you all know that the world is willing us on to be bold, to be ambitious. And so much rests on the decisions that we collectively take today. These texts are now clean. And we believe that they are the product of a transparent, inclusive and policy driven process, and has been founded on listening and the search for consensus. As the presidency, we have effectively had to take into account and balance the views of almost 200 parties. And I completely understand that parties sometimes have different priorities. And yet, we all ultimately have to sign up to the same agreement. “We are at the moment of truth,” Sharma tells delegates. He says the “texts are clean” – meaning all the bracketed options have been taken out. But that does not mean the deal is done. Nations have to agree to the text. He asks countries to ask themselves not how they can leverage this critical moment in the talks to their advantage, but: is the deal enough? Alok Sharma has just started the “informal stocktake” on the floor of the Cop26 summit, delayed from this morning, where nations get to air their problems with the latest draft agreement text. Sharma urges delegates to approve the latest agreement text and says he wants to finalise the talks today. My colleagues Damian Carrington and Bibi van der Zee are at the conference to keep us updated about what is being said. China’s chief climate negotiator, Xie Zhenhua has been putting on a positive face for the cameras this afternoon. So let’s hope that’s a good sign of an agreement. Tom Levitt here taking over the live blog throughout the rest of the afternoon. You can email me at tom.levitt.casual@theguardian.com, or send me a message on Twitter at @tom_levitt. Well, 14:30pm has been and gone. The plenary has still not started but the UNFCCC live stream shows UN climate envoy John Kerry locked in talks with China’s top negotiator Xie Zhenhua. While we are waiting for the plenary to begin, take a read of Damian Carrington‘s analysis of disagreement over “loss and damage” in Glasgow. Here is an extract. “Loss and damage” is the phrase for the destruction already being wreaked by the climate crisis on lives, livelihoods and infrastructure. It has become a critical issue at Cop26, with the potential to make or break an ambitious deal in Glasgow. Vulnerable and poor countries, which did little to cause the climate crisis, arrived with a determination to win a commitment from rich nations to compensate them for this damage. It has become perhaps the most bitterly fought-over issue of all, with the low income nations believing they have a moral right to this money – some call it compensation or reparations. Rich parties such as the US and EU are very reluctant to comply, fearing exposure to unlimited financial liabilities. Read more here. The informal stocktaking plenary has been postponed until 2.30pm Glasgow time. The Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, said: “I think it would be useful to allow a little more time for discussions to take place.” The plenary was meant to start at 12 noon, but the delegates formed huddles to discuss the most critical sticking points, very likely to include the gulf between the positions of rich and poor nations on money for loss and damage caused by climate impacts – called reparations by some – and rules for carbon markets to prevent loopholes. Big huddles formed around the US delegate John Kerry and the EU vice-president Franz Timmermans: both are under pressure from the 130 nations calling for action on loss and damage. For the media, who are not close enough to hear what is being said, it was international diplomacy as a mime act. During his statement, Sharma insisted the meeting would finish today: “It is my sincere intention to close the Cop this afternoon. We will close.” He said the deal currently on the table could not satisfy everyone but was a balanced package: “It really moves things on for everyone.” Contrary to the wishes of the Cop president, Alok Sharma, the informal stocktaking session has still not started in Glasgow. He has twice asked negotiators to sit down but two main huddles on the floor of the Cairn Gorm plenary continue to grow in size. John Kerry is at the centre of one while the EU’s Frans Timmermans is holding court in another. We may not be able to hear what is being said on the floor but overnight, the EU, US and UK have faced accusations from developing countries of resisting a loss and damage facility in the Glasgow agreement. Mohamed Adow, the director of the energy and climate thinktank Power Shift Africa, said: On the latest draft text, loss and damage funding is missing. It’s not an accident. The rich world don’t want to pay up for the damage they’ve caused. We’ve made loss and damage central to the multilateral process. It is now the third pillar in the climate talks in a way the rich, polluting, world cannot ignore. However, we didn’t get the facility that the vulnerable countries need to deal with the loss and damage they already face. Instead, the rich world wanted to force on them a never ending talk shop in the name of a ‘dialogue’. The developed countries; the EU, US and UK, resisted. It’s important that developing countries don’t fall into the trap of an endless dialogue and are better off deleting all mention of unnecessary dialogues from the text. Just in case you thought any of the arguments playing out in Glasgow were new... Alok Sharma has asked the plenary to take their seats twice but informal conversations are still going on between negotiators. John Kerry spoke with the EU’s Frans Timmermans a short while ago. The US climate envoy has also been in deep conversation with the negotiator for Guinea, who represents the G77 + China group. Good afternoon, I’ll be guiding you through developments in Glasgow over the next couple of hours. First, if you would like to watch proceedings, here is the link on the UNFCCC’s website. We will also have a stream at the top of the live blog shortly. Yesterday’s session was gripping and, at times, emotional as negotiating blocs explained what the climate crisis meant for them while reacting to the draft text. The European Commission’s vice president Frans Timmermans held up a picture of his one-year-old grandson as he spoke. We should expect more of the same this afternoon as negotiators discuss the third draft of the Cop26 text. A key sticking point in Glasgow is how the global north supports developing countries to adapt to the consequences of global heating they are not responsible for while also helping them limit their own emissions. Saleemul Huq, the director of the International Center for Climate Change and Development, lays out the disagreement and tension. The Guardian’s environment team will bring you reaction from the plenary as it happens. I’m now handing the live blog over to my colleague Patrick Greenfield for the afternoon. He will cover the presidency’s stocktaking plenary which was due to start at 12pm, but is running an hour late – nothing like some last-minute urgency to get things over the line. Negotiations at the Cop26 summit look set to continue, as countries wrangle over a third draft text that summarised the outcome of the most important climate conference since the Paris agreement of 2015. The third iteration of the draft outcome, known as a cover decision, was published on Saturday morning. Negotiating teams then had to confer with senior officials in their countries’ capitals, as some of the decisions required of them are likely to require high-level approval from governments. Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister who is president of the Cop (conference of the parties under the 1992 Framework Convention on Climate Change, the parent treaty to the Paris accord), has been engaged in a round of frantic shuttle diplomacy with the 190-odd nations represented. Sharma joked at a press conference on Thursday that his calm demeanour had earned him the nickname No Drama Sharma, one borrowed from Barack Obama. All of his calm is likely to be needed as fractious countries bombard him in the closing hours with demands for changes to the draft, in line with their country’s policies. What no one can say at this stage is when the fortnight-long conference might finally end. Previous conferences have gone on late into Saturday night, or even later. The last Cop, presided over by Chile but held in Madrid in December 2019, finally wrapped up on Sunday afternoon. Delegates are hoping to avoid such an over-run this time. The cover decision has legal standing under the Paris accord, but is not in itself a treaty. Its legal language may appear limp, with its plethora of carefully graded imperatives: “urges”, “requests”, “invites” and “calls upon”. Whether “urges” is stronger or weaker than “requests” was the subject of a fierce Twitter debate on Friday, for instance. The Paris agreement was held up for hours on a frigid night on the outskirts of the French capital in December 2015 as countries disputed the appearance of a “shall” in the text when some countries wanted a “should”. The most substantive issue of this text is: will countries agree to come back next year to re-examine their national commitments to cutting greenhouse gas emissions, with a view to strengthening them where necessary, in line with the goal of limiting global heating to 1.5C? The three architects of the Paris agreement – Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister who presided over the talks; Laurence Tubiana, his chief French diplomat; and Christiana Figueres, the UN’s climate chief at the time – told the Guardian they viewed it as essential for countries to return next year with such a view in mind. For the coming hours these words will be pored over, mauled, unwritten and rewritten many times in airless rooms by exhausted masked negotiators in Glasgow. Katie White, director of advocacy and campaigns at WWF UK, said despite amendments to the Cop26 cover agreement, the negotiations have put the world “in a better position than we have ever been in terms of political action”. She said this had been galvanised by action from business and pressure from citizens, adding that the discourse is now “politically anchored” around the goal of 1.5C, and not “well below 2C”. Speaking at a press conference at the summit in Glasgow, she said: We are pleased that the UK presidency has championed nature and we are pleased that the link between nature and 1.5C is there (in the text) and we can’t hope to meet 1.5C without nature restoration. She said there is “still a lot to be done” and urged the UK presidency to listen to the voices of the most vulnerable countries “who here, in this forum, have the opportunity to speak up”. White said that over the next 12 months, the UK government must focus on “delivery, delivery, delivery”, saying it will “set the stage for even greater ambition” at the next Cop. A scientist’s reaction to the current state of play at Cop26 – the world is now in “damage limitation mode”. Prof Richard Betts MBE, from the University of Exeter and Met Office Hadley Centre, and director of the technical report for the third UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA3), said: We’re now in damage limitation mode. Despite some progress on promises to cut emissions and protect forests, we’re still not yet on track to limit global warming to low levels, so adaptation to current and locked-in climate change is now even more urgent. We’ve already made some kinds of extreme weather more likely or more severe, and we’ve now committed the world to some level of long-term rises in sea level, so we will need to deal with these consequences. We could still avoid further increases in these impacts with greater ambition on emissions cuts, but until we completely stop building up carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, we will still continue the heating of the climate and causing ever-more severe risks and impacts. Mohammed Adow, director of climate thinktank @PowerShftAfrica and a member of Climate Action Network International, is calling out the UK and the developed world for their failure to deliver the financing the developing world so desperately needs. “If you had your house burned by fires or destroyed by sea level rise, the [proposal] the rich world wanted was only going to pay for the expert to assess the damage, but not to pay you to rebuild your house,” he said this morning, soon after the latest draft text was published. Adow warned last night that “vulnerable countries can’t afford to leave Cop26 with this current version of the text on loss and damage”. This morning he has pointed out: “The country that is actually [running] the talks, the UK, actually cut aid to climate-hit countries, just before we got to Glasgow. So it has little credibility when it comes to getting the rich world, who are historically responsible for causing climate change, to create a facility and increase funding for loss and damage.” A stocktaking plenary with Cop26 president Alok Sharma is due to start at 12pm, where we’ll find out how countries feel about the draft text published this morning and what changes they want to see. Stay tuned... Against a bright blue sky, Extinction Rebellion protesters have processed with a piper through the gravestones of Glasgow’s Necropolis before lying in front of tombs declaring Cop26 and all the summits prior to it as a failure. Karen, from the Isle of Barra, said: We are here grieving for a planet that has been sacrificed by the failure and stupidity of Cop26. The bare minimum needed from Cop26 were commitments to leaving oil in the ground and an immediate halt to fossil fuel funding. Anything less than that is idiocy. We know exactly what we need to do and we’re not doing it. In an interview published by China’s state-run news agency, Xinhua, the country’s environment minister has criticised the failure of countries to reach an agreement over finance for developing nations. Zhao Yingmin, part of the Chinese delegation at Cop26, said wealthier nations had failed to deliver on the $100bn promised during the Copenhagen climate change conference in 2009 to help developing nations strengthen their resilience to climate change, and that meant trust had been damaged. He said: Twelve years on, the developed countries have failed to honour their commitments, which has tremendously jeopardised political mutual trust. The developed countries have not yet shown their sincerity and confidence in delivering their pledges. Therefore, both sides are still negotiating. It seems that more efforts are still needed. He also said it was “very unreasonable and unfair” that developing countries had submitted ambitious Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), in line with the Paris agreement, while developed countries had failed to deliver financial support. There is lots of anger around this morning on the language on loss and damage in the new text, with many feeling the current stance is too weak. Some strong words from Tasneem Essop, the executive director of Climate Action Network, who described that latest text as a “clear betrayal” by rich nations: The latest draft text from Cop26 is a clear betrayal by rich nations – the US, the EU and the UK – of vulnerable communities in poor countries. By blocking the AOSIS and G77+ China proposal, representing 6 billion people, on the creation of a Glasgow Loss and Damage Finance Facility, rich countries have once again demonstrated their complete lack of solidarity and responsibility to protect those facing the worst of the climate impacts. We urge developing countries to act in the interest of their citizens and stand strong in the face of bullies This tweet from Saleemul Huq (director of the International Center for Climate Change and Development) sums up how the issue has become such a deal breaker at this Cop. Leaders are now tackling two problems; how to prevent global heating and how to deal with damage that has already been done by the climate crisis. Greenpeace International’s executive director, Jennifer Morgan, has said the retention of the line about fossil fuels in the draft is a “breakthrough” but warned some countries could try to get it removed in talks today. “The key line about fossil fuels is still in the text. It’s weak and compromised, but it’s a breakthrough, it’s a bridgehead and we have to fight like hell to keep it in there and have it strengthened. Today’s plenary could witness a defining moment with a clutch of countries seeking to strike that line from the deal and dilute plans to force nations to come back next year with better emissions plans. “The coal and subsidies language now includes a reference to a just transition and that is very welcome. Fossil fuel interests should be put on notice, the deal on the table is weak but if they gut it they’ll have to answer to the young, to people on the frontline of climate impacts and ultimately to history. Today the eyes of the world are on Glasgow and the loudest voices in the room need to be the nations now fighting for their lives. “Developed countries, especially the United States, still need to step up on finance, throwing their weight behind the vulnerable nations pushing for increased public adaptation funding and recognition of the loss and damage they’re suffering from climate impacts. Even at this late hour president Biden should send a signal to his team in Glasgow that they shouldn’t block public adaptation funding and finance for loss and damage from richer nations to developing countries threatened by rapidly rising temperatures.” It’s a beautiful sunny day in Glasgow. At the entrance to the SEC, many people are taking pictures on their way in – hoping, presumably, that there will be a deal today and that this will be the last time they have to see this view from this direction. For two weeks this place has been humming with energy, people rushing up and down the halls purposefully, or talking into phones with urgent expressions. There are far fewer here now, and the energy is much quieter. At the coffee stands, the barista says everyone she’s been serving is absolutely knackered. She started her shift at 8am, but the person she took over from told her there were people here from 5am. They’re waiting for the final deal, and then they’ll start to strike the stand. The new draft text has relatively few changes, showing that the 196 countries at Cop26 are narrowing down on the most contested issues that will make or break a strong agreement. The call for the phaseout of coal and fossil fuel subsidies remains, which is positive as many observers thought fossil fuel-rich nations would get it deleted. It has been slightly softened again, with “accelerating efforts towards” inserted before “coal phase out”, rather than a straight call for a phase out. That may be the price of keeping the clause in - remember no Cop document has ever named fossil fuels. Also added to this section is “recognising the need for support towards a just transition”, highlighting that funds may be needed to retrain fossil fuel industry workers. The all-important “ratchet” remains - this requests nations to return to the next Cop in 2022 with more ambitious pledges to cut emissions. The current ones to 2030 are forecast to lead to a catastrophic 2.4C of global heating. The most substantial changes are on “loss and damage” - the compensation vulnerable and poor countries want for the destruction already being cause by the climate crisis they did little to cause. It is perhaps the most bitterly fought section of all, with low income nations believing they have a moral right to this money and rich nations like the US and EU fearing exposure to unlimited financial liabilities. The new text introduces a specific mention of “funds”: Decides that the Santiago network will be provided with funds to support technical assistance for the implementation of relevant approaches to avert, minimize, and address loss and damage The previous text said “will be supported by a technical assistance facility to provide financial assistance”. It’s a small change, but a group of 130 nations, called the G77 + China and representing 85% of the world’s population, have been demanding the inclusion of text to establish a “loss and damage facility”, a specific delivery mechanism for funding, rather than more vague words about assistance in setting something up. The text also says: 73 - Decides to establish the [NAME] dialogue between parties, relevant organizations, and stakeholders to discuss the arrangements for the funding of activities to avert, minimise and address loss and damage associated with the adverse impacts of climate change to take place at the first sessional period of the SBI, concluding at its 60th session This gives a specific timetable for dedicated work on loss and damage. These are concessions from rich nations, but it may not be enough. The G77 + China have been clear loss and damage is a critical issue for them. Saleemul Huq, a veteran from Bangladesh of every Cop, said: While Mohamed Adow of thinktank Power Shift Africa said: There has also been a little movement on funding for adaptation - preparing for climate impacts like floods and droughts. The new text specifies the date - 2019 - from which the money must be doubled by 2025. That implies about $40bn a year. Saleemul Huq, of the International Center for Climate Change and Development, is also not happy with the current draft: Climate analyst Ed King is monitoring how far the conference is overrunning: At the time I’m sending this [9.59am on Saturday], Cop26 is in 12th position in the league table of Cop closing times, about to overtake Cop10 in Buenos Aires (which wrapped up at 10.58 on a Saturday morning). Will Glasgow beat Paris and Copenhagen, or break Madrid’s shameful record, by closing later than 13.55 on Sunday? Oxfam have responded to the new draft text. Tracy Carty, head of the charity’s Cop26 delegation, said: ““Here in Glasgow, the world’s poorest countries are in danger of being lost from view, but the next few hours can and must change the course we are on. What’s on the table is still not good enough. “We need the strongest possible outcome to ensure governments come back next year with strengthened emission reduction targets that will keep 1.5C alive. And decisive progress on finance to help countries adapt and for the loss and damage endured. “Negotiators should come back to the table armed with cans of Irn-Bru and stop at nothing to get an ambitious deal over the line.” The veteran climate activist Bill McKibben has written in today’s Guardian about how any progress that has been made is as a result of protest and citizens holding governments to account. Copenhagen failed because there was too little movement building in the years preceding it, allowing a leader like Barack Obama to go home empty-handed and pay no political price. The global climate movement remedied that deficiency before Paris: many governments had no choice but to reach some kind of credible deal and hence a workable framework emerged, albeit without the actual pledges to make it capable of the task. Glasgow was supposed to be the place where countries lived up to the resolutions they’d proudly announced in France, and the decidedly mixed results reflect, at least in part, the difficulties activists have faced over the last few years. Read the full piece here: Bob Ward, policy and communications director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, has weighed in on the new draft: “This text is still pretty good and one I hope that all countries can embrace. It continues to request countries to deliver more ambitious pledges next year. “Countries will leave Glasgow painfully aware that collectively current pledges for emissions cuts by 2030 are not ambitious enough. They are not aligned with the goal of the Paris Agreement of holding the rise in warming to well below 2C degrees, and to pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5C. The draft text also still calls on all countries to accelerate efforts towards the phase-out of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies. “Importantly the UK presidency has now published draft text that outlines a good process for agreeing a significant increase in investment in developing countries to help them make their economies zero-carbon and climate-resilient. It is time for countries to stop arguing over the text and to start taking the action that has been promised, particularly to increase the flows of financial support to developing countries.” Australia have been accused of “hiding behind others” and opposing progress in the climate talks. Bill Hare of Climate Analytics said: “The overall view of Australia is it’s the worst I have seen it in my career. It’s not exposing its position publicly but it’s clear that it doesn’t want a process next year for all countries to come back and close the emissions gap for 2030.” My colleague Adam Morton in Australia has the full story: Last night Australia was also awarded the “colossal fossil” award by activist group Climate Action Network for its obstructive approach to the talks. “The only good thing about Australia being at Cop is they have the best coffee at their pavilion,” said the activists as they presented the award. Panama’s chief negotiator, Juan Carlos Monterrey, is not at all happy with the latest draft: It has been announced that the stocktaking session in which delegates express their opinions on the current state of play has been moved to noon - it was expected to begin at 11am. Sébastien Duyck of the Center for International Environmental Law has a very useful tool that tracks changes between draft versions: Hopefully the negotiators didn’t spend too long debating whether “policymaking” is one word or two: One key area is paragraph 36, which refers to fossil fuels. Here’s the old version: 36. Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies and the adoption of policies for the transition towards low-emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up clean power generation and accelerating the phaseout of unabated coal power and of inefficient subsidies for fossil fuels; and here’s the new version: 36. Calls upon Parties to accelerate the development, deployment and dissemination of technologies, and the adoption of policies, to transition towards low emission energy systems, including by rapidly scaling up the deployment of clean power generation and energy efficiency measures, including accelerating efforts towards the phase-out of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, recognizing the need for support towards a just transition; The first draft was the first UN document since the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 to mention fossil fuels, which was seen as a major step, so environmentalists will be pleased to see the language made it through the night. However, the qualifier “inefficient”, which was added for the second draft, remains. In yesterday’s stocktaking plenary many poor countries objected to this language as they said it could be used as a loophole to continue fossil fuel subsidies. However, others defended the language, saying it was essential for governments to be able to alleviate high fuel prices for citizens, such as with winter fuel allowances. The mention of support for a just transition is also a positive step. The key areas in which people will be examining the language will be to do with climate finance for poor countries, the “ratchet” mechanism by which countries return with improved pledges, and money for loss and damage – the impacts of climate breakdown that can’t be avoided. Yesterday’s text is here and today’s is here, for those of you who want to examine them. The text has just appeared on the UN website. Analysts will immediately start poring through it to see what has changed overnight – we’ll bring you the reaction here as it happens. Welcome to the Guardian’s coverage of day 13 of the Cop26 climate summit. Negotiations were supposed to end at 6pm local time last night, but to nobody’s surprise they have overrun into Saturday. You can read our latest news story on the state of play here: Yesterday evening, the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, put a pause on negotiations overnight so delegates could get some rest, before a new draft text is expected to be revealed this morning. Previous Cops have often been marked by delegates negotiating late into the night; it remains to be seen whether Sharma’s decision to let people rest signals a confidence things can be wrapped up today or a recognition that the talks are not close to agreement. We’ll bring you all the latest news and analysis as it happens. You can email me at alan.evans@theguardian.com or find me on Twitter at @itsalanevansThe Glasgow climate pact is not enough to solve the climate crisis but it includes steps that could help bridge the gap between rhetoric and action. What does it mean for Australia? Here are five key questions the Morrison government must now answer. Will Australia increase its 2030 emissions target? If not, why did it sign the pact? International pressure on Australia to do much more “this critical decade” – as the agreement calls it – is going to escalate next year. This wasn’t guaranteed. Under the landmark 2015 Paris agreement, countries were expected to submit new short term targets and plans to cut emissions only every five years. The next commitments were not expected until 2025. But the Glasgow pact, agreed on Sunday morning Australian time, changes that. Countries – including Australia – agreed that existing 2030 goals fall far short of what is necessary and they should re-examine and strengthen them when they return to the negotiating table at Cop27 in Egypt. There is wriggle-room in the language – it is a consensus-based international agreement, after all. The pact only “requests” that countries “revisit and strengthen” their 2030 targets to live up to the goals of the Paris agreement, and includes a caveat that those commitments should “take into account different national circumstances”. Those circumstances are left open to interpretation. But hiding behind nuance in wording will only get countries so far. For all the justified anger in Glasgow – about what Greta Thunberg calls the “blah blah blah” and the still-vast gap between what countries are doing and what is needed – the pact at least had an urgency in its language missing at other summits since Paris six years ago. It backs the idea that much greater action is needed immediately to prevent what could be a catastrophic 2.4C heating above pre-industrial levels. For the first time, a global deal recognises the difference in damage between 1.5C and 2C of heating would be huge, and that staying at the lower level would require “rapid, deep and sustained” cuts - a global 45% cut by 2030. Having been introduced into the pact, it is a benchmark against which countries will be measured. On these terms, the Morrison government is clearly failing. Australia was the only major developed country that refused to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets at Glasgow, rebuffing calls from allies in the US, UK, Europe and the Pacific. In a statement issued shortly after the summit finished, ministers Marise Payne and Angus Taylor suggested the government did not plan to change that, describing Australia’s 2030 target as “fixed”. They appeared to claim the government had already increased its commitments (known as nationally determined contributions, or NDCs) by including a net zero target for 2050 and official projections that suggested Australia would beat its 2030 target. This argument might work politically at home, but experts say it is likely to be viewed as a joke – or worse – internationally. In the wake of Emmanuel Macron accusing Scott Morrison of lying, it will raise further questions about whether his government can be trusted internationally. NDCs were designed to capture short-term commitments so countries would put forward what they were doing and ramp it up over time. And a projection is obviously not a target or commitment. Alok Sharma, the Cop26 president and British cabinet minister, was asked at the summit’s close what the consequences would be if Australia refused to come with a new 2030 target next year. He said: “This is an international agreement and all countries will be judged by whether they stick to the commitments they’ve made.” Will the government ‘phase down’ coal power as promised? For the first time, countries have committed in a UN climate deal to “accelerate efforts” to stop using “unabated coal power”. This might sound like an obvious thing – of course, dealing with the climate crisis mean an end for coal – but the inclusion of a specific commitment about the fossil fuel is an important step. While coal power started to be abandoned as a good investment over a decade ago, many observers assumed the reference would quickly be cut when it was proposed in the first draft of the pact on Wednesday. It being there is a significant even though the wording was watered down at the last minute at the insistence of the Indian delegation, which demanded it be changed from a “phase out” to a “phase down”. The Australian delegation had already said it was comfortable with the words “phase out” before the change. To put it mildly, this seems at odds with the Morrison government’s position at home. Its policy is to acknowledge coal will go over the next few decades, but not to accelerate its exit. It has backed a policy that could pay to keep some plants running, and says Australia will continue to sell thermal coal overseas to anyone who wants to buy it. It raises a couple of questions: how does the government define “unabated” and what will it now do to accelerate a phase down? Will it cut fossil fuel subsidies? The pact also commits countries to accelerate the phase-out of “inefficient” fossil fuel subsidies. Analyses have found Australian governments help fossil fuel industries with subsidies of more than $10bn each year. More than half that is through a fuel rebate for miners and farmers than use off-road diesel vehicles, which the government and Labor argue is not actually a subsidy. But the government is also giving hundreds of millions of dollars to the gas industry to open up new basins and build power plants and other infrastructure. It is doing this despite the head of the International Energy Agency warning there should be no new oil or gas fields opened up if the world is to keep 1.5C alive. What gives? Does the Coalition support the aim to limit heating to 1.5C? This is related to the issue of targets, but a separate question in its own right. The global political focus has moved to keeping alive a chance of limiting heating to 1.5C. The Morrison government has indicated through its policies that it doesn’t actually support this goal, but has not explicitly said so. A few examples: Several sources told the Guardian the Australian delegation in Glasgow made clear it did not support the clause – considered necessary to keep 1.5C alive – that suggested 2030 targets should be increased next year. In the end, Australia and other countries accepted its inclusion rather than stand in the way of a deal The government tried to block a recommendation at Unesco that countries should be aiming to limit heating to 1.5C to protect world heritage sites The modelling report for the government’s 2050 net zero plan makes no mention of considering a scenario in which the world acted in line with a 1.5C goal, referring instead to 2C The government has been advised that its 2030 target – a 26-28% cut compared with 2005 – is not in line with what scientists say is necessary for Australia to play its part in staying within 2C, let alone 1.5C. The scientific consensus says heating of 2C will lead to disasters several orders of magnitude worse than 1.5C, costing countless lives, cultures, species and ecosystems. It is the difference between some coral surviving on the Great Barrier Reef and its complete decline. Warming greater than 2C would be magnitudes worse again. Will Australia do more on climate finance and ‘loss and damage’? The Glasgow pact says wealthy countries are not paying what has been promised in climate finance, which is meant to help developing countries adapt and cut their own emissions. They had promised US$100bn from private and public sources by 2020 but didn’t reach it. More will be expected over time. Much less again has been contributed to “loss and damage”, which is effectively compensation for the most vulnerable nations already facing unavoidable destruction from worsening extreme weather. In his speech in Glasgow, Morrison announced $500m in new climate finance funding over five years, but offered nothing on loss and damage. It is one of the lowest contributions as a share of gross national income. Australian is acting solo on finance, having pulled out of the green climate fund. A Greenpeace investigation suggested three-quarters of climate projects Australia funded directly in the Pacific had little or no link to climate change or the environment.Carlton defender Liam Jones has announced his retirement days after it was reported he had refused to get vaccinated against Covid-19. It was reported last week that the 30-year-old, who had been contracted for the 2022 AFL season, had opted against receiving the jab as required before the club’s pre-season training commences later this month. In a statement released on Sunday, the Blues said Jones’s decision to call time on his 12-year career was made for “personal reasons”, and the player himself did not elaborate on the motive behind his sudden announcement. “I wish to announce my retirement from AFL football effective immediately,” Jones said in the statement. “I want to take this opportunity to thank all who have supported me throughout my journey, both personally and professionally. I love the game and I’ll miss my teammates.” Under the AFL’s recently released vaccination schedule and the Victorian government’s mandate, players participating in the men’s competition must have had their second vaccination shot by 26 November or be barred from their respective clubs’ programs. Carlton officially start their pre-season under new coach, Michael Voss, on 22 November, with first- to fourth-year players returning first before the rest of the senior squad joins them on 6 December. Both the Blues and the AFL declined to comment last week when it was reported a player had refused to be vaccinated, before media outlets subsequently named the player in question as Jones. His retirement comes after dual AFLW premiership player Deni Varnhagen was moved to Adelaide’s inactive list earlier this month because of her refusal to be vaccinated against Covid. While Varnhagen, who works as a registered nurse, was outspoken about her stance, Jones has still not confirmed his position publicly. “I hope that people respect my decision and privacy,” Jones said on Sunday. “Neither myself or my management team will be making any further comment on the matter.” Carlton’s head of football, Brad Lloyd, indicated Jones had been weighing up his decision for some time. “We have been in constant dialogue with Liam in recent months and allowing him the time he needed to make an informed decision regarding his playing career,” Lloyd said. “Liam confirmed with us today that he has made the decision to retire, and his wish for the specific reasons of that decision to be kept private. As a club, we will be respecting that.” The Blues said they would work closely with the AFL “regarding options available to replace Jones’ spot on the list for the 2022 AFL season”.Joe Biden will on Monday hold a high-stakes virtual summit with the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, his latest initiative to restore US authority on the world stage. But the president’s efforts are being hampered by a logjam in Washington that threatens to cripple American diplomacy. Biden had made 78 ambassadorial nominations as of 5 November, according to the White House, but just seven of them – or 9% – had been confirmed by the Senate. Former presidents Barack Obama and Donald Trump had 77% and 70% of their ambassadorial nominees confirmed respectively at this stage. The inertia has left posts in vital world capitals unfilled – Biden is yet to even nominate an ambassador to the UK – and America confronting complex foreign policy crises with one arm tied behind its back. “We’re 10 months into the Biden administration and only a fraction of its diplomatic players are in place to engage the world,” said Philip Crowley, former US assistant secretary of state and author of Red Line: American Foreign Policy in a Time of Fractured Politics and Failing States. “The president has said repeatedly that ‘America is back’. The lack of ambassadors in scores of countries undercuts that message. Sure, the top priorities essentially are still being addressed, but lots of valuable initiatives get placed on the back burner waiting for ambassadors to arrive. Country by country, it is just hard to build a lot of momentum in the relationship with the country team operating at less than full capacity.” The problem was starkly illustrated during a recent row over France’s loss of a submarine contract with Australia, which opted instead for nuclear-powered submarines to be developed with the US and UK. There was no US ambassador in Paris for the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to deal with; like many world leaders, he does not engage with the chargé d’affaires or other substitutes. The depleted diplomatic corps is a symptom of Washington’s polarized politics and evenly divided Senate. Two rightwing Republicans, Ted Cruz of Texas and Josh Hawley of Missouri, have been slowing down the process by objecting to the Senate moving forward via unanimous consent. Cruz is taking a stand because he objects to a pipeline that will carry natural gas from Russia to Germany and wants the Biden administration to impose sanctions to stop it. His office told the Associated Press he was committed to using whatever leverage he has to force “mandatory sanctions”. Hawley, for his part, has demanded that the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, resign because of the “botched Afghanistan withdrawal”. He said: “Until there is accountability, the least we can do is actually vote for nominees to leadership positions at the state department and department of defense.” Without these holds the nominees could be confirmed through a voice vote, a process taking only minutes that can be used so long as no senators object. This is how more than 90% of nominees were confirmed at similar stages of the George W Bush and Obama presidencies. But Cruz and Hawley are insisting on a more convoluted and time-consuming process in a Senate that already has an overwhelming to-do list. Democrats regard such tactics as playing politics with the national interest. Jamie Raskin, a congressman from Maryland, said: “It’s a terrible impediment to our resuming democratic partnership and leadership in the world. “The rightwing plan has been to dismantle and disable democratic governance and leadership. They want to make the government dysfunctional so they can take it over and use it for their own purposes. We’re just trying to defend the idea of the reality of democracy at this point.” There was finally some progress last month when the Senate confirmed, via voice vote, former senator Jeff Flake as ambassador to Turkey, Cindy McCain, wife of the late senator John McCain, as ambassador to the UN Agencies for Food and Agriculture, former senator Tom Udall as ambassador to New Zealand and Victoria Reggie Kennedy, widow of ex-senator Ted Kennedy, as ambassador to Austria. Notably all four had links to the Senate, a claim that not every nominee will be able to make. The snail’s pace of confirmations has caused alarm at the American Foreign Service Association, which is the both the union and professional association of the US foreign service with 17,000 members in six agencies and departments. Its president, Eric Rubin, said: “No other country doesn’t send ambassadors on a regular, timely basis, and no other country in history, including ours, has ever had this many vacant jobs for this long.” Rubin added: “The world is changing. It is by no means in a stable state and we have to work out and defend our role in this new world. The time has passed when the world is just going to tolerate our peculiarities. ‘The US doesn’t fill half its ambassadorships for a year? Oh, well, that’s the US.’”At 1.35pm on 6 January, the top Republican in the US Senate, Mitch McConnell, stood before his party and delivered a dire warning. If they overruled the will of 81 million voters by blocking Joe Biden’s certification as president in a bid to snatch re-election for the defeated candidate, Donald Trump, “it would damage our Republic forever”. Five minutes before he started speaking, hundreds of Trump supporters incited by the then president’s false claim that the 2020 election had been stolen broke through Capitol police lines and were storming the building. McConnell’s next remark has been forgotten in the catastrophe that followed – the inner sanctums of America’s democracy defiled, five people dead, and 138 police officers injured. He said: “If this election were overturned by mere allegations from the losing side, our democracy would enter a death spiral. We’d never see the whole nation accept an election again. Every four years would be a scramble for power at any cost.” Eleven months on, McConnell’s words sound eerily portentous. What could be construed as an anti-democratic scramble for power at any cost is taking place right now in jurisdictions across the country. Republican leaders loyal to Trump are vying to control election administrations in key states in ways that could drastically distort the outcome of the presidential race in 2024. With the former president hinting strongly that he may stand again, his followers are busily manoeuvring themselves into critical positions of control across the US – from which they could launch a far more sophisticated attempt at an electoral coup than Trump’s effort to hang on to power in 2020. The machinations are unfolding right across the US at all levels of government, from the local precinct, through counties and states, to the national stage of Congress. The stage is being set for a spectacle that could, in 2024, make last year’s unprecedented assault on American democracy look like a dress rehearsal. The Guardian has spoken to leading Republican election experts, specialists in voting practices, democracy advocates and election officials in swing states, all of whom fear that McConnell’s warning is coming true. “In 2020 Donald Trump put a huge strain on the fabric of this democracy, on the country,” said Ben Ginsberg, a leading election lawyer who represented four of the last six Republican presidential nominees. “In 2024 the strain on the fabric could turn into a tear.” ••• Since Joe Biden was inaugurated on 20 January, Trump has dug himself deeper into his big lie about the “rigged election” that was stolen from him. Far from cooling on the subject, he has continued to amplify the false claim in ever more brazen terms. Initially he condemned the violence at the US Capitol on 6 January. But in recent months Trump has emerged as an unashamed champion of the insurrectionists, calling them “great people” and a “loving crowd”, and lamenting that they are now being “persecuted so unfairly”. Trump recorded a video last month praising Ashli Babbitt, the woman shot dead by a police officer as she tried to break into the speaker’s lobby, where Congress members were hiding in fear of their lives. Babbitt was a “truly incredible person”, he said. Michael Waldman, who as president of the Brennan Center is one of the country’s authorities on US elections, told the Guardian that Trump was normalizing the anti-democratic fury that erupted that day. “He has gone from being embarrassed to treating 6 January as one of the high points of his presidency. Ashli Babbitt is now being lionized as this noble martyr as opposed to a violent insurrectionist trying to break into the House of Representatives chamber.” Over the past year Trump has spread the stolen election lie far and wide, telling supporters at his regular presidential campaign-style rallies that 2020 was “the most corrupt election in the history of our country”. He has used his iron grip over the Republican party to cajole officials in Arizona, Pennsylvania, Texas, Wisconsin and other states to conduct “audits” of the 2020 election count in further vain searches for fraud. One of the most eccentric of these “audits” (or “fraudits”, as they have been called) was carried out in Arizona by a company called Cyber Ninjas, which had virtually no experience in elections and whose owner supported the “Stop the Steal” movement. Paradoxically, even this effort concluded that Biden had indeed won the state, recording an even bigger margin for the Democratic candidate than the official count. The idea of the stolen election continues to spread like an airborne contagion. A poll released this week by the Public Religion Research Institute found that two-thirds of Republicans still believe the myth that Trump won. More chilling still, almost a third of Republicans agree with the contention that American patriots may have to resort to violence “in order to save our country”. Waldman said the big lie is now ubiquitous. “The louder Trump yelled the more his supporters thought he was telling the truth. Increasingly the institutional machinery of the Republican party is organized around fealty to the big lie and the willingness to steal the next election, and that is terrifying for the future of American democracy.” Ned Foley, a constitutional law professor at Ohio State University, said the current moment is “unique in American history”. He called it “electoral McCarthyism”. Foley sees parallels between Trump and the anticommunist panic or “red scare” whipped up by senator from Wisconsin Joe McCarthy in the 1950s. “What’s unique about Trump and about what he’s trying to do in 2024 is that he’s applying McCarthy-like tactics to voting, and that’s never happened before.” ••• Electoral McCarthyism is being felt most acutely at state level. In several of the battlegrounds where the 2024 contest largely will be fought and won, a clear pattern is emerging. Trump has endorsed a number of Republican candidates for key state election positions who share a common feature: they all avidly embrace the myth of the stolen election and the lie that Biden is an impostor in the White House. The candidates are being aggressively promoted for secretary of state positions – the top official that oversees elections in US states. Should any one of them succeed, they would hold enormous sway over the running of the 2024 presidential election in their state, including how the votes would be counted. To get into these positions of power, the candidates are challenging incumbent election officials who were seminal in thwarting Trump’s bid to overturn the 2020 election result. This is most evident in the critical state of Georgia. Brad Raffensperger, the secretary of state, resisted the sitting president’s demand, made during a phone call, that he “find 11,780 votes” for Trump – one more vote than Biden’s margin of victory. Raffensperger is now facing a tough fight against Jody Hice, a US Congress member boosted by Trump’s backing. Hice was among the 147 Republicans in Congress who voted on 6 January (hours after the insurrection) to overturn election results, falsely claiming widespread irregularities. In Arizona, another critical swing state, many Trump allies are running for secretary of state, including Shawna Bolick. She was the architect of a bill introduced to the Arizona state legislature that would have given lawmakers the ability to overturn the will of voters and impose their own choice for president. Under Bolick’s bill, legislators would be able to overrule the official count and put forward an alternate slate of electors in the name of the loser by dint of a simple majority vote, no explanation needed. Had that provision been in place in 2020 it would have allowed the legislature’s 47 Republicans to override 1.7 million Arizonans who had voted for Biden and send their own alternate slate of Trump electors to Congress instead. Bolick’s bill did not pass. But it gave a clear indication of Trump acolytes’ thinking as they inject themselves into the election process. Competing against Bolick to be the next secretary of state of Arizona is Mark Finchem, who Trump has also endorsed. Finchem was at the Stop the Steal rally in Washington on 6 January that turned into the Capitol insurrection. Finchem, a former police officer, has links to the far-right extremist group the Oath Keepers, which federal prosecutors allege was involved in planning the violence. On 6 January he posted a photograph of the ransacked Capitol building with the comment: “What happens when the People feel they have been ignored, and Congress refuses to acknowledge rampant fraud.” If Finchem were to become secretary of state he would have a central role over certifying – or not – the results in Arizona. In Michigan, another battleground state which Biden won by 154,000 votes in 2020, Trump has endorsed Kristina Karamo for secretary of state. A self-styled “whistleblower” and Fox News favourite, Karamo filed lawsuits in 2020 seeking to block Biden’s certification on spurious grounds of mass fraud. The list goes on. Reuters analysed the records of 15 Republican candidates running for secretary of state in five battleground states, finding that 10 of them are avid “stop the stealers”. The pattern of Trump loyalists agitating to take control of elections can be seen even at the hyper-local level. Steve Bannon, Trump’s former White House senior adviser, has used his War Room podcast megaphone to call on supporters to take over the reins of election administration “precinct by precinct”. Boards of canvassers, normally unsung panels of local administrators operating at county level, are also being targeted. In Michigan, Republican stop the stealers are moving to oust seasoned election officials from the boards in many of the state’s largest counties, with possible ramifications for how future election results are certified. Leading authorities on US elections watch these rapidly shifting tectonic plates with mounting alarm. Rick Hasen, a legal scholar who writes the Election Law Blog, told the Guardian that he is worried about what might happen should Raffensperger and other officials who stood firm against Trump’s electoral coup attempt in 2020 be cast aside. “It took the courage of Republican elected officials who refused to do Trump’s bidding and overturn the election result to save us from a political and constitutional crisis. With those people removed from office, it’s harder to have confidence that the next presidential election is going to be run fairly.” Chris Krebs led the federal cybersecurity agency Cisa in charge of protecting the integrity of the 2020 election until he was fired by Trump. He fears that the conspiracy theory of the stolen election has spread so rapidly that it is now beyond control. “There’s a part of me that thinks perhaps we’re too far gone,” he said. “The stop the steal movement has metastasized into a broad base that is more powerful than any individual, even Trump.” ••• Democracy experts have focused their energies in recent years on the resurgence of voter suppression, the form of anti-democratic politics that arose out of the Jim Crow era of the 20th century. Those techniques have been on ample display this past year. The Brennan Center recorded that in the first six months of this year alone at least 30 new laws were enacted in 18 states making it harder for Americans to vote. But now voter suppression has been joined by a new, and possibly even more sinister, antidemocratic threat: election subversion. The trusted outcome of a presidential election, which every four years Americans took for granted as the bedrock of their democratic way of life, appears at risk of being willfully distorted or even overturned. “The largest concern I have right now is the potential for election subversion,” Hasen said. “That’s something I never expected to worry about in the United States.” The nonpartisan group Protect Democracy and its partner organisation States United Democracy Center have recorded 216 bills introduced this year in 41 states that politicize, criminalize or interfere with election administration. Many of the bills seek to increase the power of Republican-controlled state legislatures over the election process, stripping powers from impartial election officials and handing them to radically partisan lawmakers. The largest concentration of bills fall in exactly those states that were most closely contested in 2020 and where the outcome of the 2024 presidential election is likely to be decided – Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Wisconsin and the increasingly competitive state of Texas. “We know that some of these bills have been part of a coordinated effort,” Jessica Marsden, a lawyer with Protect Democracy, said. “We see similar measures pop up in a number of different states, so there is significant evidence that there is at least the beginnings of some sort of plan.” So far 24 of the bills have been passed into law. They include a new voting law in Georgia that came into effect in August which the New York Times described as “a breathtaking assertion of partisan power in elections”. The law tightens the grip of Republican lawmakers over the election board that oversees the vote count. It removes Raffensperger from his seat as chair of the board, which means that even if he survives next year’s challenge by Hice he will still have his wings clipped. Under the law, the newly Republican-dominated election board gains the power to suspend county election officials. That is being seen as a thinly disguised power grab over the election processes of Fulton county, an area covering the heavily Democratic and majority-Black city of Atlanta. Fulton county was seminal in handing victory to Biden. It also gave the edge to Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock, in senatorial races that swung control of the US Senate to the Democratic party. “Late at night during the passing of the voter bill in Georgia, Republicans snuck in a provision that could have the most devastating impact,” Waldman said. “It changes the rules of who gets to count the votes, taking away the power of the secretary of state and taking over county election processes on very flimsy grounds.” ••• For the past year Katie Hobbs, Arizona’s Democratic secretary of state, has been at the centre of the storm unleashed by Trump’s big lie. Attacks on Hobbs and her staff began straight after the November 2020 election and have continued unabated ever since. Biden’s narrow victory in Arizona – by fewer than 11,000 votes – was vital in securing him the presidency. The controversial decision by Fox News to call the state for Biden as early as 11.20pm on election night provoked fury from Trump and his devotees that still reverberates in Arizona to this day. Hobbs was one of those to feel their wrath. “We have been the target of a barrage of constant attacks. There have been threats, harassment and vitriol, not just against our election staff but to every department where people can find a phone extension to call,” she said. Days after the presidential election, armed stop the stealers gathered outside Hobbs’ home. In May she and her family were assigned a security detail after she received three separate death threats in a single day and was chased outside her office by a man working for the conspiracy theory website Gateway Pundit. “Security is certainly not something I expected as part of this job,” she said. Asked why she thought she was such a hate figure for Trump supporters, she said: “These folks think I’m going to be arrested, that I belong in Gitmo and deserve to be tried for treason – and they are reminding me of this every single day, without any evidence.” Threats of violence are not the only challenge Hobbs has faced. In June, Republican lawmakers in the state legislature stripped her of powers to defend election laws in court, handing the critical function to the state attorney general, a Republican. The move was later blocked by a judge on constitutional grounds. But Republican lawmakers have successfully weakened her role by barring her access to legal counsel, which severely curtails her ability to carry out her duties as the protector of Arizona democracy. “They’ve tied my hands, and that’s been par for the course in terms of partisan retaliation throughout my term in office,” Hobbs said. The Brennan Center reported in the summer that one in three election officials in the US felt unsafe in their jobs. One in six had received threats. David Becker, executive director of the nonpartisan Center for Election Innovation and Research in Washington, said that professional election officials were increasingly stepping down, or preparing to do so, in the face of unbearable hostility. “I have talked to election officials who have received threats containing the names of their children and schools they go to. These people are true public servants who are asking themselves is it worth it, because they are suffering. I’m talking about hundreds to thousands of election officials around the country who worry every night that they might be attacked as they go home.” For every impartial election official who departs, there is a Trump loyalist waiting in the wings. “And they apparently view their oath not to the US constitution, but to a single individual,” Becker said. ••• And it doesn’t end there. Were the Republicans to regain control of the House of Representatives in 2024, Kevin McCarthy, the minority Republican leader, would have considerable sway as Speaker over how the outcome of the presidential election would be certified. If a state legislature were to send an alternate slate of electors to Congress in an attempt to overturn the will of voters then McCarthy would be a pivotal player. His word would carry weight in determining whether to allow those alternate electors, potentially turning the result of the election on its head. McCarthy was one of the 147 Republican rebels who on 6 January – hours after the storming of the Capitol – objected to the certification of Biden. “Here’s one of my big concerns,” Hasen said. “The House of Representatives headed by Kevin McCarthy accepts alternate slates of electors and overcomes the will of the people, making the loser the winner.” Such a move would undoubtedly trigger a constitutional crisis, which in turn would inevitably end up before the US supreme court. Here, too, there are reasons to be apprehensive. In the runup to the 2020 election, four of the nine justices expressed some degree of support for the theory that state legislatures have the power to put forward their own alternate electors should they decide the official count somehow had failed. Trump nominated three new conservative justices during his time in the White House, tipping the balance on the court sharply to the right and increasing the likelihood that the conservative majority looks favourably on this highly questionable legal ruse. “There could be five or six justices who could go along with it, given the right case,” Hasen said. With 2024 on the horizon, democracy experts have identified several ways in which disaster could be averted. Rick Hasen wants new federal guardrails put in place to prevent state legislatures from interfering in elections for purely partisan reasons. Chris Krebs wants a more robust system of post-election audits to act as a legitimate counterpoint to the sham audits promulgated by Trump. All the authorities on American democracy who spoke to the Guardian were united about the urgency of the moment. New protections need to be put in place, right now, or else the nation will enter the 2024 presidential election cycle with its democratic structures already bloodied and vulnerable to further attack. Waldman looks to Washington for signs that the peril has been recognised, and that appropriate action is in train. He sees neither. “The leadership of the federal government doesn’t appear to be treating this as the emergency it is. This is one of the great clashes in American political history. Where is the alarm?”Since we have just had Maths Week in England, it seems appropriate to look at a wave of recent errors when communicating numbers. First, the statistics may be described wrongly. The chief executive of NHS England recently claimed: “We have had 14 times the number of people in hospital with Covid than we saw this time last year”, a claim repeated on Sky News and ITV. But there were fewer Covid-19 patients in England on 4 November (7,201) than a year earlier (11,037). The intended reference was to last August, when there were about 23,000 admissions within two weeks after a positive test, about 14 times higher than last year. Second, data can be misinterpreted. The daily number of reported deaths tends to be higher on Tuesday and Wednesday, catching up for reporting delays over the weekend. Like clockwork, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) dashboard updates on Tuesday at 4pm and newspapers duly report that Covid-19 deaths “soar”. The Evening Standard has done this at least three times, most recently with “UK Covid deaths soar to 262” (10 November). A seven-day rolling average smooths this cycle: up to 2 November, there was a daily average of 162 new recorded deaths, while a week later, that figure rose to 166. Hardly soaring. Incorrect claims can arise from misspeaking. The chief medical adviser of UKHSA said on The Andrew Marr Show: “We’re still seeing deaths in mainly the unvaccinated population.” That presumably meant a higher fatality rate, since most Covid-19 deaths have been among those vaccinated since last June. Sometimes, poor presentation can propagate misuse. In weekly reports, the UKHSA counts people using health records in its database, rather than population estimates, which leads to case rates appearing higher in vaccinated than unvaccinated groups. After chains of misrepresentation, finally Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, used these UK numbers to promote the bizarre theory that Covid-19 vaccines cause Aids. Speaking about data means more than reiterating numbers. Accuracy in statistical communication is fragile: saying the right number, describing the right measure, over the right time, giving necessary context and conveying limitations and uncertainty. Statistical producers need to guide readers on how their data can and cannot be used. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyI have huge respect for Kenan Malik, whose thoughtful articles have often opened my eyes to new perspectives, and would agree that pessimism with regard to climate change can be enormously debilitating and counter-productive (“Want to change the world? Then you’d better give up on self-defeating pessimism”, Comment). I wonder if he has come across Global Optimism, an organisation set up by Christiana Figueres and Tom Rivett-Carnac, and their podcasts Outrage + Optimism? And has he heard about the international Active Hope courses (based on Joanna Macy’s work) that are run far and wide? Though I hadn’t heard the alarming words he quotes from Roger Hallam of Extinction Rebellion, I can report that at every XR meeting I have attended the overriding emotional tone has been of respect, integrity, inclusiveness and most of all love... love for humanity and the world. Last Saturday, I marched for Global Climate Justice, as did hundreds of thousands of people worldwide, and with my daughter and granddaughter experienced a sense of hope and optimism that at last the momentum for positive change is building. From this perspective, it does not feel as if “pessimism and misanthropy have come to colonise much of the left”. Marianne Tissandier South Brent, Devon After reading the article “Lightbulb moments: why stately homes have turned to illuminations” (News), it seems that the message about climate change has not sunk in. Illuminated events should be decreasing, not increasing, and organisations such as English Heritage and the National Trust should be showing a lead in this area if we are to take tackling climate change seriously. Andrew Hudson Ulverston, Cumbria Treat drugs like cigarettes The illegality of drugs causes many deaths because it stops us from controlling the drugs’ strength and purity, it makes it harder for addicts to seek help, and it hands over the trade to criminals, leading to shootings on our streets (“You’ll never have a drug-free society, expert warns UK”, News). We should treat drugs as we now very successfully treat cigarettes, and should tax them to fund treatment programmes. The police and courts would have more resources to tackle other crimes. Richard Mountford Hildenborough, Kent Bring back the Thame Gazette I agree with last week’s letter bemoaning the lack of “a proper local newspaper that includes obituaries, club news and civil announcements” (“We need a local paper”). Covid has increased loneliness and isolation, particularly for elderly people. At a recent meeting of local residents, many of us were surprised and saddened to hear of the deaths of people we knew. A chorus of “bring back the Thame Gazette” ensued. Shirley Denny Thame, Oxfordshire Clapping was a cynical ploy As chief executive of Care England, Professor Martin Green clearly comes at the relationship between health and social care from a particular angle (“Care boss blasts ministers for treating NHS as ‘favoured child’”), but his comments helpfully open up a conversation about the government’s publicity about the NHS. I never clapped for the NHS on the doorstep. I thought it was insulting to stressed-out NHS workers. A national clap comes cheap, requiring the services of a limited number of government media officers. This was used to blur the distinction between valuing the services of dedicated staff and the protection of the NHS as an institution, while drawing attention away from failings of ministers in their handling of a worldwide health crisis in the UK. I would like to think that when the public inquiry gets underway next year, it will shine light on this cynical ploy – but I’m not holding my breath. Geoff Reid Bradford Perhaps the solution to the complaints made by the social care boss is to take care homes back under public control, with local authorities as the provider and employer of care workers, who should be paid at least a living wage and properly valued and trained. Privatised care homes are run as profit centres, not as a social service. Some of the profits are held in offshore tax havens. The Labour party should be raising this as an issue which increasingly affects an ageing population. Ann Bliss Bromley, London Excellent evisceration David Mitchell’s brutal evisceration of Liz Truss and his championing of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe (“It’s Liz Truss’s moment to do the right thing”, the New Review) put him right up there with Marina Hyde and John Crace – brilliant journalists who can raise a smile even as they make us weep. Thank you for helping to keep us sane in these desperate times. Jill Salisbury-Hughes Winton, Shropshire Ferry unreasonable Correspondent Laraine Thompson believes that Séamas O’Reilly should take a ferry from England to Northern Ireland with his young son, instead of flying (“Too many flying visits”, Letters). I believe that, from London, the nearest port with ferries to Northern Ireland is Birkenhead. To reach Birkenhead from London would require a train journey and this would be followed by about eight hours on the ferry, an interesting experience with a young child. On arrival in Belfast, Séamas would then have to travel to Derry by some means. The return journey would take a similar length of time. Thank goodness that the junior O’Reilly has been spared this and that he has such a loving relationship with his extended family. Zoom and telephones do not replace physical closeness. Jean Fenemore Croston, Lancashire Badge of opulence I enjoyed your piece on Anne Boleyn’s badge (“This old bird? Well, actually it’s the long-lost crest of Anne Boleyn”, News). The black area of the falcon’s body is so well demarcated from the remaining gilding that it is not soot. When antique silvering paint ages it blackens, just as household silver tarnishes. Her falcon in the original badge was silver. Gold and silver are usually avoided together in heraldry for modesty. The rich emblem was poor Anne’s fleeting opulence. Khwan Phusrisom Shildon, County DurhamPrince Harry and Meghan Markle, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, appear to have embarked on a new course in recent weeks as they seek to define their lives in America by adding political issues and influence into their established interests of being royal humanitarians embracing US celebrity norms of wealth, fame and talkshows. First it was Meghan, cold-calling two Republican US senators – West Virginia’s Shelley Moore Capito and Susan Collins of Maine – to urge them to support paid family leave provisions in Joe Biden’s languishing Build Back Better legislation. “She called me on my private line and she introduced herself as the Duchess of Sussex, which is kind of ironic,” Collins told Politico. Collins added – perhaps a little disappointingly for fans of the royals – that she herself was “more interested in what the people of Maine are telling me” than members of British royalty. Meghan then appeared at a New York Times forum to press the issue. “This is one of those issues that is not red or blue,” she said, underscoring an earlier Paid Leave for All letter in which she stressed that she was “not an elected official, and I’m not a politician”. She was, she wrote, “an engaged citizen and a parent”. The targets of her letter? The Democrat bigwigs Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, and the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer. She has also reached out to the New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand to offer her help around paid leave campaigning. Her husband, Harry, has also taken his turn, informing a panel at a tech forum last week that he had warned the Twitter CEO, Jack Dorsey, that “his platform was allowing a coup to be staged” a day before the attack on the Capitol on 6 January by a Trump-supporting mob. By midweek the couple were back on familiar ground, paying tribute to armed forces on Veterans Day and helping to raise awareness of returning veterans’ mental health. For some observers it is a clear effort by the Sussexes to get – at least partially – involved with the politics of the country they are making home. And, given the fractious nature of US politics, that is not an easy path to tread. “They’re trying to rebrand themselves without completely rejecting the royal moniker,” says Arianne Chernock, a professor of history at Boston University and author of The Right to Rule and the Rights of Women: Queen Victoria and the Women’s Movement. “Meghan is adamant that hers is a human rights issue that she as an American can speak to, but the issue that she casts as non-political unfortunately plays out in the US context as a very partisan one.” The process of disentangling from royalty while still benefiting from the insider advantages it confers is also a delicate tightrope. But American fascination with Meghan “is fuelled by her open embrace of her identity and her attempts to connect it to a multiracial, multicultural global population”, says Chernock. After the Oprah sit-down interview in which the pair criticized the royal family and spoke of the racism they had faced, an Economist/YouGov poll showed that about 40% of American adults overall feel personal sympathy for the couple, and were twice as likely to sympathize with the couple than with the royal family. But such sympathies are not entirely organic. The Sussexes’ quest to define their new lives in the US is plotted out. Last week, a witness statement released by the court of appeal in London that stemmed from a libel case Markle won against the Daily Mail showed that a recent coming-to-America account, Finding Freedom, was not unauthorized, as the couple had claimed, but cooperatively scripted. The revelation led some to wonder where the recent forays into the US political realm are headed. Until now, the US republic’s relationship with foreign royalty, or in this case fringe royalty, has followed relatively clear lines, as framed by the constitution to prevent a society of nobility from being established in the United States. “People use titles all the time in America but they can’t use them for any actual purpose,” says David Hackett Fischer, author Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America, a classic study in how four groups – Puritans, Royalist Cavaliers, Quakers and borderland Scots-English – came to shape the culture of the regions they settled. “There aren’t many royalists among my fellow citizens, but they may be intrigued by people with a title,” Fischer says, “and most Americans have absolutely no interest in aristocracy or monarchy and don’t think it should have any standing.” But celebrity is a different matter. “Americans don’t think of celebrity as an order, but celebrate individuals by their interest in them – as film stars, athletes, or whatever they may be, and some because they have a lot of money.” The Sussexes, he says, “are celebrities only in the sense that the tabloids cover them, but that’s about the only thing that flows from their status”. But the relative acceptance within some Democratic circles of Meghan’s political input suggests more than shared causes in a tense political moment. “Rightly or wrongly, she can do things average citizens can’t,” says Bruce Freed at the Center for Political Accountability. “It’s star power. It feeds the ego to get a call from a prominent person.” Certainly Gillibrand appeared impressed. “I could hear how sincere she was about advocacy,” Gillibrand told the 19th website after her chat with the duchess. Still, the couple are fairly far advanced in their royal-to-celebrity transformation. The outgoing New York city mayor, Bill de Blasio, in September gave the couple a tour of the World Trade Center before the Sussexes headed off to another big-stage fundraiser, the Global Citizen Festival, themed to pressure western nations to donate 1bn vaccines to developing nations. As one well-placed Hollywood society power-broker remarks, “why stay in Britain as a walk-on, or a crowd-scene to provide atmosphere, when you can have starring roles in America?” And they certainly have powerful friends easing their way. The couple’s progress in the US has been smoothed by Nicole Avant, President Barack Obama’s ambassador to the Bahamas, a Montecito neighbor and wife of Hollywood’s most powerful executive, the Netflix CEO, Ted Sarandos. They may also count on Mellody Hobson, Meghan’s co-panelist last week, president and co-CEO of Ariel Investments, the chairwoman of Starbucks, and wife of the Star Wars director George Lucas. But some steps are discernibly precarious. Last week, per reports, the couple faced criticism that their lucrative Netflix deal is at odds with the streaming platform’s hit The Crown that will, in its fifth season, depict Harry’s mother during the years of her controversial Panorama interview and subsequent divorce. As yet their Netflix production account reveals little specific direction beyond saying its mission is “making inspirational family programming is also important to us” and “to share impactful content that unlocks action”. All of which points to an effort to fashion a new brand-identity despite the contradictions of complaining about press scrutiny and then going to Hollywood to actively court it. But in many ways, the Sussexes’ attempt to cast their activism within a humanitarian framework is in keeping with all members of the royal family who have made their relevance turn on humanitarian pursuits since the 18th century. “It’s one of the pitches they make for continuing relevance, and one way that they use to justify their power and privilege,” Chernock points out.An article quoted the Home Office saying that a delay in releasing stop-and-search statistics was due to a “record level” of data and extra time being required to resolve data quality issues. After publication, the Home Office contacted us to clarify that when it spoke of “new record level” data, it meant that data had been collected for the first time at the level of individual stop-and-search records, rather than in aggregate; it was not referring to the number of cases (Stop-and-search figures ‘withheld to hide rise in discrimination’, 7 November, page 29). It is Camilla Power who plays the role of Talitha’s mother in the drama series Showtrial, not Mika Simmons, as a TV review said. And the bereaved mother of Hannah is played by Claire Lams, not “Lam” (7 November, the New Review, page 34). In preparing for his role in The Power of the Dog, Benedict Cumberbatch lived in Montana with a cowboy called Randy and his partner Jenn – not “Jane”, as we said due to a mishearing of the actor’s words (Jane Campion interview: ‘Film-making set me free ... it was as if I had found myself’, 7 November, the New Review, page 8). Other recently amended articles include: Don’t put climate activists on trial, CPS urged If Labour can’t beat the Tories’ polarising game, it should build bridges instead Ballet Black: Then or Now/The Waiting Game review – dynamic anniversary celebration Will the magic of psychedelics transform psychiatry? In Britten’s footsteps, Nitin Sawhney’s requiem will mark Coventry’s rebirth The EU is locked in a momentous fight with Poland. And the UK is backing the wrong side Write to the Readers’ Editor, The Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Simplicity. That is what this look from Valentino AW21 embodies. Except there is a lot more going on than you would assume. That said, it is not impossible to achieve. A finely milled face powder that gives you a matt finish without deadening the skin is essential. Brows need a clear gel run through them (or you can cheat with a microblading or a brow-laminating treatment for a fuller fluffier look). A little highlighter wouldn’t go amiss in the corner of the eyes and along the nose. And then, the pièce de résistance, a winged eye. A modern party look if ever there was one. 1. Laura Mercier Light Catcher Setting Powder £33.50, lookfantastic.com 2. Too Faced Better Than Sex Eyeliner £18, boots.com 3. Eyeko Brow Gel £18, eyeko.com 4. Hermès Poudre D’orfèvre Face and Eyes Illuminating Powder £75, hermes.com 5. Trish McEvoy 24-Hour Shadow &amp; Liner Pen £24, selfridges.com I can’t do without… A facial massage and treatment to revive skin At social occasions, people, even those I know well, always want to have long conversations with me about beauty. It’s not so much a ‘conversation’ as it is a Q and A where they do all the questioning (what’s the best type of sunscreen?) and I do all the answering (anything that doesn’t leave you chalky, sits well with makeup and won’t clog your pores or the environment). I recently attended a dinner where, for once, I came away with someone else’s recommendation: Sophie Carbonari. This Parisian facialist is the secret weapon of fashion’s glitterati and models. Unsurprisingly, it is notoriously difficult to get an appointment with her. Fortunately for me, though Sophie is primarily based in Paris, she now comes to London every month and recently had a last-minute cancellation. There is no menu or list of facials presented. You simply go in and she looks at your skin in a very kind, upbeat, non judgmental way; which is just as well as my skin – following a punishing work schedule and minimal sleep – was not in the rudest health. While she does all the usual things you should expect in a facial – a deep cleanse to unclog pores, a mask to loosen debris, resurfacing and brighten – the magic really lies in her incredible deep massage technique. It makes a slightly disconcerting clicking sound – she is basically smoothing out the tension in your face – but it wakes up the skin so that everything – lymphatic drainage, collagen production, circulation – begins working much better. Your now tension-free face looks less angry and your skin looks clearer, healthier and less dead. Weeks later, I can still see the benefits. The downside is trying to get another appointment. It’s not cheap but it’s a waiting list worth getting on. Facial with Sophie Carbonari, from £300. sophiecarbonari.com On my radar… Balm by name and nature – potions to soothe Clean and clear This balm-to-oil cleanser is brilliant for oilier skin tones – not only does it get rid of clear dirt, SPF and makeup, it hydrates, helps reduce sebum production and loosens blackheads. Alpha H Melting Moments Cleansing Balm, £34.95, cultbeauty.co.uk Moisturing mango Blending aromatherapy with African botanicals (the name derives from the Yoruba word for ‘moisture’) this is enriched with cocoa and mango seed butter to hydrate. Liha Orinrin Cleansing Balm, £32, lihabeauty.com Bobbi’s balm While this brand is famed for its makeup, the skincare products are also worth trying. This orange oil- infused balm lifts dirt and debris from skin, smells incredible and is also refillable. Bobbi Brown Extra Balm Rinse, £35, bobbibrown.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoBrutto, 35-37 Greenhill Rents, London EC1M 6BN (020 4537 0928). Starters £7 – £12.50; mains £13.75 – £15; desserts £4.75 – £8; wines from £22.50 Russell Norman is a restaurateur who attends to the details. He attends to the details much as popes attend to God. I know this because I once supplied him with some of those details. A few years ago, when he announced he was opening a New York-style Jewish deli complete with salt beef sandwiches, I insisted we have lunch so I could lecture him on the importance of fat in salt beef. “When people order salt beef,” I told him grandly, “they must be asked whether they want it fat on or off.” Otherwise, it will not be true to the New York Jewish deli tradition. He took notes. And when the much-missed Mishkin’s opened in Covent Garden the waiters did indeed ask the question. Oi, those salt beef sandwiches. It recalled the old gag about Jewish keep-fit lessons: you eat one of those, press your palm to your chest and say, “Feel the burn.” This nerdiness, this insistence on rightness on both our parts, is worth keeping in mind when we get to the table at Brutto, his new take on the Florentine trattoria. But for now, I am at the bar at Joe Allen, the theatreland stalwart just off London’s Strand which has finally reopened since it shut up shop with everything else in March 2020. The inheritors of the Joe’s name have made some changes. Gary Lee, formerly head chef of the Ivy mothership, has come here to do the kind of classy American bistro food he does so well. Meanwhile, what was a dead area at the front has been turned into this buzzy, downlit bar. Norman, who started his restaurant career at the original Joe’s around the corner in the 90s, is in charge of the offering. It is what you, or at least I, want a bar to be. The cocktails are strong and chilled in all the right places and the champagne is £10 a glass, a bargain in this or many other parts of town. Plus, there are squares of truffle-fried toast to help you work up a thirst. Norman is here, overseeing the application of maraschino cherries to the Jerry Thomas Manhattan. This is my new favourite drinking den. By some miracle of London transport, Norman also manages to be at Brutto in Clerkenwell by the time we get there. It occupies the site of what was the original Hix Chophouse, a pleasingly misshapen space of corners and raised levels, softened by the sort of low light which might require the application of the torch on your phone to read the menu. The name Brutto means ugly, which is a lurch into false modesty. There are drapes of linen over the lights and sweet red and white checked tablecloths, as there once were back in the day at Joe Allen. Dogs are welcome. It’s all rather lovely. Just as he did for his cookbook about Venice, Norman spent a lot of time in Florence in preparation for this opening, alongside his head chef Oliver Diver. I’ve come and gone from Florence many times over the years and I swooned when I learned the menu would include a crusty lampredotto, or tripe roll of the sort they serve in the Central Market there. It is one of the world’s great sandwiches. They have had problems getting hold of the right tripe from the fourth stomach, but he promises it’s coming. The correct rolls have been commissioned. Still, he already has a corner tiled in white and green, a tribute to the legendary Florentine trattoria Sostanza, where they cook chicken breasts in fizzing butter over coals. There’s also a blackboard list by weight of big old Scottish T-bones, playing the part of the bistecca alla Fiorentina at a good value £8.55 per 100g. But my interests lie elsewhere: with fat brown anchovies, sourdough and cold butter; with bruschetta heaped lavishly with sweet and funky chopped chicken livers. From the main courses we have taut-skinned pork and fennel sausages, plump with seeds and no filler whatsoever for £14. There is a dune of braised lentils and a dollop of nose-tickling mustard to bring it all together. The peposo, a beef-shin stew heavy with whole black peppercorns that pop pleasingly against the roof of the mouth, is proof if it were needed that long-cooked brown food is the best food. These are all big, heavily built flavours, like they’ve been working out down the gym for a good few months before landing on your table. It is with two of the starters that interesting questions arise. Thin slices of roasted pork served at room temperature and sprinkled with caperberries come with a Jackson Pollock splatter of tonnato sauce, that shamelessly savoury confection of a mayonnaise, blitzed with tuna and anchovies. I am used to the plate being flooded with the tonnato. That’s how it arrives in so many Italian-owned restaurants in London. I ask Norman if this is him being true to the Florentine way of doing things. He says it is, and gives the impression that the familiar way of serving it in London and elsewhere, in a big pond, is somewhat vulgar. He also points to the famous panzanella bread-based salad. Usually in London it is made with big, dressing-soaked croutons. Here the bread is a white mulch, akin to baby posset. Because that’s the Florentine way. As I once lectured Norman on the “correct” way to do salt beef in a New York style deli I cannot now also lecture him on the pitfalls of authenticity even though, as I always say, authentic is not the same as good. Braised Cantonese chicken feet are proof of this. But next time, I might see if I can order some extra tonnato sauce on the side. And his refusal to put vin santo on the menu because it’s a bit naff is slightly annoying, especially as it’s bloody everywhere in Florence. Still, he finds some amaretto (from a bottle branded Amaretto; none of your Disaronno muck here) and it is a lovely accompaniment to a pitch-perfect tiramisu and a bowl of ice-cream with “ugly but good” hazelnut meringue cookies. It is common to describe a restaurant like this as a “passion project”. That makes it sound emotional and gushing. Norman, who also founded the Polpo group and Spuntino, is too experienced in this business to let gush get in the way of the fundamentals. London has an enormous store of exceedingly good Italian restaurants. Brutto is the new one we didn’t quite know we needed. News bites Chef Ravinder Bhogal is staging an all-day event on 28 November at her restaurant Jikoni in London’s Marylebone, in aid of the domestic violence charity Women and Girls Network. The Samosa Sisterhood will bring together a Thali style menu, complete with Bhogal’s spin on the samosa, alongside readings by a lineup including actor and writer Meera Syal, chef Ravneet Gill and broadcaster and journalist Mishal Husain. Tickets are £75 and are available from Jikoni. The Mumbai influenced restaurant group Dishoom, with five outposts in London as well as places in Manchester, Birmingham and Edinburgh, is launching a festive feast menu from 22 November until 24 December. The menu, available to groups of four to 11 people, costs £39 a head and includes a turkey raan, Bombay potatoes, masala winter greens with house black daal and a centrepiece sharing dessert of cinnamon ice cream, fresh fruit and sponge (dishoom.com). Chester is to get a new restaurant, headed by 2016 Roux scholarship winner Harry Guy, who has cooked at various of Simon Rogan’s restaurants, as well as the Savoy Grill and the Mallory Court Hotel. X by Harry Guy will be at Wildes Chester, a boutique hotel which opens next summer. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Found Nerello Cappuccio, Sicily, Italy 2020 (£7, Marks &amp; Spencer) When we describe something as obscure or unusual, we’re making a guess about the average person’s knowledge of the field in question. Some of these judgment calls are easier to make than others. The two best national supermarket wine departments, M&amp;S and Waitrose, have had to make judgment calls about their own area of specialism since both launched wine ranges (respectively Found and Loved &amp; Found) based on the idea of introducing their customers to new wines. There’s a fair bit of overlap in what the two departments think customers are unfamiliar with. Both have lively young reds made from native Sicilian varieties: Waitrose’s Loved &amp; Found Perricone 2020 (£7.99) and (my slight preference) M&amp;S’s Beaujolais-esque Nerello Cappuccio. Waitrose Loved &amp; Found Roero Arneis, Italy 2020 (£7.99, Waitrose) Also in both ranges: excellent examples from southern Chile (M&amp;S’s Found País 2019 from the Itata Valley at £9 just pips Waitrose Loved &amp; Found País 2020 from the Maule Valley); a pair of equally good South African whites (Loved &amp; Found Bukketraube 2020, £8.99; and Found Grenache Blanc 2020, £8); and a wine apiece made from one of France’s manseng grape varieties (Loved &amp; Found Petit Manseng 2019 at £9.99 and Found Gros Manseng 2020 at £9). Both ranges also do a nice line in supporting-cast grape varieties in famous regions: elbling rather than riesling in the Mosel (Waitrose), mazuelo rather than tempranillo in Rioja (M&amp;S), and the apple and pear freshness of white arneis rather than better-known red nebbiolo, barbera or dolcetto of Piedmont. Skouras Greek Agiorghitiko, Greece 2018 (£10.99, Aldi) Greece is an ideal candidate for initiatives of the Found or Loved &amp; Found kind: the country’s wines remain criminally underrated. The country is also one of several from outside the mainstream making an appearance in the increasingly adventurous range at Aldi. Like many Greek reds, the Skouras Greek Agiorghitkio will appeal to fans of Italian wine, with its versatile food-friendly sweet-sour plum and cherry tanginess. The discounter hasn’t gathered all of its esoteric choices under a single brand à la M&amp;S and Waitrose, but there are new wines in the range from Bulgaria, Canada, China, Lebanon, Romania and Switzerland, with the delicate, genteel, off-dry Swiss Fendant 2020 (£9.99) a charming introduction to a style that is everywhere on wine lists in its home country but still all too rare over here. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachThe dilemma I’m only now able to get back into society after 20 months of having to isolate. Due to medical complications, I was only recently vaccinated and had been completely solitary out of fear of dealing with Covid. I was ill with a life-threatening infection at one point during lockdown and luckily got through that, but it showed me how alone and vulnerable I am. I have also been made redundant. I have been applying for jobs, and going to interviews. Inevitably, I am being rejected and even when I’m not, my value is being questioned and negotiated down. I feel so let down by what I thought were solid friendships. Colleagues and friends dropped me when I could not offer them work due to losing my job. You are totally on your own in life and relationships are all meaningless. At 39, I’ve given up on the idea of a romantic relationship and having a family. Men want to know on the first date whether you’re attracted to them – it takes me longer to know. It’s as though there’s no value given to nurturing relationships. I’m not looking for anything major, just responding either way to a text suggesting meeting up for a stroll, being available for a laugh and chat from time to time, or to go on a date without expectations. The door to the world might now be open but I am struggling to go through it. Philippa’s answer I’m sorry, you’ve had more than your fair share of knockbacks and illness and isolation. We can have some bad experiences dating, or with people we thought were friends and it’s natural we think that this is a pattern and that all experiences will be like this in one way or another, proving to you that humans are somehow bad, and relationships meaningless. Our challenge in circumstances like these is to not lose our faith in the inherent goodness of most people. When a pack animal is taken from their group and isolated then reintroduced, they don’t throw themselves back into the centre, they stay on the periphery, don’t take risks and they stay relatively isolated. This experiment has been done with rats and with fruit flies. And I don’t think humans are much different. Isolation and loneliness makes us wary of others, distrustful. If something happens once or twice we can experience it as a pattern, and we withdraw to protect ourselves from it happening again. We become wary of being vulnerable to shield ourselves from further rejection. And we can make very reasonable-sounding excuses to do this – just like you presented me with your evidence. Reasoning can become our enemy when we use it to back up our instinct to shy away from new people after a period of isolation. But we have the edge on fruit flies and rats because we can also use our powers of reason to override those instincts which tell us to hide. We can lead with the brain instead of with our instincts. There is also the danger of the self-fulfilling prophecy. If you go to a gathering of people and you think as you enter the space, “Nobody likes me, no one wants to talk to me, relationships are meaningless,” how would that show in your body language? What vibes would you be giving off? You’d probably stay on the edges, avoid eye contact and be guarded in any conversations. Now suppose instead you think, “Everyone is interesting and attractive and pleased to see me and I’m interesting, valuable and attractive. I want to talk to them about what I’m thinking, and I want to find out what they are thinking about,” then how would that show in your face, body language, eye-contact and the vibe you give off? It’ll make you more approachable, friendlier and relatable. Both scenarios are speculative fantasy but I always say if you are going to have a fantasy about other people make it a good one. Make it the best one and believe it and it will show in your face and it will turn your life right around. How do I know this will work for you? I cannot possibly know, but I believe it. I’ve done it, my clients have done it and I get very excited about it. If you cannot do it, go to a hypnotherapist until you can. Reprogramming yourself from “everyone is horrible” to “everyone is lovely” can make the biggest difference in your life. You may find it easy or it might take all your courage to flip this switch. You’ll need to turn your attention away from the evidence you’ve cherrypicked which backed up the stories you used to tell yourself about relationships and look the other way towards hopefulness and evidence that some seeds do germinate (but they won’t if you don’t sow them). Now, repeat after me: “everyone is interesting and attractive including you and me and we are all very pleased to see each other”. It will take practice. You have acclimatised to “everyone is not worth the effort” because you’ve practised that. Time to upgrade to your next self-fulfilling prophecy. We only have one life (apparently) – don’t be a fruit fly. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe Observer Magazine of 8 March 1970 had a bit of fun with a colour test developed by the psychologist Dr Max Lüscher that supposedly revealed personality and character traits (‘Showing your true colours’), despite his stern warning that ‘it is not a parlour game or a horoscope’. Robert Shields, the Observer’s psychology correspondent, assessed the test and presented a simplified version to try out for yourself. There were eight coloured cards to rank in order of preference. Mine were violet, red, dark blue, green, brown, black, yellow, and grey. I was delighted to find that violet is ‘popular among pre-adolescents, emotionally immature adults and homosexuals’ and showed one’s modus operandi, but the second choice shows what one’s objective really is – for red, ‘excitability, sexual desire, the will to win and the urge to dominate others’. Nailed it. Red stands for ‘revolution, anger (“I saw red”) and violence’, blue ‘has the effect of calming people down’ (‘in a blue room, a person’s blood pressure falls slightly’) but ‘most colours do not have so easily measurable an effect’. Weirdly, he considered these to be universal, despite the obvious cultural biases. ‘There is some mystery surrounding the widespread dislike of green,’ he averred, ‘which in some countries is associated with envy or greed.’ The test was put to six well-known people of the time. The first two choices of Mary Whitehouse, of the Viewers and Listeners Association, were yellow and red. ‘May try to spread her activities over too wide a field,’ concluded Lüscher, but she disagreed. ‘I don’t think I’m overstretched, you know. In the summer I do very little at all.’ If only she’d done even less. Unfortunately for Peter Cadbury – first choice, blue – the ‘day after we visited him at his Westward TV offices he was fired by his fellow directors’. At least his blood pressure would have been lower than it otherwise might have been.Staff who were placed on furlough are six times more likely to lose their jobs than other workers – but the end of the scheme had little impact on the levels of unemployment, an assessment of the programme has revealed. There had been concerns that with more than a million workers still on the scheme when it came to an end last month, its withdrawal could lead to a spike in unemployment and dent the UK’s stuttering economic recovery from the pandemic. However, with sectors such as hospitality, care and heavy goods transport complaining of major shortages of workers, research by the influential Resolution Foundation suggests that only around 136,000 workers moved from furlough to either unemployment or inactivity when the scheme was closed. Its study, based on a survey of around 6,100 working-age adults during the second half of last month, is the first attempt to analyse the effects of closing the programme. It is still not clear whether people simply returned to work at their existing company or moved to new jobs. However, the lack of any clear economic dislocation since the scheme closed suggests workers largely returned to their existing jobs on an either part-time or full-time basis. The most recent official data shows that there were still 1.1 million employees furloughed when the job retention scheme was closed at the end of September, almost half of whom (44%) were only partially furloughed and working some hours. Almost nine-in-ten workers (88%) who were furloughed in September were employed in October, while 12% moved into either unemployment or inactivity. Analysts said that the small rise in unemployment confirmed that chancellor Rishi Sunak had been right to extend the furlough scheme to the end of September. Under initial plans, it had been due to close in March. It means that the biggest economic contraction in a century has led to one of the smallest recession-led rises in unemployment. “During its 18-month duration the Job Retention Scheme has supported over 11 million employees, preventing lockdowns and huge behavioural changes from causing catastrophic rises in unemployment,” said Charlie McCurdy, economist at the Resolution Foundation. “Plans to prematurely close the scheme led to concerns that its end would spark a fresh rise in worklessness. But extending the scheme to beyond the reopening of the economy this summer has helped to limit this rise. “While it is welcome that unemployment has remained low, recently furloughed staff did face a much higher risk of losing their job in October. This reinforces the need for Britain’s stuttering economic recovery to strengthen so that more of these workers can be helped back into work swiftly rather than leaving the labour market altogether.” The independent public finances watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility, has already reduced what it predicts to be the peak of unemployment to 5.2% this autumn, rather than the 6.5% peak it forecast in March 2021. There are more than a million vacancies in the economy, which is also enduring labour shortages. Last week, Uber’s chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, visited London amid a drivers crisis for the company, which is facing a 20,000 shortage. Meanwhile, the number of jobs advertised in transport, logistics and warehouses has increased fourfold since the start of the pandemic. Uncertainty over the economy remains, however, and there is evidence that the public is saving money until the recovery is more secure – and that the poorest have suffered the most from the pandemic. A Christmas spending splurge, using money saved up during the pandemic, is unlikely to materialise, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies. When people were asked what they would do with an extra £500, they told the think tank on average that only £55 would be spent over the next three months. Economists are also concerned that the poorest households are the least likely to increase their spending after suffering a large proportionate drop in their overall wealth.The bean poles and pea sticks are still up. Ghostly, empty now of summer. Strung with fading nasturtiums, defiant of winter for few days more. I am holding on to their height and memories. Echoes of the growing season. Dialled-down reminders of what was. The sunflowers are pulled, broken tree-trunk stems tidied away. The seeds have been mostly saved or eaten by birds. The rest are aged, darkened, mildewed. The neighbour’s last apples are fallen. The giant cardoons have collapsed, their seed heads exploded on the ground. The loss more recent. November is a crueller month. Mostly it’s just me now, and our near-resident robins. The curious cat. The young fox still occasionally comes by of an evening. Immune to me, it looks back slyly, playful, as it slinks into the plot. The visits make me happy. Owls call more frequently as the light fades. Melancholy reigns. Dishes of drying seed are scattered through the house. The communal shed is cluttered, dark and damper now. Our seed needs warm and dry. I have been focusing on tagetes. A new stream of first-generation flowers, dead heads gathered in the damp morning – stuffed into my pockets. I gently lay them on kitchen roll on my return. I try not to make a mess; keep the shallow bowls from overflowing. I get they mean more to me than to other people in the house. Seed-saving came to us by happy accident, at the start of our gardening here; from masters of the craft passing through on their way to the far west of Ireland. Seeds that came with history: Trail of Tears beans and tear peas from the Basque. I mourn that it’s harder now to get seed from friends from their trips: Andrew and Sarah at Adaptive Seeds in Oregon; Madeline and Holly at Brown Envelope Seeds in Cork. Until it eases, our saved seed will overflow. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comWorld leaders and environmental experts have broadly welcomed a UN climate deal that for the first time targeted fossil fuels as the key driver of global warming, while some criticised the agreement for not going far enough. While the agreement won applause for keeping alive the hope of capping global warming at 1.5C, many of the nearly 200 national delegations wished they had come away with more. The two-week conference in Scotland also delivered a major win in resolving the rules around carbon markets, but it did little to assuage vulnerable countries’ concerns about long-promised climate financing from rich nations. The “Glasgow climate pact” was adopted despite a last-minute intervention by India to water down language on “phasing out” coal to merely “phasing down”. India’s environment and climate minister, Bhupender Yadav, said the revision reflected the “national circumstances of emerging economies”. “We are becoming the voice of the developing countries,” he told Reuters, saying the pact had singled out coal but kept quiet about oil and natural gas. “We made our effort to make a consensus that is reasonable for developing countries and reasonable for climate justice,” he said, alluding to the fact that rich nations historically have emitted the largest share of greenhouse gases. US climate envoy John Kerry said governments had no choice but to accept India’s coal language change. “If we hadn’t done that we wouldn’t have had an agreement,” he said. Chinese negotiator Zhao Yingmin said the biggest success of the summit was to “finalise the rulebook”. “Now we can start implementing it and delivering it on our achieved consensus.” Still, some poor countries were left frustrated at the pact, which they said did not address their concerns about “loss and damage”. This refers to the destruction caused by extreme weather, which is now hitting vulnerable countries far harder and more frequently than had been predicted. “This package is not perfect. The coal change and a weak outcome on loss and damage are blows,” said Tina Stege, climate envoy from the Marshall Islands. “Still, elements of the Glasgow package are a lifeline for my country. We must not discount the crucial wins covered in this package.” Fiji’s prime minister, Frank Bainimarama, said the 1.5C target leaves Glasgow “battered, bruised, but alive”. The leader thanked Pacific negotiators for their “heroic effort” at Cop26 to secure a path away from coal and fossil fuel subsidies in the final deal. “The compromise we’ve struck will only count if nations now deliver,” he said on Twitter. The pledges on emissions cuts made at the two-week Cop26 summit in Glasgow fell well short of those required to limit temperatures to 1.5C, according to scientific advice. Instead, all countries have agreed to return to the negotiating table next year, at a conference in Egypt, and re-examine their national plans with a view to increasing their ambition on cuts. Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister who presided over the fortnight-long Cop26 talks in Glasgow, acknowledged the scale of the task remaining: “We can now say with credibility that we have kept 1.5C alive. But, its pulse is weak and it will only survive if we keep our promises and translate commitments into rapid action.” Aminath Shauna, the Maldives’ minister for environment, climate change and technology, pointed out that to stay within the warming limit nations agreed in Paris, the world must cut carbon dioxide emissions essentially in half in 98 months – a formidable task. “The difference between 1.5 and 2 degrees is a death sentence for us,” she said. The return to negotiations next year, to begin an annual process of revising national targets on greenhouse gases, will be a fraught process, as some countries contend that they are already doing their utmost. Even the small step of agreeing to revise the plans was only achieved after overcoming stiff opposition, yet revision is essential if the world is to avoid surpassing the 1.5C threshold. One of the fiercest disagreements in the final hours was over the wording of an intention to abandon coal, which was watered down from a “phase-out” to a “phase-down”. Yet it marked the first time that such a resolution had been made under the UN climate process. Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, said: “It’s meek, it’s weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending. And that matters.” Current climate finance, which is provided to countries to help them invest in green technology and other emissions-cutting efforts, and to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis, is already falling short of promises, and even if fulfilled would be insufficient to cover these heavy losses and humanitarian disasters. By 2050, these hits could amount to a fifth of GDP for some poor countries, according to estimates from the charity Christian Aid. But rich nations have been reluctant to agree any mechanism for providing funding for loss and damage, in part because some of the debate has been framed in terms of “compensation”, which rich countries cannot countenance. Many observers called on countries to step up their efforts in the next year. Mary Robinson, former UN commissioner for human rights and chair of The Elders group of leaders and former statespeople, said: “Cop26 has made some progress, but nowhere near enough to avoid climate disaster. While millions around the world are already in crisis, not enough leaders came to Glasgow with a crisis mindset. People will see this as a historically shameful dereliction of duty. Leaders have extended by a year this window of opportunity to avert the worst of the climate crisis. The world urgently needs them to step up more decisively next year.” Mohamed Adow, director of the Nairobi-based thinktank Power Shift Africa, said: “The needs of the world’s vulnerable people have been sacrificed on the altar of the rich world’s selfishness. The outcome here reflects a Cop held in the rich world and the outcome contains the priorities of the rich world.” Many poor nations accepted defeat on their pleas to put stronger provisions on loss and damage into the text, in the closing hours of the conference, in order to allow the broader deal to go through. Making the concession, Lia Nicholson, lead negotiator for Antigua and Barbuda, which chairs the 37-strong Alliance of Small Island States, said: “We are extremely disappointed and we will express our grievance in due course.” Adow added: “We are leaving empty-handed but morally stronger, and hopeful that we can sustain the momentum in the coming year to deliver meaningful support which will allow the vulnerable to deal with the irreversible impacts of climate change, created by the polluting world, who are failing to take responsibility.” The Cop also resolved several outstanding technical issues that had prevented aspects of the 2015 Paris climate agreement from coming into operation. These issues, on carbon trading and the “transparency” with which countries monitor and report their emissions, have dogged the annual climate meetings for six years but compromises were finally reached, which earned applause for Sharma. Patricia Espinosa, executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, said: “After six years, this is a significant accomplishment.”Much of the country is outraged and even Downing Street is embarrassed. But for Conservatives in wealthy suburbia, the way MP Sir Geoffrey Cox is piling up his non-parliamentary earnings is nothing less than a badge of pride. Last month Tories in former foreign secretary Dominic Raab’s Esher and Walton constituency invited Cox to address an “autumn lunch” at Burhill Golf Club. A poster to advertise the event said Cox is a “most charismatic speaker full of gusto and drama” who, before being appointed attorney general and giving up his private practice, “had been the highest earning MP in the UK”. The MP, barrister and former attorney general is in hot water after the Daily Mail revealed last week that he had earned hundreds of thousands of pounds in legal fees working in the Caribbean during the coronavirus pandemic. Cox, who has long been known to be one of parliament’s big earners, took advantage of the pandemic lockdown rules to cast votes in the Commons from 4,000 miles away while he was busy advising the prime minister of the Virgin Islands in a corruption case brought by the British Foreign Office. Amid the resulting furore over his actions, Cox quickly confirmed that he had, in fact, earned more than £1m this year from his legal work, a large slice of which was for the Caribbean assignment, on top of his £82,00 salary as an MP. Labour’s shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, said that it was astonishing that Tories could promote Cox in the poster for the Esher and Walton constituency event because of how much he earned rather than his public service. While he had not broken any rules, the extent of these private earnings did not look good at a time when Boris Johnson is battling to hold back a tsunami of Tory sleaze allegations. “You don’t judge MPs by how much they earn but by what they do for their constituents and what they do in parliament,” Lammy said. The event in his constituency may explain why Raab, when asked if Cox’s earnings were appropriate, tried his best not to criticise his former cabinet colleague, saying it was up to constituents to judge for themselves. Analysis of the MPs’ register of interests by the Guardian showed that Cox has earned almost £6m from his work as a barrister outside parliament since he was elected as the Conservative MP for Torridge and West Devon in 2005. Esher and Walton Conservative party were approached for comment. • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 to include an image of part of the autumn lunch invitation.And that is a wrap for Sunday’s news. As always, it was an absolute pleasure going through the day’s news with you. Let’s re-cap on the big ones: A watered-down agreement was struck at the end of the Cop26 talks, following a dramatic last-minute intervention by India. Victoria recorded four Covid deaths, 905 new cases. NSW recorded 195 new Covid cases, one death. Appearing on Insiders, health minister Greg Hunt said the vaccination of five to 11-year-olds will not be approved until early January. Hunt also indicated Australia may not update its 2030 target. Queensland hit the 70% vaccination milestone. Author Wilbur Smith died in his home in Cape Town, aged 88. Canberra recorded 15 new Covid cases. In a searing statement, ABC chair Ita Buttrose accused the Morrison government of political interference and attempting to intimidate and control the broadcaster. And Carlton defender Liam Jones announced his retirement from AFL after previously saying he would not get the Covid vaccine. We will of course be back tomorrow. For now, go well team Guardian. Earlier we reported that under-12s won’t receive their first Covid vaccination jab until early next year. Natalie Beak and Karen Armstrong from Covid Safe Schools have responded to the announcement saying it will: “result in thousands of children, under the age of 12, continuing to contract COVID-19 over the coming months. “With cases in children continuing to climb, and by far the greatest number of outbreaks occurring in schools and early childhood centres, the government needs to do everything in its power to expedite the procurement of this vaccine, as well as to commit to a safe air program in Australian schools.” More than 50,000 Australian children have contracted Covid since the start of the pandemic, they said. One in 20 of them have been hospitalised. “We don’t yet know the long-term impacts of this disease but we do know that preventing an illness is far better than treating it. We owe our children the strongest protections we can give them.” You can read Amy Remeikis’ story here: Save the Children has also responded to Australia’s attorneys general agreeing on Friday to support developing a proposal to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 12 years old. Matt Gardiner, executive director of Save the Children’s Australian Services said it was “a nothing decision”. “Raising the age of criminal responsibility to 12 instead of 14 is not a practical solution. It goes against all expert advice and evidence. “No child has ever left incarceration in this country better than they went into it.” There will still be over 456 12 and 13-year-olds behind bars in Australia if the age of criminal responsibility is only raised to 12 rather than to 14, he said. Most of these children are in prison in Queensland, Western Australia and NSW. “Raising the age to 14 was never an ambit claim, this isn’t an industrial agreement where we can meet in the middle. This position is based on two decades of neuroscience that tells us that children, aged 11 to 13 cannot understand the consequences of their actions.” There was a rally in Parramatta today to demand answers from NSW police over the shooting of Stanley Russell. Last week, my colleague Lorena Allam wrote about the increasing pressure on the state government and state police to provide “quick and transparent” answers to the family of the aboriginal man. You can read her story here: We have been following the breaking news this afternoon that AFL footballer Liam Jones has announced his retirement. It come just days after he refused to get the Covid vaccine. My colleague Emma Kemp has the full story here ... This morning Climate Council put out a statement following the end of COP26 and it is damning on Australia’s performance at the conference. Climate Council Head of Research Dr Simon Bradshaw said 140 countries lifted their game on climate action at COP26, while Australia cemented its reputation as a laggard. “The federal government showed up empty-handed to a pivotal moment in the fight for our future. They’ve let down our Pacific neighbours, as well as Australians who do not deserve to endure more frequent and severe bushfires, floods, droughts and heatwaves,” Bradshaw said. “As our allies and trading partners rise to the climate challenge, we’re stuck in a polluting past with a handful of countries including Russia and Saudi Arabia. The Government’s own Net Zero modelling, released two days ago, predicts Australia will still be a major coal and gas exporter in 2050.” We’ve got more on Liam Jones here from AAP: Carlton defender Liam Jones has chosen to end his AFL career just days after it was revealed he was reportedly unvaccinated for Covid-19. The 30-year-old was contracted for 2022. “I wish to announce my retirement from AFL football effective immediately,” Jones said in a statement on Sunday. “I want to take this opportunity to thank all who have supported me throughout my journey, both personally and professionally. I love the game and I’ll miss my teammates.” Carlton head of football Brad Lloyd indicated Jones had been weighing up his decision for some time. “We have been in constant dialogue with Liam in recent months and allowing him the time he needed to make an informed decision regarding his playing career,” Lloyd said. “Liam confirmed with us today that he has made the decision to retire, and his wish for the specific reasons of that decision to be kept private.” From AAP: Three men have had a lucky escape after their five-metre dinghy capsized and sank off the coast of Tasmania’s remote west. The trio, all locals, were forced to swim to shore after getting into trouble around 7.30pm on Saturday about 10km south of Cape Sorell, near Macquarie harbour. One of the men was able to ring police but a helicopter couldn’t leave Hobart due to bad weather. “This incident serves as a warning that boat operators need to show a high degree of caution when setting or checking cray pots close to shore, particularly on the west coast,” Tasmania Police said in a statement. “Inexperience and the potential for rogue waves can have tragic consequences. The men were very fortunate to have been within mobile service range.” The men suffered minor injuries and were left “cold and wet” but able to walk to holiday shacks in the area. A local transported them across Macquarie Heads to their camp. There have been two fatal boating mishaps in Tasmania in recent weeks. A 65-year-old man’s body was found washed ashore in southern Tasmania on Friday morning after he set off the day before with his son, who was rescued after spending eight hours at sea. Three friends died on a boating trip off the state’s north-west in October. Want to know what the Cop26 deal means for Australia? Environment and climate editor Adam Morton outlines here five key questions the federal government must answer. AFL footballer Liam Jones has decided to retire after choosing not to get the Covid vaccine. Melbourne diners enjoying a meal out this week will be able to claim 30% of their bill back, in a move the government hopes will encourage people back into the CBD. The $5m voucher scheme is part of a $44m package to help boost weekday foot traffic. You can get the discount by eating at any restaurants, cafes and bars where meals are served across Melbourne City, including Lygon Street, North Melbourne, Southbank, South Wharf and Docklands. Well, it is definitely offical now. Great job Queensland. Senior lawyers have questioned whether the alleged abductor of Cleo Smith can have a fair trial by jury after after blanket media coverage that included the accused, Terence Kelly, being shown barefoot and shackled while being transported to prison. Kelly, a 36-year-old from Carnarvon in Western Australia, was photographed two days after his arrest in leg irons and handcuffs, with no shoes on, being ferried to a plane by police for a flight to Perth. Got some bad neighbours? Well, you’re not alone. But don’t fret! We’ve got this great little yarn about how you can handle it. We’ve got some more information on the large fire that has broken out at a factory site in the Hunter region of New South Wales. More than 20 firefighting units are attending the scene in Kurri Kurri and multiple large buildings are ablaze. The fire is being fuelled by the strong winds and large quantities of chemicals, hand sanitiser and paint. The site includes a medical waste incinerator. NSW police said the building was believed to be empty. A police spokesperson said: There is currently no risk to residential properties. The building is believed to have been unoccupied at the time, and no injuries have been reported. Members of the public are advised to stay home with your windows closed and air-conditioning on. Those suffering from a respiratory condition are advised to avoid the area and seek medical assistance if required. And I’ve got some extra information on Queensland borders. Earlier today Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath addressed the media. By the federal government’s numbers, the state hit the 70% milestone today, but premier Annastacia Palaszczuk would officially announce it tomorrow, D’Ath said. The premier will stand up tomorrow with great news. Queensland, you are kicking this out of the park. This 70% is just the start. We are on our way not just to meeting our 80% target as well, but getting to 90% target. Palaszczuk is expected to announce an easing of border restrictions early next week. D’Ath said people from hotspots who were hanging out to get into Queensland should start getting prepared. They need to be double vaxxed, have a test 72 hours before they arrive in the state and have adequate home quarantine measures in place. When those border passes become available in the next few days, they can apply. A woman is on the run from South Australian police after allegedly giving false ID before escaping from a medi-hotel in Adelaide last night. The woman had arrived from Darwin and was transferred to a city medi-hotel, but left the hotel about 7.45pm on Saturday. It will be alleged she provided false identification to police on arrival in South Australia. The woman tested negative to Covid-19 on arrival in SA. She was last seen wearing the same outfit as in CCTV image and may have gotten into a taxi near the intersection of Pulteney Street and Rundle Mall, Adelaide. Anyone who knows the woman’s identity or her whereabouts, or any taxi or other private passenger services that may have transported this person, is asked to contact police immediately on 131 444. We’ve been following the searing statement from Ita Buttrose today, but for those who want the rundown, Amanda Meade has the full story here: Although a lot of the wild weather has passed, there are weather warnings still in place for parts of Victoria and NSW this afternoon. You can check the BOM website for the full list. Two men escaped an incredible near-death experience yesterday when the plane they were flying crashed into the ocean off City beach in Perth. Western Australia police said the pilot reported engine troubles, before being forced to manoeuvre the plane into the ocean shortly after 3.30pm on Saturday, local time. The pilot and passenger were able to exit the aircraft and swim about 20 metres to shore. Neither have any serious injuries. Insp Vic Hussey told reporters it had been airborne for about 20 to 30 minutes, having taken off from Jandakot airport, when the pilot reported an engine problem. “He’d flown north across the coast. He just said to me he was looking for a safe spot to land, and the safest spot he could work out was the ocean, so that’s where he landed,” Hussey said. The ABC had this photo below of the plane crash: For any of you who are interested, here is the full statement from Ita Buttrose ... and it is pretty searing stuff. “I will leave it to Senator Bragg to explain his motives but the impact of this action is clear. As Chair of the ABC Board I am duty bound to call out any action that seeks to undermine the independence of the national broadcaster.” Under-12s won’t receive their first Covid vaccination jab until early next year and the government has no plans to change the definition of “fully vaccinated” for older Australians to include a booster shot, the health minister says. Children aged between five and 11 will not be able to access a vaccine until at least early 2022, Greg Hunt said on Sunday, arguing the federal government saw no reason to rush the program. Read more here: And they’ve done it! This CNN package on Australia’s participation at Cop26 makes for grim viewing. A lot of disappointment from global heads of environmental groups like Greenpeace and Destination Zero. We reported earlier today that the Ben Boyd national park is to be renamed, due to Boyd’s association with blackbirding, a form of slave trade that forced Pacific Islanders to work in Australia. The park will now be renamed by traditional owners. The questioning of place names has been welcomed by Indigenous leaders. Yvonne Weldon, chairwoman of the Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council and the first Aboriginal candidate for lord mayor of the City of Sydney, said the questioning of public space names showed “we are moving forward as a society”. She told the Guardian: We must be secure enough in our identities to continue to talk about our public spaces. Questioning who and what we remember, even when it throws up contradictions, is a sign that we are moving forward as a society and repairing relationships with our communities. Weldon said she had been campaigning to have Aboriginal leaders recognised across Sydney without success. There are 25 publicly funded statues of the colony’s early leaders around the CBD. Among them are Captain Cook, Governor Arthur Phillip, Lachlan Macquarie, Queen Victoria, explorer Matthew Flinders and even his cat Trim. But there isn’t one that recognises Indigenous leaders. You can read the full story here: Shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers spoke to the media a little earlier today. He spoke about the economic recovery and the Cop26 agreement. Chalmers said it was “terribly disappointing” that Australia had not played a constructive role ion Glasgow. Very, very, clearly, Australians wanted the government to be more ambitious with their nearer term targets. The global community wanted Australia to be more ambitious on those interim targets. Instead, we’ve got a government which is part of the problem when it comes to climate change and not part of the solution. This is a government which has overseen a decade of missed opportunities over their period in office. Doing something meaningful on cleaner and cheaper energy, means more jobs and more opportunities and more investment for more of our people. The government can’t get their head around that and so their heart’s not in it. On the Covid-19 economic recovery he said: We desperately need the economy to recover in a way that ordinary working people can share in the benefits of that recovery. What we know from this government – from almost a decade now of missed opportunities – is that this government will never put working families front and centre when it comes to the recovery. This government sees an economic recovery as an opportunity to pat themselves on the back, and not an opportunity to create new jobs and new opportunities for more people in more parts of Australia. The ABC chair, Ita Buttrose, has accused the Morrison government of political interference and attempting to intimidate and control the public broadcaster after the Senate established an inquiry into the ABC’s complaints handling process. Buttrose said in a statement on Sunday: This is an act of political interference designed to intimidate the ABC and mute its role as this country’s most trusted source of public interest journalism. If politicians determine the operation of the national broadcaster’s complaints system, they can influence what is reported by the ABC. Buttrose said the inquiry – set up by Liberal senator Andrew Bragg on Thursday – “appears to be a blatant attempt to usurp the role of the ABC board and undermine the operational independence of the ABC”. As senator Bragg is aware, in October the ABC board initiated an independent review of the ABC’s complaints system by two eminent experts, Prof John McMillan, former commonwealth and NSW ombudsman, and Jim Carroll, former SBS director – news and current affairs. The terms of reference for the review are comprehensive and wide-ranging. Australia’s Aboriginal-led justice coalition Change the Record has slammed Friday’s meeting of attorneys general where they supported developing a proposal to raise the age of criminal responsibility as “empty and inadequate”. Change the Record co-chair Cheryl Axleby said: This is a nothing announcement that does nothing to improve the lives of children, and nothing to close the gap. The medical evidence is clear: governments should raise the age of criminal responsibility to 14 years old as a bare minimum. Three years ago attorneys general committed to exploring options to raise the age and Axleby accused them of doing “nothing since then” to actually help the issue. She said: Last year almost 500 children under the age of 14 languished behind bars, disproportionately Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. This proposed reform would do nothing to help those children – it just kicks the can further down the road. According to data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, if governments only raise the age to 12 years old, then 456 out of the 499 children under 14 in prison last year would remain locked away behind bars. We’ve got a better breakdown on Victoria’s Covid-19 numbers this morning. The state recorded 905 new Covid cases and four deaths since yesterday. There are now 17,302 active cases of the virus in the state, and 411 people have died during the current Delta outbreak; 394 people with the virus are in hospital, and of those, there are 75 active cases in intensive care. The new cases were detected from more than 64,000 test results received yesterday. It’s fair to say the people in the northern rivers of New South Wales generally do not like being told what to do by the government. In a region with a free-thinking, anti-authoritarian reputation, and a long history of anti-vaccination sentiment, the requirement to get the Covid jab for work or leisure purposes was never going to find a warm welcome. Angus Taylor and Marise Payne have released a joint statement welcoming the finalisation of the Cop26 draft text. They said: The Morrison government will always stand up for and make decisions in Australia’s national interest, and we will do what’s right for rural and regional communities. Australia’s economy is almost unique amongst developed countries, with an economy specialised in the production of energy- and emissions-intensive commodities. We are the world’s fourth-largest energy exporter, after Saudi Arabia, Russia and the United States. The statement repeated the claim that Australia’s emissions have fallen faster than similarly developed countries. Ahead of and during Cop26, Australia worked closely with our Pacific family to raise the important role of our oceans in addressing the impacts of climate change, to secure outcomes on climate financing and support for building climate resilience, particularly for vulnerable countries in our Pacific region, and to ensure they have access to low-emissions technologies to support their development and future prosperity. The NSW government will make it harder for frontline workers who catch Covid at work to claim compensation, in a move the premier says will save business millions. The NSW government will roll back the special Covid-19 provision, which was designed to make it easier for workers to claim compensation and added to the Workers Compensation Act in May 2020. Premier Dominic Perrottet said that when the provision was put in there were no vaccines and it had exposed businesses to super-high insurance premiums. The government said insurance claims could rise by $950 on average. Perrottet said: Now that the economy is steadily reopening, we want businesses investing in new staff and higher wages, not inflated insurance bills. Sophie Cotsis, the shadow minister for industrial relations said: Mr Perrottet’s decision is a stab in the back for the tens of thousands of workers fighting Covid. Mr Perrottet expects a hospital cleaner who fell sick fighting COVID to then have to fight iCare too. From AAP: Cherry growers are warning a price hike could be on the way ahead of the festive season. At his 16-hectare orchard at Orange, in central-western NSW, Guy Gaeta grows nine different varieties of cherries. He said: We haven’t got overseas labour. We’ve got very few from the Pacific Islands [but] cherry farmers mainly need the backpackers and at the moment it’s not looking too good. The 64-year-old warned that the labour pains are being felt right across the district and will cost consumers at the till. If we don’t get the labour and we don’t pick at an optimum time, there’s definitely going to be a price increase. I can guarantee if we get $10 a kilo, the consumer will be paying $20-plus. The southern state will see a cold outbreak late Sunday into Monday after the passage of a cold front and a trough. Snowfall is expected to lower to around 200m to 400m in some places. There have been 15 new Covid-19 cases in Canberra in the past 24 hours. That brings the total number of active cases to 172. It comes as Canberrans enjoyed new freedoms this weekend, with masks now only required in high-risk settings, no limits on home visits and nightclubs reopen. Acclaimed author Wilbur Smith has died in his home in Cape Town, South Africa, aged 88. The author published 49 titles, selling more than 140m books in 30 languages. A statement released on the Wilbur Smith Books website: Global bestselling author Wilbur Smith died unexpectedly this afternoon at his Cape Town home after a morning of reading and writing with his wife Niso by his side. In the 49 novels Smith has published to date, he has transported his readers to gold mines in South Africa, piracy on the Indian Ocean, buried treasure on tropical islands, conflict in Arabia and Khartoum, ancient Egypt, World War Two Germany and Paris, India, the Americas and the Antarctic, encountering ruthless diamond and slave traders and big game hunters in the jungles and bush of the African wilderness. If you haven’t already, this great piece from Van Badham looks at how QAnon hasn’t just seeped into far-right politics in Australia, but has destroyed relationships between friends and families. Baham’s mate Meshelle was looking for community when she stumbled into a yogi QAnon culty situation. Albanese said the government was sending a pro-coal message to some electorates to win votes, even though they know the writing was on the wall for the future of coal in this country. The government wants to send messages that it knows aren’t true in some parts of the electorate. It is an arrogant government that is prepared to say anything at all in the short term and to be prepared to use taxpayers’ money to do that. So we have, for example, the proponents of a new coal-fired power plant in Collinsville in north Queensland being given $4 million for a project, for a feasibility study that they know won’t go ahead. If construction on that project doesn’t start during this term of government, then the people in that electorate will know essentially they’ve been conned. Albanese is attacking Australia’s performance at Cop26, saying we need to do more to work constructively with the rest of the world. We’ve worked with Saudi Arabia, Mexico and Brazil as one of the few industrialised countries that refused to change the 2030 target. Albanese is commenting on the Glasgow agreement and attacking the PM for backflipping on key policy areas. This is a prime minister who can’t be trusted who himself says: ‘I’m not concerned about what I said yesterday.’ So given that he can’t give any credence to what he said just yesterday, why should Australians have regard for what he says today? And Anthony Albanese is addressing media now. Greenpeace Australia Pacific has also put out a statement on the Cop26 final text, saying the agreement is far from perfect but it does send a message that coal is on the way out. CEO David Ritter said: This is not the deal the world needed, but it is what has been delivered - and the momentum is in the right direction. The task ahead is relentless pressure on the fossil fuel corporations and reckless governments such as Australia’s. And make no mistake - one clear positive is that the governments of the world have agreed for the first time that the age of coal is over. The language could be stronger, but the message to Scott Morrison and his government is clear - Australia needs to rapidly exit coal and stop lavishing billions in subsidies on this polluting industry. Graham Readfearn’s story from Friday night noted the modelling showed the Coalition’s “technology not taxes” plan would leave the nation relying on offsets and unknown technology breakthroughs – and the gas sector growing. The modelling suggested the “net zero” plan would see the value of the coal industry drop by half by 2050. The Morrison government released modelling underpinning its net-zero-by-2050 goal on Friday afternoon. Critics said it “may as well have been written in crayon” and it pointed to Australia not reaching its own mid-century target. We had a great piece from Ketan Joshi on Saturday morning dissecting the climate modelling: In April this year, Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, said that “we will not achieve net zero in the cafes, dinner parties and wine bars of our inner cities”. This explains why he turned to the salt-of-the-Earth hard-workin’ rural folk at McKinsey – one of the biggest billion-dollar multinational consulting agencies on the planet – to produce the Australian government’s long-awaited modelling explaining the pathway to “net zero by 2050”. A 17-year-old is in critical condition after he was stabbed multiple times in an inner Sydney park. Police were called to Yurong Parkway at Woolloomooloo about 11pm on Saturday with reports of a physical altercation and stabbing. Officers were told three males had stabbed the teenage boy and then fled. The 17-year-old is in St Vincent’s hospital in a critical but stable condition. An investigation is under way with police asking anyone with relevant information to come forward. This from AAP on last week’s job figures: The federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is confident of a strong rebound in the Australian labour market as Covid restrictions and lockdowns end. Official jobs data for October released last week showed the unemployment rate unexpectedly spiking to 5.2% from 4.6%, although it did not capture the easing of restrictions in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. Frydenberg says Australian Taxation Office data shows payroll jobs rose 13% in the fortnight to 24 October. New hires were 25% up in NSW, 15% higher in Victoria and 22% stronger in the ACT. The treasurer told Sky News on Sunday: We are seeing thousands of new hires across the economy but also, importantly, we are going to see tens of thousands – if not hundreds of thousands – of people come off zero hours and back into work. We are very confident of a strong rebound in the labour market, that we can see unemployment get back to the fours, bearing in mind it hadn’t been under 5% for a decade. Treasury analysis using banking data shows consumer spending is now greater than it was pre-pandemic, with NSW and Victoria spending an extra $150m a day after lockdowns eased. Frydenberg suggested the economy was now facing a private sector-led recovery. We as the government are handing over the baton to the private sector to carry Australia’s economy forward. Queensland is just about to reach its first major Covid-19 vaccine milestone today - the state is expected to hit 70% double-dose target this afternoon. In news that will make many separated families happy, it means border restrictions will be eased for those fully vaccinated. Under the state’s roadmap, fully vaccinated people will be allowed to enter from interstate hotspots if they fly in after having a negative Covid test within 72 hours and can quarantine at home for 14 days. Good morning, team Guardian, and many thanks to Christopher Knaus, whose capable hands have taken you through the morning. We’ve got Albanese speaking in a few minutes and I have this fun little fact for your Sunday morning: Tanya Plibersek is now the longest-serving female in the lower house since Federation. Bronwyn Bishop of course spent quite a while, but Plibersek has taken the cake! I’m going to hand you over now to the excellent Cait Kelly, who will take you through the rest of the morning’s developments. Some really interesting news out of New South Wales. Environment minister Matt Kean has announced that the Ben Boyd National Park, located on NSW’s far south coast, will be renamed in the language of its traditional custodians. Indigenous communities had requested the park be renamed due to Boyd’s association with blackbirding, the kidnapping of Pacific Islanders to work as slaves or poorly paid labourers. Kean said: It is time to acknowledge the real history of Ben Boyd and remove his name from the national park that continues to hold enormous cultural significance for Aboriginal people. It is clear from the expert historical analysis, that Ben Boyd’s association with ‘blackbirding’ should not be reflected or celebrated in any way in our national parks. Last year, the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service engaged an independent historian, Mark Dunn, to report on Boyd’s history on the NSW south coast. The report confirmed his involvement in blackbirding was viewed by many at the time as a form of slavery. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese was on Sky News a little earlier. He was asked about Paul Keating’s comments this week criticising Labor and the government for their foreign policy position on China. Albanese was asked whether Australia should be cooperating with China, not working against it, as Keating suggested. Albanese: Well, China, of course has changed its posture in recent times, it has got far more forward-leaning. It’s important that Australia stand up for Australian values and we will continue to do that. And of course, at the same time, it’s important that we have economic relations with China and other countries in our region. Albanese was also asked about Labor’s policy to give people $300 to get a Covid dose. He is asked if Labor would now dump it, given the high vaccination rates achieved without it. No, the policy was, Andrew, as you will well recall, that it was applicable up until December the first. That was the policy that we had. That was the policy that was announced. Will it be offered for boosters? Albanese: Well, we’ve never said that we would do that, Andrew, we had a consistent policy about bringing forward vaccination rates. Well, I said, at a time when Scott Morrison was saying that it wasn’t a race, we were saying it was a race. Albanese was also asked when Western Australia should open up. He played a dead bat. Well, that’s a decision for WA. They should open up whenever it’s safe to do so, based upon the health advice, which is there. I don’t want to see any restrictions in place for longer than is necessary. But I recognise the extraordinary job that Mark McGowan has done in keeping Western Australians safe. On that point, Cop26 president Alok Sharma was asked what the consequences should be for countries like Australia if they refuse the call back to the table next year. Sharma said simply: All countries signed up to this and it’s an international agreement. Hunt is asked about the Cop26 agreement, which requires Australia to update its 2030 targets at next year’s conference. He declines to say whether Australia will do so. But he indicates Australia will only update its projections. We’ve set our target. We’ve set our target. But what we’ll continue to do is update our projections. David Speers presses Hunt on the point: Will Australia update it next year? Is that what we’ve agreed to in Glasgow? Hunt says: I’ll let others speak to the text of it. But the advice that I have is that we have a clear target. And what we change is our projections. And guess what – five years ago, six years ago, everybody said [we wouldn’t] meet our 2020 target. We were able to beat it. They said that we wouldn’t meet our 2030 target. We’re going to beat it. What does that mean? China is up 70%, India is up 80%, Korea is up 30%, Canada down 1%, New Zealand is down 4%. We’re down 20%. So we’re down 20% on our emissions and we’re making enormous progress. But we’re doing it without higher electricity prices and higher petrol prices and that’s the alternative for Australians – higher electricity [prices]. Hunt says the vaccination of five- to 11-year-olds may be approved by early January. The Therapeutic Goods Administration is currently examining the safety and efficacy of the Pfizer vaccine for children of that age. The US has already given emergency authorisation for five-to-11s. Hunt says Australia has the smaller Pfizer doses required for the cohort. We do want to go as quickly as possible ... The expectation that they have set is the first part of January, hopefully early January, but it is in the hands of the medical experts. They operate independently. But they’re going as quickly as possible. We’re in the fortunate position where we have the doses that we require. We included that in the contract. But significantly, we’re ready to go when our regulators are convinced it’s safe and effective for children. Hunt is also asked about the wisdom of states like South Australia and Queensland opening up while vulnerable Indigenous Australians remain relatively unprotected. He says vaccination rates in Indigenous communities are increasing at vastly higher rates than the general community. It is important that we open these borders, and the Doherty modelling has shown that these state figures help protect everybody. But we want every individual to come forward – Indigenous, non-indigenous. We’re focusing in particular today on immuno-compromised patients like cancer patients, with the Breast Cancer Network of Australia standing up and talking with them to urge breast cancer patients and others to have their first dose if they haven’t had it. Or their second. Or to come forward in particular for their boosters. And so, these are national figures that have been set based on the strongest science. What’s set Australia apart? How is it that we have the third-lowest rate of loss of life in the OECD and one of the highest vaccination rates? It’s because we’ve listened to that science. We’ve followed that science. We’ve done that very carefully. And that’s led Australia to a position where we are one of the most highly vaccinated societies, most recently vaccinated societies, and one of the first after Israel to have a whole-of-nation booster program. Hunt is asked about the continued approach of Western Australia to shut its borders. He says the federal government is hearing the state may consider bringing the reopening forward to coincide with the Ashes cricket series’ Test match scheduled to start on 14 January. Well, we’d like to see Western Australia open as soon as possible. It’s obviously a matter for them. It’s subject to their assessments. But we are hearing that they are considering bringing that forward to at least... Well, coincidently, to time with the cricket. We’ll let them determine it. I want to see a Perth test - fast, hard, bouncy wicket, last test of the Ashes, gives us our best chance! But above all else, I want to see not just cricketers but children reuniting with parents. I want the same rules for children and cancer and cardiac patients as for cricketers. And to do that as quickly as possible. It’s our deep humanity to bring people together. And that’s what we’d urge. And you know, we’re seeing the numbers lift in WA and I welcome that. Hunt’s asked whether WA should open the borders prior to Christmas. He says he wants to see them opened “as soon as possible”. Health minister Greg Hunt is speaking now on the ABC’s Insiders program. He is asked about booster shots. He says they are an “important booster” that adds to a person’s strong immune response. We’ve been one of those to start a whole of nation booster program, one of the first after Israel. We’ve already reached 250,000 boosters only a week into the full program. I think we’re at 257,000 boosters at this point. And we have a whole of nation supplies, and so we’re launching today our next campaign Hunt’s asked whether booster shots will be made mandatory for aged care workers and other critical groups. He says there is no consideration, currently, of changing the definition of fully vaccinated from two doses. So it’s recommended. The advice at this stage of Professor Murphy’s Scientific and Technical Advisory Group is that you’re regarded as fully vaccinated with two doses. Everything is always under review, but there’s no plan to change that requirement at this stage. But as we’ve done throughout, we’ll continue to follow the medical advice. That’s how we’ve had one of the lowest rates of loss of life in the world, one of the highest rates of vaccination. And now, one of the earliest whole-of-nation booster programs in the world. The Investor Group on Climate Change says the Cop26 commitments keep the aim to limit warming to 1.5C within reach but that stronger policies and 2030 targets are needed. The group’s chief executive, Rebecca Mikula-Wright, called on Australia and others to commit to clear and strong 2030 climate policies to “unlock the capital needed to transition to a net zero economy”. Global warming of above 1.5°C presents irreversible, foreseeable and large-scale risks to investors and financial markets. The commitments that have come out ahead and as part of Glasgow have been significant but global action is still falling short. The net zero emissions transition is inevitable and already under way and investors want to seize the enormous investment opportunities worth trillions of dollars that will be created. There is a huge opportunity to create new jobs and boost economic growth, but only for those countries that get ahead of the curve. Across Asia, Australia and New Zealand, we call on governments to commit to clear and strong 2030 climate policies that will unlock the capital needed to transition to a net zero economy. Sticking with Covid, NSW has recorded 195 new cases and one death. Those case numbers out of Victoria are encouraging. It’s the first time the state has recorded fewer than 1,000 daily cases since 3 November. The state is also edging closer to the 90% fully vaccinated mark. It’s currently at 87% for those aged 12 or above. Stepping away from Glasgow for a moment, Victoria has recorded 905 new Covid cases and four deaths. Climate Action Network Australia’s executive director, Julie-Anne Richards, said Australians had “every reason to feel let down” by the Morrison government. Our allies like the United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union, Japan and others moved ahead with more ambitious climate plans. The United States and China agreed to increase their ambition going forward. Important neighbours like Indonesia and India flagged their intention to phase down coal. Whereas prime minister Scott Morrison let our country down by treating the Cop like a trade show for fossil fuels, spruiking for giant gas corporations and fossil-fuel technology that has for decades failed to reduce pollution. Indigenous groups have slammed the Australian governments efforts at Glasgow. Ray Minniecon, of the Indigenous Peoples Organisation, said Australia had “totally shattered any hopes we had of repairing and healing the deep wounds and scars of our lands and people”. We leave Cop26 deeply ashamed and embarrassed by the Australian government’s behaviour and attitudes to the deep concerns we have about the climate crisis. We are angry that their solutions are based on the premise of a ‘business as usual’ mentality which will continue to harm our peoples and all Australians on the lands and waters we all love. Shame, shame, Shame! A group representing bushfire survivors in Australia says it is shameful that Australia won the “colossal fossil award” at the Cop26 talks. But Jo Dodds, president of Bushfire Survivors for Climate Action, said the group was heartened made by the efforts of other developed and developing nations at the talks. To our shame, Australia won the Colossal Fossil Award, provided by Climate Action Network International. The award recognises the countries who do the least to prevent dangerous climate heating and the most to promote fossil fuels (and their accompanying emissions!). It’s an eye-watering irony that our nation – still reeling from the most catastrophic bushfires we’ve ever faced, warned that we’ll be facing even worse as the climate continues to heat – is still embracing coal, still investing our taxes in new gas projects, still asking communities like mine to be more ‘resilient’ in the face of ever-growing danger. Bushfire survivors need a reason to keep going. We need a reason to rebuild, a reason for reopening our businesses. We need reasons for hope. At this point, after our government’s performance at Cop26, we don’t have these reasons. Instead, just like the government’s plans for propping up our fossil fuel sector with carbon capture and storage, hope is just a dream. The Climate Council said Australia had done nothing to change its position as the worst performing of all developed countries on emissions reductions at Glasgow. The council’s research director Simon Bradshaw said Australia had been left even further behind at Cop26. The message from the rest of the world to Australia is clear: come back in 2022 with a much stronger target for 2030 and a plan to move beyond coal and gas. The sooner the Australian Government steps up with a plan to drive down emissions this decade, the sooner we can start unlocking Australia’s unrivaled opportunities for new jobs and prosperity through renewable energy and clean industries, start repairing our international reputation, and start protecting Australians and communities everywhere from the ravages of climate change. The Australian Conservation Foundation said the Glasgow agreement, while not ambitious enough, had achieved breakthroughs, “despite the Morrison government’s best efforts”. ACF’s climate change program manager Gavan McFadzean said both major parties in Australia would need to step up with a target to cull pollution by at least half this decade. This was the COP where Australia was left behind, with dire consequences for our climate, economy and jobs. While Glasgow hasn’t achieved the ambition we need, there were breakthroughs. Despite the Morrison government’s best efforts, 140 countries lifted their pollution reduction targets, 103 countries agreed to slash methane pollution, and the last rights were given to coal, with commitments to end construction of new power stations, end public funding, and phase out coal power. Looking forward to next year’s federal election, both the Coalition and Labor will need to step up with a target to cut pollution by at least half this decade, and the policies to get us there Bill Hare, chief executive of Climate Analytics, described India’s last minute intervention to water down language on phasing out coal as “quite shocking”. No one disagrees that India would need support to phase out coal. This was done in a very last minute way and obviously was a surprise to many other parties there. India has long been a blocker on climate action, but I have never seen it done so publicly. India needs to phase-out of coal by 2040 If the Paris Agreements 1.5° limit is to be met and this wording change does not affect that challenge. India already has a very serious coal problem and everyone knows this has to be addressed urgently, So rather than slow action, this will result in even more effort to encourage and support India to begin the transition away from coal Just a reminder that this blog will be taking in Australian reaction to the Cop26 deal. We’re also running a second live blog, with a global focus, here: Former prime minister Kevin Rudd says the agreement, despite being watered down, shows clearly that “coal is on its way to being consigned to history”. He said Australia had “not simply been granted a leave pass to do nothing for another five years - and they will now need to come back to the table by COP27 next year”. Here’s Rudd’s full statement: In the arc of history, COP26 was always going to be judged by whether it bent the emissions curve. And while Glasgow has shown that the ambition mechanism at the heart of the Paris Agreement is beating, survival for those on the frontline of this climate crisis is still not certain. Countries like my own which refused to update their 2030 targets have not simply been granted a leave pass to do nothing for another five years — and they will now need to come back to the table by COP27 next year. While the official text might have stopped short of agreeing to phase out coal, the statements made by world leaders in Glasgow leave no doubt that coal is on its way to being consigned to history. Despite the weakened reference to coal, it still marks the first time an agreement has directly stipulated a winding down of fossil fuels. Cop26 agree an end to fossil fuel subsidies was needed, that greater financial support was needed for poorer nations, and that an accelerated phase out of coal was necessary. That is being hailed as a win by environmentalists. Greenpeace Australia Pacific chief executive David Ritter said the agreement was far from perfect, but said it sent a “clear message to Scott Morrison that his failed climate policy will no longer be tolerated”. This is not the deal the world needed, but it is what has been delivered - and the momentum is in the right direction. The task ahead is relentless pressure on the fossil fuel corporations and reckless governments such as Australia’s. The Australia Institute said Glasgow had moved the dial forward on emissions reductions by directly targeting fossil fuel companies. Richie Merzian, the institute’s climate &amp; energy program director, said: If COP26 is judged on its ability to advance emissions reductions, then Glasgow has already moved the dial forward. Attempts to name and shame fossil fuels have been blocked for major fossil fuel producers in the UN, but finally a line has been drawn in the sand. After 15 years in the process, its heartening to see fossil fuels directly targeted, with significant alliances against coal, oil and gas launched on the margins of COP, language on phasing down traditional coal power agreed, including by Australia. Post-Glasgow, we can rid ourselves of the pretence that fossil fuels can be part of the solution to the climate crisis. Hello, and welcome to our live blog for Sunday, 14 November. The big news this morning is coming out of Glasgow, where a watered down agreement has been struck at the Cop26 talks, following a dramatic last-minute intervention by India. The agreement is now only making a weaker reference to phasing down coal, rather than phasing it out. That will obviously have big ramifications for Australia, which took an openly pro-coal approach to the talks. We’ll have all the local reaction to the deal and any other big developments in Australian news today. Stick with us.Where are you on Sundays? I’m on tour at the moment, so I could be anywhere. This Sunday I woke up in a Bournemouth Airbnb, on a bed so comfy that I stripped it to find out the manufacturer. I’m going to chuck out my disgusting old specimen at home and buy myself one of these ones. Are Sundays busy? It all builds to an evening show, so the whole day has a strange nervousness, an undercurrent of tension that builds until you hit the stage. I’d love to spend the day drinking a real ale in front of a fire at a lovely pub, doing the crossword with the dog at my feet. Instead, I walk around city centres trying not to panic. What do Sundays feel like? There’s no feel – it’s a working day. Because of that, they’ve lost any individual character or meaning. My wife and I sometimes get nostalgic, both yearning for a time when Friday nights were exciting and Sundays were lazy; I miss the comfort of that predictability. How do you relax? Being outdoors. I’ll walk the dog – along the Gower is my favourite spot – and go for a sea swim. I rarely get a Sunday lunch; the last roast I did was at Christmas. We just can’t be bothered with the faff, despite the fact I’d probably enjoy it. Sundays growing up? I was dragged along to church every week against my will. I loathed it completely, and at around 14 I became too big and stroppy to be taken unwillingly. Lunch was alright, then the afternoons were crap. I suffered from social anxiety as a kid – the dread of homework and being back at school was awful. Sunday evening? Pre-show, lots of pacing. I’ve got a routine: eat, shower, soundcheck, iron shirt. Then there’s a two-hour rollercoaster onstage, followed by a crash when I collapse afterwards. Later, my tour manager and I settle down on the sofa with a pizza, glass of wine, and Gordon Ramsay’s Kitchen Nightmares around 1am. It’s more romantic than when I’m at home. The DIY SOS Big Build Children in Need Special is at 9pm on Tuesday, on BBC OneMPs are keeping secret their employment agreements for second jobs worth up to £100,000 annually after quietly changing the rules on disclosure. The public had been entitled to inspect MPs’ contractual arrangements linked to their work in parliament. But the rules requiring MPs to deposit the agreements with the office of the parliamentary commissioner for standards were scrapped by parliament in 2015. Campaigners are now calling for an urgent change in parliament’s code of conduct to force disclosure of the work involved in MPs’ advisory roles. Boris Johnson also faces calls for a review of MPs’ outside interests and a ban on consultancies linked to politics after a public backlash over the extra earnings of many politicians. An analysis of the MPs’ register has revealed more than a quarter of Tory MPs have second jobs, worth more than £4m a year. The interests they represent include the gambling industry, global investments firms and the energy sector. Tom Brake, director of Unlock Democracy, a not-for-profit group which campaigns for democratic reforms, said new rules should be introduced urgently to require the publication of MPs’ employment agreements linked to their political activity. He said: “MPs should make this information available on a voluntary basis with immediate effect. It would help clear the air.” Under a previous guide to the code of conduct, published in 2012, MPs were required to deposit any employment agreement connected to their work as an MP for public inspection. A new code, approved by the House of Commons, in March 2015 removed the obligation. The office of the parliamentary commissioner for standards said last week that no MPs had deposited contractual agreements in the last six years. One official said: “The only such agreements we still hold are historical ones dating from the period before the 2015 election, and none of them are live contracts as the employment has ended.” The row over the government U-turn on proposals to overhaul the House of Commons’ disciplinary system has focused public attention on MPs’ second jobs. Former Conservative transport secretary Chris Grayling is one of the best-paid MPs, with a £100,000-a-year advisory role with Hutchison Ports Europe, which operates the ports of Felixstowe and Harwich and has its parent company in the Cayman Islands. He is paid about £270 an hour. Grayling was given the go-ahead for the role by the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, but said he would not do work in areas where he may have “gleaned specific information” in his ministerial job. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, announced in March that Felixstowe and Harwich would be given freeport status, where normal tax and customs rules do not apply. Former minister Andrew Percy, the Tory MP for Brigg and Goole, has disclosed in the MPs’ register of interest a signing-on bonus of £7,000 for the Canadian-based government relations firm Maple Leaf Strategies, which he worked for until last April. Percy also said he would receive commissions on any business referrals. Percy also discloses in the latest MPs’ register that he has been paid £500 an hour for six hours’ work a month for Iogen Corporation (Canada), a world leader in the development of cellulosic ethanol, a renewable transport fuel. Percy has previously campaigned in parliament for the national rollout of E10 fuel, which contains 10% ethanol. He has also been a member of the all-party parliamentary group for British Bioethanol. He did not respond to a request for comment on his outside interests last week. A report by the committee on standards in public life in July 2018 said the MPs’ code of conduct and guide to the rules should be changed to read: “MPs should not accept any paid work to provide services as a parliamentary strategist, adviser or consultant.” The recommendation was not adopted by the Commons. Speaking at an event at University College London last week, Lord Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life, said the controversy over MPs’ second jobs showed the public’s concern on conduct in public office. He said: “Ethical standards are important for making democracy work. The public does care about this.”Two weeks ago it was difficult to find a single Labour MP who genuinely thought their party was in with a chance of winning the next election. The mood was one of quiet resignation at the prospect of a fifth consecutive defeat. The media had also largely written off Keir Starmer. A fortnight of Tory sleaze stories later, with Boris Johnson having been at the centre of many of them, it all looks very different. “Everything we said, prior to the Owen Paterson fiasco, appeared to be dying in a giant void,” says the shadow cabinet member Charlie Falconer. “Now the goal for Labour is standing open and unguarded. Suddenly it seems like everybody in the media is after stories about how terrible this government is.” A golden rule of spin doctors, often attributed to Alastair Campbell (though he denies being the originator), is that if one particularly bad story is still plastered over the front pages nine days after it first broke, then the person at the centre of the storm will be in terminal trouble. Saturday was the 10th day since the Paterson fiasco, in which Johnson tried to save his friend’s career, despite the latter’s “egregious” breaches of Commons rules. And the sleaze stories were still coming from left and right, thick and fast. The Guardian front page headline was “PM’s holiday villa linked to Goldsmith tax evasion case”, while the Daily Mail had a poll that was such bad news for the Conservatives that the paper splashed it across the front. “After a week of sleaze Labour race ahead of Tories by SIX points”, the Mail said. Embarrassingly for Johnson, this was all on the concluding weekend of the Cop26 climate summit – at which he had hoped to pose as a global saviour. Today, on it goes, with the Observer’s extraordinary revelations about Jennifer Arcuri’s diary of her affair with Johnson when he was London mayor. His ex-lover’s apparently contemporaneous notes show he overruled advice from his own officials in order to further her business interests, and their relationship. A poll for this newspaper by Opinium today also gives Labour a lead – for the first time since January – and shows Johnson’s personal ratings plumbing new depths. Now it is the mood inside the Tory party that is depressed, and very sour. Much of the 2019 intake – including those who won former Labour seats in the north and Midlands because voters liked Johnson’s upbeat political celebrity brand much more than that of Jeremy Corbyn – are furious at being ordered to vote to save Paterson for no reason, only then to be blamed for doing so by their constituents. Frustration at the government’s antics extends right across the Conservative parliamentary party. A Tory MP who won his seat in 2010 said: “Our intake is also pretty pissed off with him because he recently promoted the 2019 intake to jobs ahead of us because they were from the ‘red wall’ seats, when we had been waiting for years. And now this. We are not a happy united team.” Asked on Saturday how bad it was for the prime minister – and if Johnson might be on the way out – a former cabinet minister put it this way: “It is bad. It is certainly the worst crisis he has faced. But it is not unrecoverable.” What Johnson needed to do, he said, was put time into rebuilding personal relations with his MPs, something he was not very good at. Inevitably, with the Tories imploding, there is early talk of rivals manoeuvring for Johnson’s job. Last week Rishi Sunak distanced himself deliberately from the Paterson mess, saying the party had to do better, though Sunak’s own backing among the Tory grassroots has dropped off since his big-state, high-tax budget. From the right, supporters of the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, are said to be out in the field, canvassing away. “They are not very subtle,” says one senior Tory, who had seen some lobbying first-hand. Other names seen as potentially interested and possibly in the frame if things get even worse for Johnson are Jeremy Hunt and the ex-chief whip Mark Harper. Labour meanwhile is finding its voice, with its deputy leader, Angela Rayner, and chair of the standards committee, Chris Bryant, leading the anti-sleaze charge. If Starmer can win the trust of the electorate his MPs know things could really begin to look up. “Keir now needs to take the ball and run with it,” said one frontbencher. For Johnson there is no end to the trouble in sight. The Arcuri revelations are explosive. The parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, is still considering an inquiry into the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat. And on Wednesday, Johnson will appear before the Commons liaison committee to answer questions from senior MPs on sleaze and trust in politics, in what promises to be a highly uncomfortable session in front of TV cameras. Soon the prime minister will have to act to limit second jobs for MPs, which are feeding a daily production line for sleaze stories. But doing so will bring more political problems for the man who himself earned £1.6m as a backbencher from outside work. “He can’t win with his MPs,” said a former minister. “Whatever he does to limit second jobs he will anger huge numbers of us [who have them].” In the space of less than a fortnight, Johnson has gone from being viewed as winner both at Westminster and in the country, to being seen as something of a political liability by his own MPs. Another former minister described him as “a publicity phenomenon, which is how he got the 80-seat majority”. Now that people had begun to see through the act, he suggested, that could be that. “He’s squandering that,” the former minister added. “He looks dodgy. It’s like having a drift in the ceiling and you think, oh, I can live with that for a bit. And the whole fucking ceiling comes down and you think, I wish I’d dealt with that. “Voters don’t seem to care, then suddenly, it all catches up with you. The troubles with the economy are going to mount up. Levelling up is a slogan and not a policy. Global Britain is a slogan and not a policy. He just looks shallow.” Another influential Tory was equally doom laden. “Boris has forgotten what being a Conservative means. It started with ‘parking tanks on Labour lawns’, as a bit of a PR exercise – which was clever, strategic stuff. But it’s gone to his head, he’s bought into his own PR, and he’s now a leader that’s lost his way and forgotten the sound Conservative principles that got him elected as the party’s leader in the first place. “That, combined with his seeming inability to put a strong team of advisers around him, or to empower ministers to go out and deliver for him as they all want to, and you’ve got a toxic mix of havoc and shambles in No 10 that will drive this country into the ground if MPs don’t start doing something about it.”Medical experts are speaking out against Covid-19 vaccine “detoxes” that some inaccurately claim can remove the effects of vaccinations received under mandates and other public health rulings. In one TikTok video that has received hundreds of thousands of views, Carrie Madej, an osteopath based in Georgia, falsely claims a bath containing baking soda, epsom salts and the cleaning agent borax will “detox the vaxx” from anyone who has received a jab. Experts say such a bath could irritate the skin and eyes – but will not remove the effects of a Covid vaccine. In Kansas, Dana Hawkinson, medical director of infection prevention and control for the state university health system, told the Kansas City Star borax was “potentially caustic and harmful”. Angela Rasmussen, a virologist and adjunct professor at the University of Saskatchewan in Canada, told NBC News: “Once you’re injected, the lifesaving vaccination process has already begun. You can’t unring a bell. It’s just not physically possible.” Anti-vaccine groups have also claimed self-administered cupping – an alternative therapy involving suction that has no proven benefits – can remove the effects of Covid vaccines. Social media posts providing instructions on how to “un-inject” a vaccine have been shared. Unproven and sometimes dangerous vaccine “detox” remedies, including restrictive diets and supplements, have been popular in anti-vaccination circles for years. Social media, coupled with politicized resistance to Covid-19 vaccine mandates imposed by businesses and government agencies, has increased the spread of misinformation. TikTok in particular has become a platform for anti-vaccine influencers. Madej’s video was removed but users were able to share it by making duets, a feature by which users can add reactions or context side-by-side with an original video. Some duets, which have also gone viral, list ingredients needed for a “detox bath” or show users making such baths themselves. “This illustrates how these anti-vaccine communities are shifting and pushing these claims toward vaccinated people,” Ciaran O’Connor, an analyst at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, a London anti-extremism and disinformation non-profit, told NBC. The US has recorded more than 762,000 deaths from Covid-19. About 226 million Americans have received at least one vaccine dose and at least 195 million have had two, meaning 58.7% of Americans are fully vaccinated. While the spread of Covid “detoxes” has caused concern among experts, some argue it should be seen as a sign vaccine mandates are working. “I think it is actually a good sign that these ‘How to undo your vaccine’ videos are taking off,” Rasmussen said. “It suggests that a lot of those people who previously were saying ‘vaccines are terrible and I will never do it’ are, actually, doing it.”The Glasgow climate package, aimed at ensuring the world limits global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, was acknowledged even by the UK hosts as “imperfect”, and leaves much of the hard work on cutting greenhouse gas emissions for next year. Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, said: “We asked nations to come together for our planet at Cop26, and they have answered that call. I want to thank the leaders, negotiators and campaigners who made this pact happen – and the people of Glasgow who welcomed them with open arms. “There is still a huge amount more to do in the coming years. But today’s agreement is a big step forward and, critically, we have the first ever international agreement to phase down coal and a roadmap to limit global warming to 1.5C [above pre-industrial levels]. I hope that we will look back on Cop26 in Glasgow as the beginning of the end of climate change, and I will continue to work tirelessly towards that goal.” Al Gore, the former US vice-president, also praised the public pressure put on world leaders at the conference: “The Glasgow Climate Pact and the pledges made at Cop26 move the global community forward in our urgent work to address the climate crisis and limit global temperature rise to 1.5C, but we know this progress, while meaningful, is not enough. “We must move faster to deliver a just transition away from fossil fuels and toward a cleaner and more equitable future for our planet. The progress achieved in the lead-up to and at Cop26 was only possible because of the power of people – young and old – using their voices to demand action.” Many developed and developing countries hailed the progress it represented on the world’s goals. But green campaigners warned that the urgency of the climate crisis meant the world was running out of time. Frans Timmermans, executive vice-president of the European Commission, summed up many countries’ reactions, saying: “It doesn’t stop here, it only starts.” On the last-minute weakening of language about phasing out coal, Timmermans said: “Let’s be clear, I’d rather not have the change. I was very happy with the language we had.” But he added it was “like going from 24 carat gold to 18 carat, it’s still gold … we are now making concrete steps to eliminate coal … and that countries that are so dependent on coal are willing to be part of that agreement is astonishing”. Countries will have to return next year and the year after to update their targets on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. Laurence Tubiana, one of the architects of the 2015 Paris deal and now CEO of the European Climate Foundation, said the outcome showed that the 2015 Paris climate agreement was working as intended. “Despite the Covid-19 crisis, we have accelerated action, responded to the [scientists’] call to close the gap towards 1.5C, and [an agreement to phase down] coal is in the text,” she said. But she added: “There is a lot more to do. The commitments and claims of the first week on finance, forests, end of public finance for fossil fuel, methane and cars must now be translated into real policy and oil and gas production still to be addressed. Nick Mabey, chief executive and co-founder of the green thinktank E3G, said: “Leaders came to Glasgow with some real progress but also the realisation this was not enough to keep their citizens safe. By agreeing this emergency package they have responded to rising climate damage with an action plan to keep 1.5C within reach. But the real task begins now as every country must go home and deliver on their Glasgow promises.” Many youth activists and those from some of the most vulnerable countries took a bleaker view, however. Vanessa Nakate, a climate activist from Uganda, said: “Even if leaders stuck to the promises they have made here in Glasgow, it would not prevent the destruction of communities like mine. Right now, at 1.2C of global warming, drought and flooding are killing people in Uganda. Only immediate, drastic emissions cuts will give us hope of safety, and world leaders have failed to rise to the moment.” She said the scale of the climate movement was increasing: “People are joining our movement. 100,000 people from all different backgrounds came to the streets in Glasgow during Cop and the pressure for change is building.” Rachel Kennerley, climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, criticised the UK government as host nation of the talks. “The road to 1.5C just got harder when these talks should have cleared the way to making it a whole lot easier. The UK government cunningly curated announcements throughout this fortnight so that it seemed rapid progress was being made. Here we are though, and the Glasgow get-out clause means that leaders failed to phase out fossil fuels and the richest countries won’t pay historic climate debt.” She added that the government should take more action at home on cutting emissions: “With the Cop moment over, countries should break away from the pack in their race for meaningful climate action and let history judge the laggards. The UK, as a country with huge historical responsibility for emissions, can end support for a mega gas project in Mozambique, pull the plug on the Cambo oilfield, stop the new coalmine in Cumbria and drilling for oil in Surrey. After all, the prime minister talked a big game at the beginning of the fortnight.”Michelle Carr is frequently plagued by tidal waves in her dreams. What should be a terrifying nightmare, however, can quickly turn into a whimsical adventure – thanks to her ability to control her dreams. She can transform herself into a dolphin and swim into the water. Once, she transformed the wave itself, turning it into a giant snail with a huge shell. “It came right up to me – it was a really beautiful moment.” There’s a thriving online community of people who are now trying to learn how to lucid dream. (A single subreddit devoted to the phenomenon has more than 400,000 members.) Many are simply looking for entertainment. “It’s just so exciting and unbelievable to be in a lucid dream and to witness your mind creating this completely vivid simulation,” says Carr, who is a sleep researcher at the University of Rochester in New York state. Others hope that exercising skills in their dreams will increase their real-life abilities. “A lot of elite athletes use lucid dreams to practise their sport.” And there are more profound reasons to exploit this sleep state, besides personal improvement. By identifying the brain activity that gives rise to the heightened awareness and sense of agency in lucid dreams, neuroscientists and psychologists hope to answer fundamental questions about the nature of human consciousness, including our apparently unique capacity for self-awareness. “More and more researchers, from many different fields, have started to incorporate lucid dreams in their research,” says Carr. This interest in lucid dreaming has been growing in fits and starts for more than a century. Despite his fascination with the interaction between the conscious and subconscious minds, Sigmund Freud barely mentioned lucid dreams in his writings. Instead, it was an English aristocrat and writer, Mary Arnold-Forster, who provided one of the earliest and most detailed descriptions in the English language in her book Studies in Dreams. Published in 1921, the book offered countless colourful escapades in the dreamscape, including charming descriptions of her attempts to fly. “A slight paddling motion by my hands increases the pace of the flight and is used either to enable me to reach a greater height, or else for the purpose of steering, especially through any narrow place, such as through a doorway or window,” she wrote. Based on her experiences, Arnold-Forster proposed that humans have a “dual consciousness”. One of these, the “primary self”, allows us to analyse our circumstances and to apply logic to what we are experiencing – but it is typically inactive during sleep, leaving us with a dream consciousness that cannot reflect on its own state. In lucid dreams, however, the primary self “wakes up”, bringing with it “memories, knowledge of facts, and trains of reasoning”, as well as the awareness that one is asleep. She may have been on to something. Neuroscientists and psychologists today may balk at the term “dual consciousness”, but most would agree that lucid dreams involve an increased self-awareness and reflection, a greater sense of agency and volition, and an ability to think about the more distant past and future. These together mark a substantially different mental experience from the typically passive state of non-lucid dreams. “There’s a grouping of higher-level features, which seem to be very closely associated with what we think of as human consciousness, which come back in that shift from a non-lucid to a lucid dream,” says Dr Benjamin Baird, a research scientist at the Center for Sleep and Consciousness at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “And there’s something to be learned in looking at that contrast.” You may wonder why we can’t just scan the brains of fully awake subjects to identify the neural processes underlying this sophisticated mental state. But waking consciousness also involves many other phenomena, including sensory inputs from the outside world, that can make it hard to separate the different elements of the experience. When a sleeper enters a lucid dream, nothing has changed apart from the person’s conscious state. As a result, studies of lucid dreams may provide an important point of comparison that could help to isolate the specific regions involved in heightened self-awareness and agency. Unfortunately, it has been very hard to get someone to lucid dream inside the noisy and constrained environment of an fMRI scanner. Nevertheless, a case study published in 2012 confirmed that it can be done. The participant, a frequent lucid dreamer, was asked to shift his gaze from left to right whenever he “awoke” in his dream – a dream motion that is also known to translate to real eye movements. This allowed the researchers to identify the moment at which he had achieved lucidity. The brain scans revealed heightened activity in a group of regions, including the anterior prefrontal cortex, that are together known as the frontoparietal network. These areas are markedly less active during normal REM sleep, but they became much busier whenever the participant entered his lucid dream – suggesting that they are somehow involved in the heightened reflection and self-awareness that characterise the state. Several other strands of research all point in the same direction. Working with the famed consciousness researcher Giulio Tononi, Baird has recently examined the overall brain connectivity of people who experience more than three lucid dreams a week. In line with the findings of the case study, he found evidence of greater communication between the regions in the frontoparietal network – a difference that may have made it easier to gain the heightened self-awareness during sleep. Further evidence comes from the alkaloid galantamine, which can be used to induce lucid dreams. In a recent study, Baird and colleagues asked people to sleep for a few hours before waking. The participants then took a small dose of the drug, or a placebo, before practising a few visualisation exercises that are also thought to modestly increase the chances of lucid dreaming. After about half an hour, they went back to sleep. The results were striking. Just 14% of those taking a placebo managed to gain awareness of their dream state, compared with 27% taking a 4mg dose of galantamine, and 42% taking an 8mg dose. “The effect is humongous,” says Baird. Galantamine has been approved by Nice to treat moderate Alzheimer’s disease. It is thought to work by boosting concentrations of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at our brain cell’s synapses. Intriguingly, previous research had shown that this can raise signalling in the frontoparietal regions from a low baseline. This may have helped the dreaming participants to pass the threshold of neural activity that is necessary for heightened self-awareness. “It’s yet another source of evidence for the involvement of these regions in lucid dreaming,” says Baird, who now hopes to conduct more detailed fMRI studies to test the hypothesis. Prof Daniel Erlacher, who researches lucid dreams at the University of Berne in Switzerland, welcomes the increased interest in the field. “There is more research funding now,” he says, though he points out that some scientists are still sceptical of its worth. That cynicism is a shame, since there could be important clinical applications of these findings. When people are unresponsive after brain injuries, it can be very difficult to establish their level of consciousness. If work on lucid dreams helps scientists to establish a neural signature of self-awareness, it might allow doctors to make more accurate diagnoses and prognoses for these patients and to determine how they might be experiencing the effects of their illness. At the very least, Baird’s research is sure to attract attention from the vast online community of wannabe lucid dreamers, who are seeking more reliable ways to experience the phenomenon. Galantamine, which can be extracted from snowdrops, is already available as an over-the-counter dietary supplement in the US, and its short-term side-effects are mild – so there are currently no legal barriers for Americans who wish to self-experiment. But Baird points out that there may be as-yet-unknown long-term consequences if it is used repeatedly to induce lucid dreams. “My advice would be to use your own discretion and to seek the guidance of a physician,” he says. For the time being, we may be safest using psychological strategies (see below). Even then, we should proceed with caution. Dr Nirit Soffer-Dudek, a psychologist at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev in Israel, points out that most attempts to induce lucid dreaming involve some kind of sleep disturbance – such as waking in the middle of the night to practise certain visualisations. “We know how important sleep is for your mental and physical health,” she says. “It can even influence how quickly your wounds heal.” Anything that regularly disrupts our normal sleep cycle could therefore have undesired results. Many techniques for lucid dream induction also involve “reality testing”, in which you regularly question whether you are awake, in the hope that those thoughts will come to mind when you are actually dreaming. If it is done too often, this could be “a bit disorienting”, Soffer-Dudek suggests – leading you to feel “unreal” rather than fully present in the moment. Along these lines, she has found that people who regularly try to induce lucid dreams are more likely to suffer from dissociation – the sense of being disconnected from one’s thoughts, feelings and sense of identity. They were also more likely to show signs of schizotypy – a tendency for paranoid and magical thinking. Soffer-Dudek doubts that infrequent experiments will cause lasting harm, though. “I don’t think it’s such a big deal if someone who is neurologically and psychologically healthy tries it out over a limited period,” she says. Perhaps the consideration of these concerns is an inevitable consequence of the field’s maturation. As for my own experiments, I am happy to watch the research progress from the sidelines. One hundred years after Mary Arnold-Forster’s early investigations, the science of lucid dreaming may be finally coming of age. How to lucid dream There is little doubt that lucid dreaming can be learned. One of the best-known techniques is “reality testing”, which involves asking yourself regularly during the day whether you are dreaming – with the hope that this will spill into your actual dreams. Another is Mnemonic Induction of Lucid Dreaming (Mild). Every time you wake from a normal dream, you spend a bit of time identifying the so-called “dream signs” – anything that was bizarre or improbable and differed from normal life. As you then try to return to sleep, you visualise entering that dream and repeat to yourself the intention: “Next time I’m dreaming, I will remember to recognise that I’m dreaming.” Some studies suggest that it may be particularly effective if you set an alarm to wake up after a few hours of sleep and spend a whole hour practising Mild, before drifting off again. This is known as WBTB – Wake Back to Bed. There is nothing particularly esoteric about these methods. “It’s all about building a ‘prospective’ memory for the future – like remembering what you have to buy when you go shopping,” says Prof Daniel Erlacher. Technology may ease this process. Dr Michelle Carr recently asked participants to undergo a 20-minute training programme before they fell asleep. Each time they heard a certain tone or saw the flash of a red light, they were asked to turn their attention to their physical and mental state and to question whether anything was amiss that might suggest they were dreaming. Afterwards, they were given the chance to nap, as a headset measured their brain’s activity. When it sensed that they had entered REM sleep, it produced the same cues as the training, which – Carr hoped – would be incorporated into their dreams and act as reminders to check their state of consciousness. It worked, with about 50% experiencing a lucid dream. Some commercial devices already purport to offer this kind of stimulation – though most have not been adequately tested for their efficacy. As the technology advances, however, easy dream control may come within anyone’s reach. David Robson is a writer based in London. His next book, The Expectation Effect: How Your Mindset Can Transform Your Life (Canongate), is available to preorder nowLast week, Xi Jinping gave himself full Marx. The Chinese Communist party’s sixth plenum, a gathering of top political cadres, passed a resolution on “Certain Questions in the Party’s History”, in which Xi’s system of thought was defined as “Marxism for the 21st century”. Not only that, but that it also served as “the essence of the Chinese culture and China’s spirit”. These are not terms that sound natural in English, but their significance is immense, because only two previous resolutions of this sort have ever been passed – in 1945 and 1981. The resolutions on party history are meant to provide a definitive statement on the CCP’s record in governing China. The 1945 resolution sealed Mao Zedong’s status as the definitive party leader, ahead of his victory in the civil war against Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists four years later. The 1981 resolution was more intriguing, because it was a very rare admission of fault by the party itself; its language was tortuous but it consisted of a grudging apology to the nation for the horrors of the Cultural Revolution. Forty years on and the new resolution shows no sign of contrition, instead stating the party’s “transformation” of China. It praised Xi, Mao and Deng Xiaoping for leading it to achieve “the tremendous transformation from standing up and growing prosperous to becoming strong”. This is a turning point in the history of the CCP. The resolution elevates Xi to a position held only by Mao and Deng before him, as a moving force who did not just carry on the Chinese communist revolution, but recreated it. If Mao is the founder of the People’s Republic of China and Deng the reformer who made it wealthy, the “new era” of Xi is one in which China becomes a prosperous society at home and a global one in influence. “Party history” in China is a very specific term and it does not only mean a description of the CCP’s past. That past is fascinating to historians because of the factional battles and violent confrontation that marked the party’s passage from a tiny group in 1921 to its status as a machine that rules a quarter of humanity. “History” should be read as Xi has flagged it, as a Marxist sense of the determinism, or inevitability, of a particular outcome: a socialist society driven by Xi Jinping Thought. Of course, it helps to bring about such inevitability if alternative possibilities are closed off. One ideological deviation that Xi has condemned frequently is “historical nihilism” – criticism of the officially approved version of the party’s history, which removes almost all attacks on events such as the famine that killed millions in the Great Leap Forward of 1958-62 and greatly underplays the traumas caused by the Cultural Revolution. The 1981 party resolution opened the way for a limited, but real, ability to criticise that terrible era in public. Now that space has shrunk. This year, the cyber-administration of China reported that it had removed more than 2m online posts relating to unacceptable views of party history that “distort” it by “slandering” its leaders and their actions since 1949. However, even if Xi shares Mao’s distaste for dissent, his political thinking is very different. Mao’s provided political rocket fuel for radicals around the world, whether Parisian students in 1968 or Peruvian peasants in the Shining Path terror movement of the 1980s. Xi Jinping Thought does not provide that kind of briquette for the revolutionary fire. It does not remotely encourage individual uprising against the forces of oppression, but instead praises massive state power to develop the ultimate goal of “common prosperity”. The “new era” seeks Chinese influence globally in all areas that matter, from security, not just in east Asia but more recently in the Indian Ocean and the Arctic, to norms on trade and technology and even cultural production. It matters that it is the party, not just Xi, which is protected in the battle against “historical nihilism”. Xi’s personality cult, while real, does not make him the equivalent of Vladimir Putin, who has built a political system around himself. The Russian leader benefits from the ambiguous placement he has within his own country’s history, both a product of the old system (as a former KGB agent) and the president of a post-Soviet state. In China, the party still rules supreme and Xi’s status derives from his continuity in a sequence that includes Mao and Deng. However powerful he is, his legitimacy derives from his status as party secretary-general, as the heir to the century of historical development, one reason why he is so keen to make sure that the party’s reputation is untarnished. Yet tradition is not everything. Last week’s events are the start of a year leading up the party congress, widely expected to be held in October next year, when Xi will probably seek and gain a third term in power. Both Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao were forced to step down after two five-year terms each, preventing the kind of personalised rule for life that Mao had enjoyed. Xi, in contrast, has made it clear that he intends to go for a third term and perhaps beyond. His keynote speech at the party congress in 2017 argued that Chinese-style socialism was no longer just a strategy for survival in one country, but for a new sense of a global China, which he intends to develop over the long term. Meanwhile, the shape of Xi’s China at home is becoming ever clearer. The limited liberalism of the Jiang and Hu eras, where some dissent was allowed online and universities could debate democracy and constitutional change, even if discreetly, has largely disappeared. China’s fledgling civil society, tackling issues from climate change to Aids treatment, has been absorbed and neutralised by the state. So far, however, the ability to provide growing living standards along with a genuine pride felt in China’s rising global status seems to have kept the middle class broadly satisfied. But there are problems to come. A confrontation with the US is still unlikely, but it would devastate China’s economy as well as lives globally. Climate change and water shortages still bedevil China’s urbanisation, a reality that may lie behind the sudden, late agreement at Cop26 between Washington and Beijing to cooperate on these issues. The demographic fallout from the one-child policy means that China will have a society older and more in need of healthcare from the 2030s. Xi’s position looks unassailable now, but even all-powerful leaders cannot countermand the drying of the deserts or the decision of families in tiny flats not to have babies.One afternoon, Emily Ratajkowski’s therapist took her up to the roof and presented her with a bowl of water balloons. Ratajkowski had awoken from a dream where she had been fighting, in a terrible rage, but when she tried to hit out it was “like being a ghost,” she explained, “something without a body”. Her therapist had suggested she throw things to access her anger, but the balloons were too colourful. They popped too gently. So her therapist handed her a jar and told her to think of someone she wanted to punish. It flew from her hand and shattered noisily against the wall. The essays she went on to write, now published in a collection titled My Body, read as those shards of glass, landing with purpose. A couple of times I was reading her book in public, and acquaintances made variations on a snort at the idea of a collection of feminist essays by a person such as Ratajkowski, a model and actor who became famous dancing in a thong in Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines video, whose Instagram glitters with nudes and shots advertising her bikini collection. There was a similar noise internationally in 2020 when New York Magazine published one of these essays, Buying Myself Back, about the many ways in which she does not own her image, from attempting to buy a piece of art that is a screenshot of her face to the sexual assault by a photographer who later sold three separate books of Polaroids he’d taken of her that night. After people read it, the noise quieted. Rather than simply a story written from a place of great power and privilege, it was a story about that power and about that privilege. About the boundaries of a power that lies solely in beauty. Hers, readers found, was an extreme version of a reality familiar to many women who had also been forced to consider where their image ended and their self began. The book continues in the same vein; essays that shock and illuminate as they walk around the central themes of what it means to be a woman and a commodity, poking at them with a variety of sharpened tools. One essay sees Ratajkowski waking in a $400m Maldivian resort with her husband, where she has been paid “a shit ton” to post pictures of their sponsored holiday. A headache blooms over the course of a restless day spent on the beach, checking Instagram as a picture of her ass collects a million likes and thinking darkly about money. The tone is that of a thriller or horror film – the sense something terrible is looming, perhaps in the waves, perhaps in her phone, perhaps in her body. Contemplating the “glistening skin” of her hips in a bikini from her swimwear line, “the whole of the ocean stretched out before me and yet I felt trapped”. In another she accepts $25,000 from a billionaire to join him at the Super Bowl. Watching a model grind purposefully against him, Ratajkowski contemplates the transactional nature of her industry, both contracted and unspoken. “I liked to think I was different from women like her. But over time it became harder to hold on to that distinction or even believe in its virtue.” The model went on to marry a tech mogul, and peers who married pop stars suddenly got Vogue covers. “The world celebrates and rewards women who are chosen by powerful men,” she notes. “Wasn’t I on the same spectrum of compromise?” At times the reader is a popcorn-eating audience; at other times her therapist, offering balloons. Throughout, glamour is tempered with boredom and, sometimes, pain. Early in her life Ratajkowski learned that beauty gave her power, but also that it was complicated. “It wasn’t just the way I looked that made the boys notice me, it was also my perceived status in the outside world as an attractive girl,” she writes, one eye then on Britney Spears, “a warning”. She learned to be wary of people who responded to her beauty; there’s a hidden violence present as she walks through parties. While filming the video that made her not just famous, but “famously sexy”, pop star Robin Thicke grabbed her breasts. It only occurred to her recently that “the women who gained their power from beauty were indebted to the men whose desire granted them that power in the first place.” She describes the night in 2012 when a photographer violently assaulted her after a lingerie shoot, and his response to the essay’s fact-checker too: “This is the girl that… bounced around naked in the Robin Thicke video that time. You really want to believe she was a victim?” She treats it as a valid question. One essay is a letter to another photographer who, it’s clear, underestimated her. She tells him the story of Audrey Munson, an artist’s muse whose likeness is scattered across New York, and who attempted suicide before being buried in an unmarked grave. “I think of her and the other naked women who line the walls of museums,” Ratajkowski writes, each one anonymous, forgotten, dead. Upon realising her nude shoots had led to her being cast in Gone Girl, after director David Fincher asked Ben Affleck for someone “whom men were obsessed with and women hated”, it’s clear all her achievements are curdled by a squeeze of lemon. It’s thrilling, often, to sit with Ratajkowski in the roiling surf of her life, in elegant stories written with uncomfortable honesty. It’s revelatory, too, to explore digital life and body politics through the eyes of a person whose body shapes a discourse, and unexpectedly moving to see the bruises left behind. The only problem with this being a smart and glittering collection of essays, rather than simply the glamorous celebrity memoir Ratajkowski could have sold, is that its quality reveals its limits. Read as memoir, it’s extraordinary; read as activism, it’s unsatisfying. Her commentary on the industry she’s chosen is passionate and chilling, and yet at times rings hollow, in part because of her reluctance to subvert the male gaze she critiques. She returns to the concept that her power lies in her body, without interrogating the idea that her body could also walk away. It’s fair, of course, for her to criticise the system she works within, but it’s unclear whether she cares enough to change it. To do so would mean (among other things) leaving social media, where images remain commodities to be exploited and crushed, often taking women’s identities down with them. Just because she can see the problems (capitalism, beauty standards, misogyny) are structural doesn’t mean she is not implicated in them. Or, indeed, is not perpetuating them daily. But perhaps this project is a beginning. Perhaps it’s not Ratajkowski’s responsibility to overthrow the patriarchy, or redefine beauty, or destabilise capitalism. Perhaps it is enough for her to simply write a dazzling book considering the contradictions of living in a body like hers. To hold her stories up to the light, shards of glass, and see which ones draw blood. • My Body by Emily Ratajkowski is published by Quercus (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA year ago, while still in the grips of the pandemic, workers at many businesses – small and large – were continuing to work from home mostly due to either government or corporate mandates. Now, as the pandemic (hopefully) recedes, many workers are coming back to work but my smartest clients have learned that, to attract and retain the best people, a work-from-home option needs to be on the table. During the pandemic we were scrambling just to keep things going. But now we’re implementing policies that many feel should have supervisory controls. And many business owners, large and small, are asking themselves a question: is it time to monitor what our people are actually doing when they’re not working in the office? To this I say: are you kidding me? Apparently not. In fact, a growing number of companies, as they’re implementing new work-from-home benefits, are also incorporating remote monitoring software to keep an eye on their employees’ behavior. A recent poll in the UK of more than 2,400 workers by the trade union Prospect found that almost one in three reported being monitored, up from a quarter of workers in April 2021. Not only that but the number of remote workers who said they’ve been watched through an in-home camera has doubled during that period. Yes, you read that right: an in-home camera! Here in the US a study of 1,250 employers by Digital.com revealed that 60% were using monitoring software to track the productivity and activity of their work-from-home employees, citing reasons such as a “better understanding how employees are spending time”, “confirming workers are working a full day” and “ensuring they’re not using work equipment for personal use”. Meanwhile, demand for remote monitoring software is up more than 54% since the pandemic started, according to a site that tracks these things, and to meet that demand a proliferation of software companies have emerged offering work-from-home monitoring solutions. For example, there’s Aware, a platform that analyzes employee behavior across messaging platforms like Slack, which raised a $60m third round of financing last month. Microsoft announced just this week that it was adding increased employee surveillance so that its Microsoft 365 platform can use machine learning to track employee actions. Up-and-coming providers like Activtrak, Kickidler, Workpuls and iMonitorSoft position themselves as “workforce analytics” platforms but are really just offering their corporate customers the capability of watching how their employees are using apps, the ability to take random screenshots triggered by an employee’s suspicious behavior, and to see their workers’ activities. Workpuls promises its customers that employees can be monitored “without being noticed” so that they can “still get the information you need”. Really? After years of employees demanding more flexibility, independence and mobility are we as employers going to respond by tracking those employees’ every movement while they’re not in the office? This is the exact opposite of trust. There could not be a worse way to manage your teams. There does not exist a more inferior message to send to your people. There are lots of advice columns – like this one – written to help employers get the most out of their employee monitoring software or to help them better track the activities of their employees working from home. Want my advice? Don’t. Don’t monitor your employees. Don’t buy any of this software. Don’t worry about what your employees are doing when they’re not in the office. And for God’s sake, don’t install a camera in an employee’s home! Instead, worry about how your business is achieving its objectives, how your employees are meeting their goals set out by their supervisors, whether or not they’re doing this from home or from Mars. Who cares? Who cares what your employees are up to? Who has the time to waste monitoring this minutia? I couldn’t even bear to spend an hour monitoring my kids’ activities on Facebook without feeling my IQ drop, so now I’m going to look over the shoulder of grown men and women hired to do a job for me as if they’re in middle school? This is not how you treat your people. This is not how you trust your team.There is a close link between the parliamentary sleaze scandal and – you’ve guessed it – Brexit. The plotters who tried scandalously to exonerate Owen Paterson and undermine the course of parliamentary justice were all Brexiters – some of them extremely so. From Paterson himself to the prime minister, who attended the dinner where the plot was hatched, taking in the leader of the house, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who enthusiastically supported it, they all share responsibility for what is now being increasingly recognised as the catastrophe of Brexit. For, make no mistake about it, Brexit was, and remains, a sleazy operation. What is the common factor behind the problems we read about daily, from the crisis in Northern Ireland to the supply chain issues that bedevil normal life in Britain? It is that, thanks to Brexit, we have left the single market. However, I refer to Great Britain, which does not include Northern Ireland. When we move to the United Kingdom, which comprises Great Britain and Northern Ireland, we find that under the “protocol” negotiated by Johnson and his lickspittle Lord Frost, Northern Ireland remained inside the single market. This was always going to cause friction, and we may now be heading for the climax. But a central feature of the Brexiters’ sleaze operation in the run-up to the 2016 referendum was that we would not leave the single market. In his new book It’s The Leader, Stupid, Andrew Adonis reminds us in a perceptive essay on what he calls Nigel Farage’s “reverse takeover” of the Conservative party that “the Vote Leave: Take Control website explicitly argued that Britain [my italics] would stay in the single market via membership of the European Economic Area, yet leaving the single market became a red line subsequently”. As we Remainers (and Rejoiners) have discovered to our, and the nation’s, cost, the huge benefits of membership of the single market were simply taken for granted until they began to disappear. The Leave-Remain controversy has for a time had echoes of the Dreyfus affair in early 20th century France – a divisive issue, best not raised in polite company. But recently I have abandoned all caution and raised it with many people I have bumped into, just to get their reaction – of which a typical Brexiter’s one is: “They didn’t tell us it was going to be like this.” Which brings us to that sleaziest of misrepresentations, which struck the loudest chord during the Leave campaign: £350m a week for the NHS. As they used to say – and no doubt still do – in school exams: “Compare and contrast.” In this case, compare and contrast that £350m a week with Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR)’s estimate that the blow to the UK’s long-run productivity from Brexit has been mounting towards 4% of gross domestic product annually. As my fellow commentator Martin Wolf of the Financial Times pointed out last week, that is £80bn a year. Moreover, the OBR’s estimate is regarded as conservative by some thinktanks, which put the annual loss nearer to 6%, or well over £100bn. By contrast, the “benefits” to the NHS of £350m a week would have amounted to £18bn a year – and they were always mythical anyway. Now, in common with many, I have been disappointed, to put it mildly, with the Labour party’s poor performance over Brexit. Sir Keir Starmer has been in his element attacking parliamentary sleaze, but this slogan “Make Brexit Work” is surely doomed – unless it is some “cunning plan”, as popularised in the Blackadder television series. Maybe the plan is to capitalise when it becomes obvious to all that Brexit isn’t working and, furthermore, cannot work. Our future, both economically and politically, lies in Europe, and what we are being subjected to at present is a dangerous historical aberration. Luckily, there is a body called European Movement UK, which is doing its best to rebuild relations with continental Europe step by step: its projects range from alleviating the problems in road haulage and farming to trying to restore visa-free travel for musicians. Meanwhile, the damage mounts, one of the principal reasons being a collapse of some 15% in our exports to and imports from our principal market. Our prime minister fancies himself as a classical scholar. I wonder if he recalls Aristotle’s observation that “one of the most important subjects about which all men deliberate” is “imports and exports”? He should certainly be aware of Aristotle’s insights into the “fatal flaw” in leaders’ characters: hubris, or arrogance. Johnson has been displaying this in spades.The end of the internal combustion engine was one of the goals identified by Boris Johnson before Cop26. The climate summit in Glasgow has delivered in part – some manufacturers and a few big countries said last week they would end sales of fossil fuel cars by 2040. Neither Volkswagen nor Toyota, the world’s two biggest carmakers, signed up, because of concerns over electric charger availability in poorer countries, but nevertheless the path is clear. Petrol and diesel are on their way out. Battery electric cars are on the way in. Surprising then, that Johnson Matthey, the FTSE 100 chemicals company, announced on Thursday that it was ditching plans to expand in the lithium-ion battery market. For years the FTSE 100 company had touted its bespoke battery technology as the perfect replacement for its revenues from catalytic converters for diesel cars – almost two-thirds of its sales. Now it says it will try to sell the business, abandoning one factory in Poland and another planned for Finland. The company’s retreat – accompanied by the “retirement” of its chief executive, Robert MacLeod – suggests the blue-chip company’s vision for the future is no longer so clear. Further breakup of the business, a few years past its 200th birthday, is a serious possibility, say investment bankers. Without a compelling growth story, Johnson Matthey might itself be advised to hire bankers to prepare a defence against the well-funded private equity firms that have already made light work of a series of British engineering stalwarts. Beyond the implications for one of Britain’s oldest listed companies, the signal it sends for UK industry is not welcome. Johnson Matthey points out – accurately but belatedly – that battery manufacturing is a scale game, and that rivals are far ahead. China, Korea and Japan have a huge lead. The EU and US have also woken up, and are investing in new “gigafactories” at a rapid pace. In the UK, the government-funded Faraday Institution suggests carmakers will need annual battery output of about 140GWh by 2040 to sustain the car industry at anything like its current economic heft. There has been one verifiable success so far: Chinese manufacturer Envision’s promise to make 38GWh a year in Sunderland. Startup Britishvolt is gaining momentum to fund another. Yet some observers are sceptical that the UK will ever come close to what the government hopes – suggesting the car industry could shrink rapidly. There is some cause for hope, not least in the UK’s undisputed academic excellence. It is by now a well-worn trope within industry that the UK (or rather academics at the University of Oxford) gave the world the lithium-ion battery, but it was Japan’s Sony that brought it to market. Now UK scientists (including, still, those in Johnson Matthey within a separate division) are among those racing to produce a solid state battery – likely to be the next step up in the crucial search for energy density – and government-funded bodies are poised to commercialise any technology that does emerge from the lab. But, as senior officials point out, Britain can ill afford to wait a decade for the next generation of batteries. Carmakers are making their investments now, and once those relationships and supply chains are lost, they are not easily regained. Most economists use a gravity model of international trade: the closer and bigger two businesses are, the more they are likely to trade. Decisions like Johnson Matthey’s will not destroy the UK automotive industry by themselves, but every time someone decides not to invest in the sector, the UK’s gravitational pull on new investment wanes. Bright sparks amid the gloom at M&amp;S Marks &amp; Spencer gave its long-suffering shareholders an early Christmas present – and some hope – last week as it put the financial turmoil of the pandemic behind it. Annual profits were, it said, going to be a respectable £500m as shoppers returned to its clothing departments and food halls. Jaded followers of M&amp;S, with its record of false dawns, may have trouble believing their ears. But credit where credit’s due. After more than four years, the duo of turnaround expert Archie Norman as chairman and M&amp;S diehard Steve Rowe as chief executive is starting to deliver, with a 10% jump in food sales and “substantial improvement” in its clothing and homeware divisions. The pair have done what previous teams failed to do: taking unpopular decisions to close stores and performing serious surgery on its clothing business. But this is more than a two-man show, although big decisions like the joint venture with online grocer Ocado now look smart even if the City questioned the price tag at the time. An experienced team of fashion executives have assembled its clothing ranges in a project led by Richard Price, who returned after a stint at Tesco, where he ran its homewares and F&amp;F clothing arms. In the food halls, Stuart Machin – who is considered a contender for next chief executive – is leading the charge with the new products and lower prices needed to pull in high-spending families for bigger shops. But let’s not get carried away. M&amp;S has benefited from pent-up demand for wardrobe updates unleashed by the end of lockdown – this may not be as robust next year – and from the closure of hundreds of Debenhams and Arcadia stores. M&amp;S shares have almost doubled this year, and closed the week at a more-than-two-year high of 240p. Senior rivals privately admit a strong M&amp;S is good for everyone on the high street. Let’s hope this is a trend M&amp;S can make last for more than one season. Freeports are a zero-sum game played with taxpayers' money This week the government’s much-vaunted freeport project will become a reality. Promised by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, as a vital component in the levelling-up toolkit, and as a benefit of Brexit, the low-tax zones will be switched on by government legislation on Friday. Three locations in England will be the first to come into being – Teesside, Humber and Thames – and five more will follow. Freeports in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are also planned, subject to talks with a recalcitrant Treasury. Offering tax breaks and streamlined customs arrangements, freeports are sold as a way to reboot the economies of left-behind towns and cities after decades of neglect, while boosting the UK economy at large. But the Treasury’s own economics watchdog, the Office for Budget Responsibility, warns that there will be few discernible benefits. At best, they will shift business activity from elsewhere in the UK into the new zones. Effectively, corporates will get tax breaks for shuffling the pack. It is a zero-sum game played at the cost of taxpayers. Teesside has the best chance of success, with vast tracts of brownfield land adjacent to the few remaining hi-tech manufacturers, and first-class but under-utilised dockland infrastructure. All provide the backbone for a future cluster. Providing a locus for activity could spur growth. Public sector activism and ownership of key assets within the freeport zone – under local Conservative mayor Ben Houchen – twinned with private enterprise, may well prove powerful – if the project is well executed. But there are risks. Freeports can be a haven for secrecy, tax evasion, crime and cronyism. The involvement of workers – to whom the benefits of economic regeneration are intended to flow – is sorely missing, so capital could be sheltered in freeports at the expense of labour. Decades of austerity will not be reversed by more experimentation with trickle-down economics. While the ambition to catalyse regeneration should be applauded, serious questions remain about whether freeports are the way to go.How did it come to this? For five wretched hours, the vice-president of the United States found himself hiding in a barren underground garage with no windows or furniture. Somewhere above, a baying mob was calling for him to hang. The story of the deadly insurrection on 6 January, when Donald Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol in an attempt to subvert democracy, has been told in newspapers, books and TV documentaries. But journalist Jonathan Karl has seen unpublished photographs from that day that tell a new story about Vice-President Mike Pence. In his highly readable new book, Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, Karl recounts how the rioters broke into the Senate chamber, climbed up into the chair where Pence had just been presiding, posed for pictures and left him a chilling handwritten note: “It’s only a matter of time. Justice is coming.” Congressional leaders Kevin McCarthy, Mitch McConnell, Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer had been rushed to a secure location outside the Capitol. But Pence, who was resisting pressure from Trump and the mob to overturn the election result, a power he did not possess in any case, declined to follow. “They wanted to take him out of the complex immediately and he refused to leave,” Karl says in an interview at an outdoor cafe in north-west Washington. “Pence is not a yeller but he yelled at his Secret Service lead agent, saying, ‘No, I’ve got a job to do, I am staying.’ “Then, as the crowd is coming in towards the Senate floor, they said we have to at least get out of here because the room he was in didn’t have anything secure.” Surveillance video from the day shows Pence and his entourage being whisked down some stairs at a brisk pace. What happened next had been a mystery. Karl, who has reviewed all the pictures taken by the vice-president’s photographer, learned that the vice-president ended up in a loading dock beneath one of the Senate office buildings. Karl, who is ABC News’s chief White House correspondent, says the images reveal Pence in a garage with concrete walls and concrete floor. The vice-presidential motorcade was there but Pence refused to get inside his vehicle, worried that they would drive away at the first sign of danger. “Their first priority was to keep him safe. His priority was to stay. Those were not necessarily consistent. So for the first couple of hours at least, he refused to go inside the car.” Pence “looks a bit distraught”, Karl recalls from the pictures. During these roughly five hours there was no communication with Trump, who was at the White House, watching the spectacle unfold on TV. But the commander-in-chief was telling the world what he thought of his deputy. Karl continues: “There are a couple of shots where his chief of staff [Marc Short] is showing Vice-President Pence his phone and I was told that, in at least one of those shots, what is being shown is Trump’s tweet where he said, ‘Mike Pence didn’t have the courage.’ “Here he is, the one guy in leadership refusing to leave the complex, holed up in a concrete parking garage while people are chanting for his life upstairs. He’s being shown a tweet from the president, who has not bothered to call to see if he is safe, saying he didn’t have courage.” There was another striking photo that day, after the insurrectionists had been chased out of the building so that Joe Biden’s election win could be certified. At around midnight, in statuary hall, Pence came face to face with Liz Cheney, a Republican congresswoman who would later vote for Trump’s impeachment. “Liz Cheney says to him, thank you, you did the right thing, it was really important – something to that effect. And Pence just looks at her, no discernible expression, maybe also because he’s wearing a mask, and doesn’t really say anything. It’s as if he’s worried that he’ll be overheard saying something nice to Liz Cheney. But there’s a photo of that moment which would also be interesting to see.” The pictures were taken by an official photographer whose salary is paid by taxpayers. Karl was denied permission to publish them but is confident they will be subpoenaed by the House of Representatives select committee investigating the events of 6 January. Even when the dust had settled, Trump showed no remorse or compassion for Pence. In March, Karl raised the subject during an interview with the former president at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida. The conversation went as follows: Karl: Were you worried about him during the siege? Were you worried about his safety? Trump: No. I thought he was well protected. I had heard he was in good shape. No. Because I had heard he was in very good shape. Karl: Because you heard those chants. That was terrible. I mean, you know, those – Trump: Well, the people were very angry. Karl: They were saying, ‘Hang Mike Pence!’ Trump: Because it’s common sense … Karl adds now: “What he was doing was essentially justifying the chants of those that were calling for the murder of his own vice-president, and there wasn’t a second of a beat to say, ‘Now, that was outrageous, they may be angry, but we can’t –’ He didn’t say that. Not at all. It’s not present in his head. “He’s still angry at Pence. He told me flatly that he would still be president if Pence did what he wanted to do and he didn’t know that he could ever forgive Pence.” For four years, Pence had been Trump’s oleaginous lieutenant, defending his every move and keeping conservatives and Christian evangelicals on his side. But at the critical moment, with America teetering between democracy and autocracy, the vice-president and former Indiana governor chose democracy. Karl explains: “I go into excruciating detail about the pressure that Pence was under. It was massive. It was relentless. It was public. It was private. It was from all directions and Pence, to his credit, was disloyal at exactly the right time. He was disloyal when it mattered the most. He had been loyal to Trump through everything else. He had enabled, you could argue, everything else and history will judge him for all of that. “But at that moment, Pence did the right thing and it really mattered because I don’t know what would have happened. I asked a lot of people this and nobody can give me a good answer. I don’t think there is a good answer. He didn’t have the authority to overturn the election. “He didn’t have the authority to throw out these electoral votes. But what if he did? It would have been chaos. What would Pelosi have done? How does it end? How do you get out of that? Eventually it wouldn’t have stood but how? The constitution’s not going to help you at that point. He’s basically stopping the last step in the certification of an election and that step is required for Biden to become president. So what if Pence just stopped it?” The more he learned in researching the book, Karl writes, the more he became convinced that, as horrific as the events of 6 January were, America was far more imperilled than most people realised at the time. It was a miracle, he argues, that nothing more dire happened between Trump’s election defeat and Biden’s inauguration. “The most important thing for people to take away from this book is an awareness that we came close to losing it all. Our democratic system has been around for well over 200 years but it’s actually fragile and more fragile than it has been at any point during our lifetimes.” The system, no matter how ingenious its construction, ultimately relies on key individuals behaving honourably. Karl, whose previous book was Front Row at the Trump Show, continues: “There were many people along the way who, if they had done something else, the situation could have had a much worse and even more catastrophic end. “The Michigan Republican leaders stand out to me because they were brought to the Oval Office, summoned there by Trump. They are leaders of a Republican party in a state where Republican voters are overwhelmingly entirely behind Donald Trump and they said, no, we cannot overturn our state’s election results.” Another example was Chris Liddell, a White House deputy chief of staff who had served all four years. “This guy had a clandestine operation going on in the West Wing to aid the Biden transition because it’s required by law. But what if he didn’t? What if he broke that law? Who’’s going to come in? “None of these people in their background would there be any indication that they would be the ones that would stand up against Donald Trump. But they did. Again, history will judge them for everything else they did but, in that moment, they helped this from becoming an even bigger crisis than it was.” So it was that Trump did not have to be forcibly removed from the Oval Office or have his fingers prised from the Resolute desk one by one. Yet he continues to tower over the Republican party and hold grievance and vengeance-fuelled rallies. He is still pushing false conspiracy theories about a stolen election and attempting to recast the history of 6 January as a heroic stand by brave patriots. Karl says: “It was clear from the interview that Donald Trump views January 6 as a great day and one of the greatest days of his presidency, which is amazing because it’s one of the darkest days in the history of the American republic. “He, in his head, has convinced himself – and I believe he believes it – this was a tremendous day because all of these people came from all over the country to fight for him in a way that his own political allies had never been willing to fight for him. They wanted to ‘stop the steal’.” Karl, 53, first met Trump in 1994 when he was a reporter at the New York Post and the property tycoon gave him a tour of Trump Tower, where newlyweds Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley were staying. Trump hasn’t changed much, he finds, except in one important regard. “The Trump I saw in 1994 was not as obviously angry and vindictive because the Trump in Mar-a-Lago has gained something and lost it, and is eager to deny that it was him who lost it and to blame others, including primarily those closest to him.” Karl describes how, in a fit of pique after his defeat, Trump threatened to quit the Republican party and start his own but backed down after being warned that such a move would cost him millions of dollars. The author does not think Trump will run for the White House again in 2024 because of the risk of another humiliating loss. If that prediction proves accurate and Trump’s name is not on the ballot, should we still be worried about the future of American democracy? “We have to be when you have a large segment of the population that doesn’t trust the results of an election, and the ground is being set to not trust the results of another election. “The efforts that are being taken in the states where Republicans are in control to limit voting have also caused those on the other side of the political spectrum to believe that they can’t trust the results of a presidential election.” Karl adds: “Our entire system is predicated on the idea that you fight it out in a campaign. Voters go and vote and the results are honoured. The winners are congratulated, the losers concede, and the fight goes on to the next election. Once you take that out of it, we’re in real trouble. So I am really worried. Trump is the great accelerant here but he’s not the original cause. It’s not just Trump.”The photographer David Godlis first went to Miami Beach when he was a kid, visiting his grandparents who had retired there. This was the 1950s, and South Beach was, as he recalls, a kind of heaven for that older generation of Jewish immigrants – his grandparents were originally from Russia – who had scraped and struggled to make a life in America for their families, and could now enjoy the benefits of a purpose-built apartment, sunshine, palm trees and Yiddish vaudeville in Ocean Drive theatres. Those trips down by train from New York, with his mom, were, he says, “like visiting Jewish Disneyland”. By the time he went to stay with his grandmother in 1974, some of that magic kingdom was starting to disappear. Godlis was 22 and trying to make his way as a photographer, inspired by the landmark exhibition of Diane Arbus’s extremes at the Museum of Modern Art in 1972. On that visit he took his camera out on to Ocean Drive and shot 60 rolls of film in 10 days, pictures of the dream that his grandparents had lived, that was becoming a memory. This picture, of a woman outside a drugstore, is typical of those photographs, which are collected in a new book, Godlis Miami. The woman in her Jackie O shades inhabits both the confected glamour of the place that Godlis had known as a child, and the harsher day-to-day – discount insulin and cartons of smokes – of how it was turning out. Looking back in his book, Godlis realises that on that trip he stumbled on how to take pictures – “Look. Concentrate. Shoot” – but also the invaluable trick of being in the right place at the right time. A couple of years later, he wandered into CBGB nightclub in the Bowery in New York and discovered a comparable world of garish make-believe – over the next few years he made his name as the in-house photographer of nascent punk rock. Godlis Miami is published by Reel Art Press (£29.95). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyNazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British citizen holding dual Iranian nationality, has been detained in Tehran for more than five-and-a-half years on bogus accusations of spying. Successive Conservative foreign secretaries, including Boris Johnson, have promised and failed to secure her freedom. The reasons are unclear. This shocking situation cannot and must not continue. Richard Ratcliffe, Nazanin’s husband, has campaigned tirelessly for her release. His courage and fortitude are admirable, as are hers. Fearful that his wife may be illegally jailed again, he mounted a 21-day hunger strike outside the Foreign Office to dramatise her plight, before ending it yesterday. Talks last week between Britain and Iran once more failed to make progress. Nor is there movement in the cases of two other Britons, Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz, also held hostage by Iran. “We’re still stuck,” Ratcliffe said. He’s right. It’s another disgrace to shame this shameless government. Such outrageous injustice cannot be tolerated any longer. Nor can the lack of urgency, application, transparency and guile that have characterised the government’s damaging, disjointed and unsuccessful approach since 2016. Explanations are required. Without further excuses, delays or obfuscation, Johnson must answer the following questions: • Why is he still refusing to settle an acknowledged £400m debt to Iran, incurred before the 1979 revolution? This unjustified failure to pay up has bedevilled talks. Britain says bank transfer restrictions arising from international sanctions prevent payment. This is disingenuous at best. It can find legal ways around rules it helped create – if it wants to. In 2016, the US settled a similar debt, paying Iran $400m in cash in return for the release of four American hostages. • Why has Johnson failed to honour his personal promise to pay the debt made, when he was foreign secretary, to Ratcliffe and, indirectly, to the Iranians? Johnson’s promise was a blatant attempt to compensate for his disastrous blunder in parliament, when he misrepresented Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s activities in Tehran. Was it a lie? His blunder was used by Iran to justify her jailing. “He needs to take seriously the promises he makes and keep them,” Ratcliffe said last week. Even Johnson, a man without honour, must see he has a moral duty to set this right. He could – if he wants to. • Why are Johnson and Liz Truss, the latest foreign secretary, persisting with the Foreign Office’s non-confrontational, softly-softly approach? It has failed utterly. As the former foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt says, it’s not about paying a ransom, but it is about credibility. Johnson takes a tougher line with the EU than he does with Iran, whose hardline leaders mock the UK. British moves to block the lifting of international sanctions and sever bilateral relations would get Iran’s attention – if Johnson wants to. • Did Johnson let US objections wreck a planned prisoner swap last summer? The swap reportedly involved British hostages as well as US and Iranian detainees. Iran says a deal, which included full payment of Britain’s debt, broke down at the last minute when the US balked. Did Johnson let his post-Brexit eagerness to curry favour with Joe Biden get in the way of his duty to rescue British citizens? Why did he foolishly agree to link their fate to that of American hostages? • Did the fact that Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz are dual nationals with foreign-sounding names adversely influence the amount of attention devoted to their plight, at least in the early stages? It’s an ugly thought, but there is evidence in the Ashoori case to suggest it did. After the Afghanistan debacle, it’s sadly possible to believe almost anything of the flailing, ill-led Foreign Office. Questions such as these will keep on coming the longer the hostage scandal continues. If Johnson wants to prevent it spiralling into yet another full-blown government crisis, he should stop shirking, take responsibility and bend his will to freeing Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe.Senior minister Greg Hunt has refused to say whether Australia under a Morrison government will update its 2030 emissions target as required under the Glasgow Cop26 agreement and instead quoted Shakespeare. But separately, the foreign minister and emissions reduction minister said in a joint statement on Sunday: “Australia’s 2030 target is fixed and we are committed to meeting and beating it, as we did with our Kyoto-era targets.” Hunt dodged a series of questions on the issue from host David Speers when appearing on the ABC’s Insiders program. He said Australia “welcomed the outcome at Glasgow” as “important progress for the world” but would not answer questions on whether Australia would update its 2030 target next year. “We’re projecting a minus 35% actual pathway. So we are meeting and beating our targets,” Hunt said. When pressed again by Speers on whether Australia would update the target in 2022 as required, he said: “We’ve set our target. But what we’ll continue to do is update our projections.” Asked again, the minister quoted Shakesepare: “It reminds me of Prince Hal to Hotspur in Henry IV – ‘I never promised to pay thee, but now that I’m here, I’ll pay thee double’. It means under-promise and over-deliver.” Hunt was the environment minister at the time Australia’s target of a 26-28% reduction on 2005 emissions was set under the Abbott government. Australia was one of the few nations at the Cop26 conference not to increase its short-term pledge, rejecting calls from allies in the Pacific and Europe, the US and Britain. Sunday’s official statement from the foreign minister, Marise Payne, and the emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor – who went to Glasgow spruiking Australia’s fossil fuel industry – makes no mention of Australia updating its 2030 target. “The Morrison government will always stand up for and make decisions in Australia’s national interest, and we will do what’s right for rural and regional communities,” Payne and Taylor said. “Under our plan to achieve net zero emissions by 2050, we will act in a practical, responsible way to reduce emissions and build on our track record of achievement – reducing emissions while growing our economy, maintaining affordable, reliable energy and ensuring our regions remain strong. That’s the Australian way.” The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has previously said emissions must be cut by 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels to limit global warming to 1.5C. But Australia took nothing concrete on 2030 to the Glasgow summit, only committing to net zero emissions by 2050, a pledge most developed nations had made years ago. Since then, the Morrison government has released the modelling it used to make that commitment and convince its junior coalition partner, the Nationals, to support the bare minimum of action. It sets out Australia is on track to reach net 85% emissions reduction under the Morrison government plan, with a reliance on yet to be developed technologies to take care of the final 15%, as well as laying out a bigger fossil fuel gas industry for 2050 than exists today. Australia has signed the final agreement, which sets out countries returning next year, with updated 2030 emissions reductions targets. At the final Glasgow press conference, Cop26 president Alok Sharma was asked what would happen if nations like Australia failed to update their targets. He said on Sunday: “All countries have signed up to this and at the end of the day this is an international agreement and every country will be judged by whether or not they stuck to the commitments they’ve made.”Like every soldier, Ben Wallace knows that sometimes you have to fight fire with fire. As Owen Paterson’s inferno of sleaze engulfed the Tories, the defence secretary lit a little tealight of his own. It was put about that a couple of SNP MPs, David Linden and Drew Hendry, and Labour MP Charlotte Nichols got pissed on a ministerial trip to Gibraltar. Like anyone who has been accused of being smashed on a flight, they deny the allegations. Wallace said the alleged conduct risked “undermining respect for parliament”. Rubbish. The only lapse of judgment is Wallace’s, in thinking anyone would care. If there is a cause that enjoys comprehensive cross-party, cross-demographic national support, it is drinking on the plane. Well, that and drinking at the airport. Not yet in the cab to the airport, although driverless cars may change that. But everyone knows that once you get through security, the complicated part of the trip is over. You are in the hands of the authorities, and the chief authority in the departure lounge is JD Wetherspoon: the Beehive at Gatwick, the Windmill at Stansted: resonant names for the traveller. Any time of the day or night, you can guarantee that these bastions will be standing room only. It is a myth that airport drinking is the preserve of stags and hens. Young and old, rich and poor, men and women, champagne in the lounge, bloody mary after take-off, sundry tinnies: there’s something for everyone. If it is good enough for Kate Moss, it’s good enough for you. The hierarchy of travel experiences is directly related to booze. At the bottom of the table are Ryanair and EasyJet, where you have to pay for your drinks on the plane, or beforehand – for the nervous – in the form of a reassuring voucher. Then there is British Airways and other normal carriers, where drinks are included in the price of a ticket, correctly understood to be a marker of high civilisation. In business class, the free drinks start at the airport in a private lounge, for a better sort of alcoholic. After that, the drinks continue, relentlessly, until you land in a confusion of body and soul from which it takes the whole holiday to recover. One shudders to think what the situation is like on private jets. In fact, practically the only way to signify that you are very important is not to get battered on the plane. Nothing is more suspicious than a British person quietly going to sleep. Where does it come from? Unlike other behaviours, which on closer examination turn out to be universal, getting flight-pissed does seem to be curiously British. The Danes and Germans enjoy a pint as much as the next northern European, yet their airport bars are not chocker with multigenerational legions of battered travellers. Well, sometimes they are, but only if they’re Brits. The British state of nature is to be drunk, which is why we invent little rules to convince ourselves otherwise, like waiting until the sun is “over the yardarm” – incidentally, an expression which most people take to mean some point in the afternoon but in fact refers to 11am. I suspect that modern travel drinking began with the defence of the realm act 1914. The regulations were designed to curb our natural instincts to help with the war effort. By limiting pub opening times and weakening drinks, the new wartime rules traumatised the population for many generations to come. In the same way that displaced peoples favour art and jewellery – wealth they can take with them when they are next invaded ≠ Brits know that the right to a pint might be seized at any moment, without warning. In this light, drinking on a plane, where alcohol is freely available and you can be confident you won’t have to drive for a couple of hours, becomes less of a happy luxury and more of a moral imperative. Enjoy this Carling now, child, it could be your last. Speaking of defence of the realm, the best drink I’ve ever had on a plane was a gin and tonic on an RAF flight, where guests are still trusted with heavy crystal tumblers and spirits are poured freely from large bottles. If Ben Wallace is really worried about respect and parliament, perhaps he should start there. He might also remember that another key part of the defence of the realm act was not spreading rumours about military matters. As everyone in the Windmill at Stansted knows: what goes on tour stays on tour.Adam Boulton, at 62, says it is time for him to leave his job as Sky News’s editor at large. It’s a wrench, he told a Times interviewer, 63, for he’s still “young and healthy”. But: “I’ve just got to accept to a certain point that you and I, we’re tail-end baby-boomers, and there’s a kind of move against the baby-boomers and the fact that we’ve had less time at the peak is just the way it goes.” The graciousness of his departure has been admired, though possibly not by all his colleagues of a similar age. For some, that “we” possibly had a hint of Captain Oates’s “I may be some time”. Which still-vigorous presenter should go next to spare Sky News the burden of discriminating against them? The tail-end boomer category extends, after all, to people aged 57, who may even think of themselves as merely middle-aged. Until now, Boulton had rarely been classified along with the BBC’s opposite-end outliers, who presumably owe their survival, if not to possible legal action, then to the resemblance of such evictions, when postponed long enough, to patricide (there being no parallel female examples). Outside broadcasting, Boulton’s compliance, after what appear to have been fairly unsubtle hints from Sky News, was probably more welcome to young disseminators of the “OK boomer” pre-pandemic meme than to pre-retirement contemporaries with zero freelance options. Should they, following Boulton’s example, also internalise the popular ageism that has been exacerbated since the 2008 financial collapse by, first, Brexit’s divisiveness, then by Covid’s? “We’ve had our day,” Boulton conceded, of older colleagues and himself, in a kind of age-related cringe that Hollywood producers must dream of. Why can’t mature actresses be more like Boulton? Employees who need to work until their pensionable age might have wished, however, for more emphasis on personal choice. Couldn’t he just say he was bored, sick of politicians, keen to spend more time on a novel in which, hilariously, a vast pandemic death toll is trivialised by people who are not themselves immortal? Boulton’s interview reminds us that the enforced extension of UK working lives has been accompanied not only by flourishing ageism, but by the related and somehow more respectable generationalism. One academic paper defines this as: “The belief that all members of a given generation possess characteristics specific to that generation, especially so as to distinguish it as inferior or superior to another generation.” It’s the system that places Boulton the self-described boomer in the same supposedly illuminating age category as, say, Owen Paterson (65), Diane Abbott (68), Sir Patrick Vallance (61), Ian Botham (65), Jackie Kay (60), Charlie Mullins (69), the Archbishop of York (63), Nigel Farage (57), Boy George (60) and the late Errol Graham, who starved to death during lockdown, aged 57, after his benefits were cut off. Nor, of course, was Mr Graham the only boomer forgetting to enrich himself at the expense of future generations: 18% of pensioners are living in poverty. The objection that these simple divisions take no account of class, race, sex, ability, location and life experience has yet to threaten their popularity, this imprecision being largely, perhaps, their chief attraction as ageist insults. So long as “old fart” is impolite, “boomer” makes a very acceptable, or even judicious-sounding substitute, with “millennial” doing the same work for people who would really like to say, you intuit, “brat”. But the ubiquity of generationalist thinking, everywhere from business and academic to political life, is, as powerfully argued by the authors of the above paper, “dangerous and problematic”. It divides people and creates self-fulfilling stereotypes, while lending itself to official exploitation. Where there are mobs to denounce, or welfare to cut, intergenerational hostility is a government’s best friend. That intelligent people should now be announcing themselves as boomers, gen X-ers or, perhaps less apologetically, millennials, makes you wonder what was so terrible, really, about horoscopes. If Boulton had said something like “typical Cancer, me” to his interviewer, “always trying to please”, it would at least be a victimless idiocy. But his reinforcing of the burdensome boomer stereotype won’t affect only surviving Sky presenters. Routine denigration of older groups reinforces negative, potentially self-fulfilling thinking about age in much younger people, with implications for when they, too, enter a supposedly obsolescent demographic. Researching the psychology of ageing, Professor Becca Levy calculated that negative perceptions of ageing had a dramatic effect on life expectancy, those with positive ideas living 7.5 years longer. “If a previously unidentified virus,” she concluded, underlining the carnage of ageist prejudice, “was found to diminish life expectancy by over seven years, considerable effort would probably be devoted to identifying the cause and implementing a remedy.” As it turns out, we now know what happens, at least in the UK, when a previously unidentified virus shortens the lives of mainly older people. The former health secretary Matt Hancock claimed, wrongly, that a “protective ring” had been placed around care homes, after which, according to the recent parliamentary report, their “tragic scale of loss was among the worst in Europe”. People over 65 were classified en masse as defenceless and at risk while gerontophobes adopted “#boomerremover”. The prime minister cheerfully resisted lockdown because the dying are “all over 80”, that is, a full two years older than Sir John Major, who eviscerated him last week. In practice, stigmatisation and the new virus reinforced one another. An article in the Lancet noted: “As a result of Covid ageism, not only older people but also younger people are at risk of internalising the representation that being older means being vulnerable, and thus experience worse trajectories of physical and particularly mental health with time.” And now they can internalise the additional hint to self-cancel age 62. Brightish side: Boris Johnson is 57. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistDo revolutions always end in betrayal? Sudanese citizens are but the latest group to see a democratic dawn blotted out by the forces of reaction. It’s an age-old story. Napoleon subverted the French Revolution, imposing an imperium where freedom briefly reigned. Stalin purloined the power of the proletariat to build a totalitarian dictatorship. From southern Africa to Cuba to Myanmar, today’s ruling heirs to revolutionary political struggle dishonour their inheritance. European peoples who joyfully cast off the Soviet yoke watch liberties erode anew. The Arab spring swiftly wilted. The 1776 “American revolution” was arguably no revolution at all – more a white middle-class taxpayers’ revolt dressed up in fancy language. Developments last week in countries as far apart as Nicaragua, Ethiopia and China are a warning of how radical change may be halted and reversed, how hard-won revolutionary gains are easily lost. In all three, as throughout history, a single, self-aggrandising individual squats at the heart of the problem. Nicaragua has never been anything but poor. Yet the victorious Sandinista revolution of 1979 initially brought reform and hope of a better future. The defeat of the Somoza family dictatorship became the left’s biggest cause célèbre since the Spanish civil war. Volunteers flooded in. Fighting off US-backed Contra rebels, Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega became a political superstar. Yet Nicaraguans eventually tired of the war and tired of Ortega, too. In 1990 I watched as he toured the countryside atop a flatbed truck, trying to revive flagging belief in the revolution’s promise. To his surprise, Ortega lost the election that year. Defeat soured him. He vowed to regain the presidency – by any means. He achieved his aim in 2007 and, abolishing term limits, has clung to power ever since. Abetted by his wife and vice-president, Rosario Murillo, his regime has become “an insular dynastic tyranny that eerily resembles the one he fought decades ago”, wrote journalist and author Stephen Kinzer. Political opponents and old comrades have been locked up, the press and judiciary silenced, and protesters killed and abused. Last week’s presidential election, won by a “landslide”, was widely condemned as a sham. But Ortega, 76, seems impervious to criticism. He’s expected to rule until his death, when he hopes Rosario or one of their sons will succeed him. “He seemed a reasonably promising leader. Few could have imagined that he would degenerate into a hermit dictator,” Kinzer lamented. “How did this soft-spoken, introverted, even self-effacing revolutionary, who was a Boy Scout and once considered entering the priesthood, ultimately emerge as the most brutal ruler in his country’s history?” That’s a cautionary conundrum Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s embattled prime minister, would do well to ponder. Like Ortega, Abiy has morphed from global pin-up, winning the 2019 Nobel peace prize, to international outcast, after his disastrous invasion of northern Tigray province last year. Abiy’s war of choice now threatens to engulf the capital, Addis Ababa, shatter Ethiopia’s fragile unity, and further destabilise the Horn of Africa. Like Ortega, his personal ambition and poor judgment have jeopardised the considerable gains made since the 1991 revolution that ended the Marxist Derg military regime. Abiy declared a nationwide state of emergency last week, urging citizens to take up arms. African Union and UN ceasefire calls have been rejected. Human rights groups document ongoing war crimes allegedly committed by Abiy’s forces as well as by his foes and allies. Meanwhile, his policy has brought famine back to Ethiopia – a horribly symbolic failure, given still vivid memories of the 1980s. The UN says 400,000 people in Tigray face a food emergency. Millions are displaced. What kind of leadership is this? How may one reckless man, refusing to admit error and resign, retain the power to trash three decades of achievement and incinerate a nation’s future? It’s a question that should also be asked of China’s autocratic, over-reaching leader, Xi Jinping. He spent last week securing internal Chinese Communist party (CCP) backing for an unprecedented third term as president, beginning next year. Xi is now the most powerful politician since Mao Zedong, to whose brutally authoritarian style he closely adheres. Official media sing his praises with sickly sycophancy. Critics keep mum out of fear of their lives. In Xi’s surveillance state, techno-fascism rules. Yet what connection truly exists between Xi’s power politics and personality cult and the aspirations of the founding CCP revolutionaries who, meeting 100 years ago in Shanghai and inspired by Russia’s revolution four years previously, pledged to fight oppression? After decades of steady progress, what price might China’s people yet pay for Xi’s aggressive ambitions? Facing a slowing economy, a growing debt crisis, a degrading environment, an ageing population and a widening array of external antagonists, Xi has but a few years to realise his “China dream” of global pre-eminence, geographical reunification, internal consolidation, strict political monogamy and stifling social conformity. With one eye on history and another on the future, Xi gambles on glory. It could go either way. A China crash could lead to conflict or worldwide recession or both. Yet a China triumphant under Xi could be fatal, too, for global democracy, civil rights, free speech and international law. Hong Kong is the grim portent. How do such rulers justify their betrayals of the people, the ideals and the struggles that brought them to where they are? Perhaps, like Ortega and Abiy, Xi believes only he can rule effectively, that he’s irreplaceable, unique. Perhaps they confuse confidence with hubris. They seek to secure fatuous “legacies”. They grow addicted to power. In truth, there is no justification. Such traitors to reformation are a toxic blight. Like Mao’s one hundred blossoms, they seed across the modern world – not as flowers but as weeds. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to amend a reference from “Mao’s one thousand blossoms” to “Mao’s one hundred blossoms”.Ambulance services are helping to relieve GPs’ huge workloads by using some of their paramedics to carry out home visits to sick patients, a service traditionally undertaken by family doctors. Paramedics are swapping answering 999 calls for tending people who have asked for a GP to see them at home because they are too ill or frail to come into the surgery. NHS bosses say paramedics taking on this role is fast emerging as a way of helping GPs, stopping patients ending up in hospital unnecessarily and tackling chronic understaffing. The North East ambulance service (NEAS) is one of several services that is seconding paramedics to work with GPs because they believe that home visits help the NHS overall, including reducing pressure on A&amp;E, which is experiencing record demand for care. “It helps GPs, patients like it and paramedics enjoy working like this,” said Paul Younger, who has been with the NEAS since 2002 and is one of its six paramedics who work in primary care. “It takes about 45 minutes for a GP to go and see a patient for a home visit. But they can see four to five patients in their surgery in that time if a paramedic does the home visit instead. “Plus, we paramedics can get there quicker, sometimes in as little as 15 minutes, whereas if a GP was going to visit someone at home who’d rung the surgery that morning, they’d have to wait until they’d seen all their patients that morning and then go, so not until lunchtime.” Three NEAS paramedics work like this every weekday around Berwick, and another three in North Tyneside, including Whitley Bay, North Seaton and Wallsend. They drive unmarked cars rather than NHS ambulances. “Initially, some local GPs were a bit dubious. GPs have been doing primary care for decades so, with the change, some thought: do the paramedics know what they’re doing? Are patients safe? But over time they’ve learned that they can play an important part of looking after patients in primary care,” added Younger. Almost all the patients he and his colleagues visit are housebound. Most referrals have come from a GP but sometimes a district nurse, care home or domiciliary care worker makes the request. The NEAS paramedics also cover care homes – they comprise one in seven of their visits. “The range of clinical cases paramedics deal with is vast,” said Paul Aitken-Fell, NEAS’s lead consultant paramedic, who set up the service in 2019. The most common problem they encounter is trouble breathing, for example because of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. But they deal with a wide range of conditions including joint pain, skin problems, infections and heart attacks. “If you are having a heart attack you’d be better off with a paramedic turning up at your house than a GP because, being specialists in urgent and emergency care, we see them more than GPs,” added Younger. Only one in 10 patients ends up going to hospital because paramedics’ experience means they can treat most of them on the spot and draw up a care plan, sometimes with input from a GP. NEAS is in talks with GPs elsewhere on its patch to start providing the service, including Hartlepool and Easington, said Aitken-Fell. NEAS’s ability to deal with 999 calls is not undermined by the scheme because the six are dedicated home-visit paramedics, and deploying them like this should ultimately cut the number of people needing a blue light ambulance, he added. “This is a great example of different parts of the NHS coming together and working in new ways to deliver better care for patients,” says Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents England’s NHS trusts, including the 10 specialist ambulance trusts. “It’s a win-win-win: for the organisations involved, for staff and above all for patients, who feel listened to, safe and confident in the care provided.” NHS Providers has highlighted NEAS’s work with GPs in a report to be published this week on the creative solutions that trusts are adopting, given the health service in England is short of almost 100,000 staff. Several other ambulance services offer GP-style home visits. London ambulance service paramedics have undertaken home visits and worked in GP surgeries in the boroughs of Redbridge and Merton since last year. LAS is expanding its efforts to help hard-pressed GP surgeries. Thirty of its paramedics are currently on a training course, in conjunction with Health Education England, to enable them to work in GP surgeries alongside family doctors, practice nurses and their colleagues. “Arrangements like this are proving to be a virtuous circle where everybody benefits. We must expand these schemes to help keep primary care sustainable,” said one NHS boss.Last week a new fish and chip shop opened in Barnsley. There were long queues to snaffle the first 1,000 portions, sold at the bargain 1972 price of 45p, but the most extraordinary thing about it was the owner, Azeem Rafiq: English cricket’s great disruptor. The story of the 30-year-old Rafiq has dominated the front and back pages this month after the touchpaper finally caught in his long-running battle for justice over the racism he experienced while at Yorkshire CCC. It has been a story Shakespearean in its tragedy, and spiralling in its repercussions, of how a superb young cricketer, Yorkshire’s first captain from an Asian background and a beacon of inclusivity, became lost and alienated at a club where, he has claimed, casual racism was allowed to float and fester. Rafiq’s determination to be heard has cost him his career, his mental health and many of his friends in the game; while the club’s mangled investigation of his claims of institutional racism has dragged their own reputation through the mire. In the past week, the chairman, Roger Hutton, and the chief executive, Mark Arthur, have both resigned and sponsors, previously only too glad to nail their colours to English cricket’s most successful county, ran suddenly into the night: Nike, Emerald, Yorkshire Tea, Anchor Butter, Tetley’s beer, Harrogate Spring Water, Bagnalls, David Lloyd Clubs – all gone. Martyn Moxon, the director of cricket, is off sick, suffering from a stress-related illness; Andrew Gale, the head coach, is temporarily suspended before a disciplinary hearing. The England and Wales Cricket Board has suspended Yorkshire from holding internationals and other big games at Headingley, while death threats have been sent to Rafiq, to his family and to Yorkshire employees. In all the mess, there are no winners. Rafiq moved to England from Pakistan aged 10. He was soon picked up in the Yorkshire system, as a talented off-spinning allrounder, a clever young man and an astute leader who idolised Michael Vaughan. He played age-group cricket for England, and was captain of the under-17 and U19 sides. The U19 squad he led to the World Cup in 2010 was full of big names and bigger personalities: there was his vice-captain, Hampshire’s James Vince, plus Joe Root, Jos Buttler and Ben Stokes – England’s current Test captain and previous vice-captains. His white-ball Yorkshire debut came at the tender age of 17, his County Championship debut the year after, and he scored a century in his second first-class match, a chirpy innings described as one of “confidence, panache” and “remarkably few nerves”. By 2012, he was leading Yorkshire, the club’s youngest captain, after an injury to Gale: five T20 wins in six games followed. But there was sourness amongst the honey. The Headingley dressing room was a hard one and “banter” disguised racist remarks that wore Rafiq down. The alleged incident with Vaughan – which the former captain has vehemently denied – occurred in 2009, one of the first times the two men had ever spoken. Rafiq’s own behaviour was haphazard. In 2010 he was one of the first cricketers to fall foul of Twitter, when he posted abusive messages about John Abrahams, his England U19s coach, after being dropped for breaking agreed curfews. He struggled to balance his Muslim background with fitting in with the lifestyles of his teammates, something he thinks helps explain the yips he started to suffer the following winter as the story of youthful promise started to spoil. He continued to struggle with his game, feeling increasingly isolated, and in 2014 left Yorkshire, suffering from a loss of form and depression. After a couple of years in the wilderness, he admirably worked his way back to the club, and in 2016 was awarded his county cap. While hopes of representing England alongside the men he led as a teenager had faded, a fulfilling white-ball career seemed to be in reach. Then in 2018, tragedy struck, as his beloved son was stillborn. A distraught Rafiq took compassionate leave and it was during this period that Yorkshire decided to end his contract. To the general cricketing public, Rafiq then disappeared, playing a little cricket in Pakistan, training as a coach, cooking free meals for NHS staff and key workers during the first lockdown and starting his own business. It was in an interview with Wisden’s Taha Hashim in August 2020 that Rafiq first publicly mentioned the racism he had suffered while at Headingley. It was picked up a couple of weeks later by George Dobell, then of Cricinfo, and this time Rafiq was more specific in his allegations: that Yorkshire’s lack of action had left him close to suicide and that he “lost faith in humanity”. After ignoring previous complaints against the club, which Rafiq had wanted to settle amicably, Yorkshire were eventually kicked into action, commissioning a report, which was supposed to take three months. As winter turned to spring and then summer, that stretched to nearly a year. While Dobell helped keep Rafiq’s name in the news, the pressure took its toll. When brief details did emerge, Rafiq was enraged that the club apologised for “inappropriate behaviour” rather than racism. When a summary of the report was finally released, on the same day England’s Test with India at Old Trafford was called off, seven of Rafiq’s allegations were upheld though the report declared it was neither able to prove nor disprove institutional racism. Still the full report was not published, nor was it sent to Rafiq, nor the ECB. As they had from the beginning, Yorkshire underestimated their former captain, a man whose stubbornness matched their own and who refused to take money in exchange for a non-disclosure agreement. Finally, when the club announced that no disciplinary action would be taken and revelations emerged that a player had admitted using the P-word in conversation with Rafiq but the club accepted it was “banter between friends”, a crisis point was reached: MPs became involved and sponsors started to flee. Lord Patel, the former ECB deputy chair brought in to replace Hutton, settled Rafiq’s employment tribunal case within 72 hours. Immediately, Rafiq promised a donation to the Bethan James bursary, set up to support young journalists. The digital, culture, media and sport select committee hearing on Tuesday, which will be attended, among others, by Rafiq and Hutton, who was thwarted in his efforts to reform the club, is expected to be explosive. Today the Yorkshire website displays all 29 of their squad players; only one comes from a non-white background, England’s Adil Rashid. It is a tragedy of opportunity denied at a personal and community level. Rafiq’s legacy, what he has continued fighting for, is that he will, in the end, change English cricket’s most famous club for good.There is an illuminating photograph of Eikoh Hosoe at work in 1968. His subject is the avant-garde dancer Tatsumi Hijikata, with whom he had collaborated for almost a decade. Hijikata is running barefoot across a field and, just a few feet behind him, Hosoe is leaping in the air while simultaneously pressing the shutter of the camera clasped to his eye. Rather than simply documenting the dancer’s performance, the photographer seems to have joined in the dance. The image speaks volumes about Hosoe’s fascination with, and immersion in, the Japanese postwar avant garde, as well as his commitment to creating images that constantly challenged conventional notions of what photography should be and could do. For him, it was, above all, about immersive collaboration: the creation of a heightened space in which he attempted to become one with his subject. This idea informed his many creative interactions with Hijikata, the founder of butoh, a form of wildly expressive and physically demanding dance, as well as his most well-known work, Ordeal By Roses, in which he photographed the controversial Japanese novelist, actor, dramatist and ultra-nationalist Yukio Mishima, in a series of darkly homoerotic tableaux. Hosoe was ahead of his time in his embrace of the avant garde and his creation of an often darkly poetic visual expressionism through his use of high-contrast black-and-white tones, sculptural closeups of nude bodies and starkly evocative landscapes that seem to reflect his – and his subject’s – interlocking states of mind. The boldness of his approach pushed against the parameters of documentary photography, echoing through the work of the Provoke generation of the late 1960s, one of whose leading practitioners, Daidō Moriyama, actually worked as Hosoe’s assistant when he first arrived in Tokyo in 1961. Add to this Hosoe’s co-founding of the Vivo collective in 1959, it’s name taken from the Esperanto word for “life”, and his pioneering photo books, made in collaboration with the best designers of the time, and it is hard not to see him as the most influential postwar Japanese photographer. Hosoe had witnessed the firebombing of Tokyo in 1944 as a child and his family had been evacuated from the city, living for a time in the village his mother had grown up in. In 1965, he made his series Kamaitachi there, encouraging Hijikata to enact a kind of psychic dance that called up the suppressed terrors of their shared childhoods – including the invoking of a demon weasel that local farmers believed stalked their fields in search of human prey. The atmospheric theatricality of the series did not sit well with contemporary critics or his more traditionally minded contemporaries, who found it indulgent and inauthentic. It now seems audaciously fictive. In Hijikata, though, Hosoe had found a fellow traveller. Their creative relationship had begun dramatically seven years before, when Hosoe had watched dumbstruck as Hijikata’s company interpreted Mishima’s novel of secret homosexual desire, Kinjiki (Forbidden Colours), in a performance that involved two dancers interacting with a live chicken. He later described the performance as “ferocious”. “The encounter fundamentally changed Hosoe’s relationship with photography or, rather, the people he photographed,” writes Yasufumi Nakamori, a curator and academic who worked closely with the photographer on a new, meticulously researched retrospective book of his work. “Instead of simply photographing the subject, he began to view himself as involved in the creation of a distinct space and time.” From that moment on, Hosoe strived to capture the intensity of what Nakamori describes as “the trance-like state” he created through his intense interactions with his subjects. In Mishima, who initially commissioned him to do some publicity shots, Hosoe found an artist willing to lay bare his soul for the camera with an often alarming intensity of purpose. In one infamous portrait, Mishima is shot from above, standing on a circular mosaic of the symbols of the zodiac, wrapped in a garden hose that snakes around his body and into his mouth. In Ordeal By Roses, they created a powerful narrative that touched on forbidden desire, sadism and ritual, with Mishima later saying that Hosoe’s camera had allowed him to inhabit an inner world that was “grotesque, barbaric and dissipated”, but also shot though with “a pure undercurrent of lyricism”. The resulting book was published in 1971, by which time Mishima had killed himself by seppuku – ritual suicide by disembowelment – an act that lent the series an even darker aspect. Since then, Hosoe, now 88, has expressed his unease about being too closely identified with Mishima. The new monograph shows how that one famous series fits into a much bigger narrative marked by a relentless imaginative curiosity and a creative fearlessness that took him – and photography – into a new place of uncertain possibilities. Dark, dreamlike and unsettling, his images remain hauntingly powerful in their merging of performance, often intense physicality and an almost mythic atmosphere. Though of their time, they resonate still. • Eikoh Hosoe is published by Mack (£55)My relationship with fashion is that of a long-term couple who frequently argue at a pitch that worries the neighbours. It contains passion, guilt, sorrow and frequent spot-cleaning. I still enjoy the vinegar perfume of glossy magazines and even (as I peer at the price of a coat or boot) the familiar internal screech. I still enjoy a leisurely stroll around the shops, gently fingering a silky sleeve, noting the newer skirt length or ugly shoe index. At its best, getting dressed is an existential pleasure akin to the jolt upon meeting a stranger’s eye across a crowded room; at its worst, like lowering oneself into a cold bath of beans without a single name on your sponsor sheet. I love my clothes, each thing embedded with the sweat of memory, each old dress a welcome surprise. And yet, when papers started running stories about people not unlike me who were “giving up” clothes shopping, discussing the struggle as if jeans were heroin or shops were sirens, Asos calling to them from the rocks, I was left cold. Did you read them? You couldn’t miss them. Did you try it, too? Did you take a deep breath one January and vow not to step into either Primark or Prada, not to add another going-out top to your heaving drawer, to save the world by wearing the jacket you have? I mean, good on you. Thank you for your service. But what I have always found absent from these stories is why that seemingly simple choice – an apparently passive act – is so incredibly difficult for so many. One solution for those who wanted to buy less was to rent more. Fashion-rental businesses popped up like sequined moles, promoted by people like Carrie Symonds (who married Boris Johnson in a rented gown) and Gwyneth Paltrow (who is on the US board of an American firm called Rent the Runway – they claim that 20% of the retail market will be rental by 2025). In the UK, the clothes-rental market is predicted to reach almost £3bn by 2029. The argument for it is twofold – : it’s a more sustainable choice than buying new clothes, and it allows people to wear clothes they’d never usually be able to afford. Again though, there seems to be an important chapter to this story missing, a whole level skipped. The lift didn’t stop at the 13th floor. I enjoy the thrill of finding something glorious in a shop but am keenly aware, too, when the excitement comes not from the thing but from the buying itself. A year of not buying new clothes is not a hardship for me, a person who has always worn almost exclusively secondhand clothes and rarely thrown anything away, resulting in outfits that are worn until they fall apart (once, memorably, during an interview with a male TV star, who kindly offered a safety pin). And yet the appeal of renting clothes, to me, is minimal to none. Not for the reason of ickiness that some people share – I don’t mind a dress I wear having a history. And not because I don’t care about dressing up – I insist, in fact, on looking fabulous 40-60% of the time. And not even because a recent study revealed that renting clothes (which involves a large amount of transportation and dry cleaning) is worse for the planet than throwing them away. No, the problem for me is that renting an outfit would erase much of the rare delight of choosing something to keep. A large part of the thrill of dressing up comes from the risk. The risk of investing in a new jigsaw piece in your aesthetic identity. And that means engaging with a piece of clothing beyond just wearing it to your ex’s wedding. It means washing it, possibly saving up for it; it definitely means wearing it more than once, otherwise what distinguishes this from fancy dress? It means embracing it, and forcing it into the family of your older clothes, into the awkward patchwork of your life. The thing missing from those stories about people struggling not to buy new clothes is an interrogation into why so many feel that need, into how capitalism turns people into addicts. If fashion brands really cared about the environment they would either overhaul their businesses entirely, meaning massive inevitable losses, or simply close up shop, shutting down a system that runs on production and consumption. And fashion rental feeds that same compulsion, cultivating addictive behaviour for profit. Nobody needs a £1,000 handbag, even for a weekend – renting it for £50 doesn’t neutralise the insanity. Which is not to say there can’t be joy in fashion, or even in shopping, but why must we kid ourselves that we’re saving the world by babysitting someone else’s dress? Clothes-rental businesses are as much of a solution to the problem of fast-fashion consumption as a tea towel is when faced with a flood – if we’re serious about real change, somebody needs to try to turn off the tap. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanLike many other seaside towns across the country at this time of year, the streets of Newquay in November are a pretty drab affair. Ice-cream kiosks are locked up for the winter, and the town’s famous beaches – where, in summer, holidaymakers jostle for space – are now empty. It was one of the busiest summers on record for Cornwall, as Covid restrictions to overseas destinations made it a holiday hotspot. But now that the tourists have left, the impact of the staycation boom on the county is becoming abundantly clear as it faces up to a homelessness crisis out of all proportion to anything it has witnessed before. “Every day we have more people coming to us,” says Monique Collins, dishing out another portion of meatballs into one of hundreds of plastic containers lined up waiting to be filled. From the Sandy Lodge Hotel in Newquay, she runs the DISC charity that provides support and meals for people living in hotels, B&amp;Bs and temporary accommodation all across Cornwall. “People are being evicted because their landlord either wants to turn their property into a holiday let or because they want to sell up because property prices are so high. There is no accommodation – and the situation is getting worse because of benefit cuts and rising energy bills. I am really worried about how families here are going to manage this winter. It’s a catastrophe.” Property prices in Cornwall have risen by 20% in some areas this year, and estate agents are continuing to push hard for more sales. One Falmouth agent sent out leaflets last week urging property owners to make the most of “an unrepeatable opportunity”, boasting that 81% of its clients were from outside the area looking for second homes and were prepared to pay more than locals. Holiday lettings have also boomed, with many houses in Newquay renting out for double what they did last year. Landlords can often earn more in a few weeks than they can in a year from a long-term let. With second homes and holiday lets swallowing up housing supply, local tenants have been left facing eviction but with nowhere to go. “Trying even just to get a viewing on a property, it’s horrendous,” said Zoe, a mother of three who didn’t want to give her surname. She is being evicted after 12 years in her home in Truro as her landlord wants to sell up. “There are hundreds of people viewing the same one. All you hear is ‘no, no no’, because we have kids and we have a dog. The agents make you feel completely worthless. All I want to do is find somewhere to live for my family.” Patrick Winterton, 36, a gardener in Falmouth, was evicted from his long-term rented home in October because the owner wanted to change it to a holiday let. “It’s not even like the house was near the beach or had a sea view. It’s just in suburban Falmouth,” he said. He is now renting a caravan but it’s not cheap, costing him nearly half his monthly salary. “I am one of the lucky ones because I found somewhere. But maybe next year this will be on Airbnb too. What I’d do then, I don’t know.” Hettie and Chris Bevington have been told to leave their home with their three young children on 4 January. “Could there be a worse time of year to have to leave? We’ve lived here for three years and never missed a rent payment,” said Hettie, 38, a care worker. “It used to be that Redruth was where people who do normal jobs like us could afford to live in Cornwall. But rents have gone up so much here too.” Chris, 58, works for Cornwall Council, and since the pandemic often works from home. “How am I supposed to work from home if I don’t have one? The council says they can’t help us until we are evicted. So do we just sit here, and let our children watch us being forcibly evicted by bailiffs? I don’t want to put them through that but I am not sure what else we can do,” he said. “Our neighbour is being evicted too. She’s in her 60s and has just started chemotherapy. Where is she going to go on 4 January?” St Petrocs, another Cornish homelessness charity, is already seeing higher numbers than it has done in years, and is gearing up for an even busier winter. “People come to us when they have just been made homeless and have no idea what to do next,” said Dave Brown, from the charity. “We help them work through the options available to them. Unfortunately, those options have become fewer and fewer.” Acorn, a community union representing renters, said it is seeing a wave of eviction notices that will come into effect in January. “It might be a property owner’s legal right to end a tenancy and sell their property, but is it a moral right?” said John Whitcher, who volunteers for Acorn. “It’s doing untold damage to people’s lives, particularly children.” The spectacular Headland Hotel, the setting for the film of Roald Dahl’s The Witches starring Anjelica Huston, makes for an unlikely vanguard in the fight against Cornwall’s housing crisis. But the luxury five-star hotel is hiring local people who have become homeless. “In about March this year, we realised there was a major problem with housing in the area, as we were struggling to recruit staff because of accommodation shortages,” said Veryan Palmer, director of the hotel. She eventually found a surf lodge to house employees but still needed staff. Collins suggested interviewing some of the people coming to DISC for help, and now nine people previously homeless and out of work have permanent jobs and a place to live. “One woman came who had been sleeping in her car. She burst into tears in the interview because she hadn’t had a shower in a week. We stopped the interview immediately, took her to the hotel spa with a bag of toiletries and let her have a bit of time to feel herself again,” said Palmer. She got the job. Another young man hired by the Headland was sleeping in a tent, having been evicted so that his landlord could let his home on Airbnb. “Taking people on in these circumstances raised a few eyebrows at first with other staff. But I think it’s been eye-opening for our whole team to realise how you may only be a couple of steps away from homelessness yourself.” Tucked in a wooded hollow behind County Hall in Truro lies one of the council’s short-term solutions to the housing crisis. It is designed for single adults who would otherwise be sleeping rough, and has 21 cabins each with a bed, desk, fridge and microwave, and a bathroom with shower, sink and toilet. The site has 24-hour security, a laundry facility, and an orchard with picnic seating. “For some people, just having their own front door makes a real difference,” said Barbara Lashmar, who oversees the site. “It’s not perfect, and no one is saying people should stay here for ever, but it is a stepping stone off the street.” Olly Monk, Cornwall Council portfolio holder for housing, says the council is doing all it can to end the housing crisis. “We’ve got an immediate issue with families who are being threatened with homelessness. It must be absolutely terrifying for them,” he said. The council is buying caravan parks as well as developments of modular homes that can be erected quickly. It is also buying new-build houses straight from developers, announcing last week the purchase of 130 new homes, 100 of which would otherwise have gone on the open market. “This shows our commitment to do whatever is necessary to provide homes that people in our communities can afford,” said Monk. “We are building and buying up as much social housing as we can. But we need Westminster to give us more powers. We want every property’s primary use to be residential, and if there is any deviation from that, then the owners have to apply to us for permission. We want to close the loophole that allows second homes that are holiday lets to not pay rates. And we want the power to put a surcharge on council tax for second homes or holiday lets.” He also wants landlords and estate agents to “think twice”. “They should look at their conscience, and look at their communities, and think about where their sons and daughters are going to live in the future.” In the meantime, the Bevingtons and their neighbour are planning a big Christmas this year, despite the looming eviction. “This will be our last one here in our home. We’re going to have everyone, as who knows where we will be living next year.”Imagine, if you can, a small, bluish room. Wires, screens, sensors. A few keepsakes from the old world. The room’s fleshy inhabitant, confined indoors by a zoonotic pandemic, greenwashes a data-mining company from her bed. The government has made it illegal for her to step outside. There is a communal kitchen down the corridor, which she shares with a few strangers she met online, but mostly she orders her meals via an interface and eats them here. Microphones record her interactions. A motion sensor on her wrist reminds her to optimise her performance. Filled with saudade for the dying world outside, she has bought a few rainforest plants to brighten the space. Her pocket surveillance device reminds her to water them. She catches the news: the world’s richest man has just left the Earth’s atmosphere. So much for the home of 2021! What about the home of 2050? Might it offer a more hopeful vision of domesticity than the dystopian nightmare some of us have been living through these past couple of years? Or are we inexorably sliding into a world of surveillance and atomisation, climate crisis and housing crisis, drowning alone as our meta headsets suck the very data from our souls? Maybe a bit of both, says Sarah Douglas, director of the Liminal Space. She is behind the forthcoming Tomorrow’s Home exhibition at the Museum of the Home in east London, which imagines how we’ll be living three decades hence. “The home of the future could help us flourish in ever more tailored and sophisticated ways,” she says. “But it will be messy as we learn to navigate the huge benefits and ethical questions that new interactive technologies bring.” The exhibition, produced in collaboration with University College London, imagines a home inhabited by three (gender-neutral) people. There’s Kai, 17, who works for a 3D printing company, hangs out in the metaverse and has never eaten meat (and can’t understand why anyone would). There’s grandperson Mo, 76, a retired teacher with early-onset dementia who pines for the good old days. And there’s lodger Charlie, 34, who has cerebral palsy and works for a protein manufacturer based in Buenos Aires. Life in 2050 is shaped by three overarching “macro-trends”: the climate crisis; the ageing population; and the “fourth Industrial Revolution”, which will see data-gathering technology infiltrate our most intimate spaces. Of course, we will not embrace any future trends wholeheartedly. “It may be that there is a highly connected class, a bumbling-along class, and a set of people who choose to live totally off-grid,” says Rachel Coldicutt, director of Careful Industries, which researches how technology interacts with humans. Those who do wish to keep their home as a private sanctuary will not find it easy, she warns. The world’s most powerful tech companies have already shifted focus from phones to homes: Google has its nest range of “intelligent” security systems; Amazon has filed patents for devices capable of reading your “emotional data”; and Facebook is launching its “metaverse”. These technologies have a way of overriding any initial reservations we might have about them. “People don’t buy Alexa because it’s a surveillance device,” Coldicutt says. “They buy it because it’s nice to have a hands-free timer in the kitchen. It’s still a surveillance device.” Some of us might not have a choice but to submit. If social housing exists in the future, might its inhabitants be required to submit to some form of monitoring in order to “prove” that they deserve to live there? If you’re on the future version of universal credit and you’re still in bed at 8.30am, is that going to be a problem? Coldicutt reckons that it might be. But from the outside, at least, our homes will look much the same. There’s no reason to assume that the British public’s taste for Victorian terraces will disappear by 2050. “The homes will just have to work harder,” says architect Piers Taylor. “They will be workspaces and wellness spaces as well as places to eat and sleep, and they will need to be more flexible, too.” Around 80% of carbon emissions in construction come from concrete and steel, so renewable materials like timber will become more common in new homes, as will lower-rise buildings. “Anything below two storeys and housing isn’t dense enough, anything much over five and it becomes too resource intensive.” We will need modular interiors that can rapidly change to accommodate, say, the arrival of a child, or a climate refugee. And perhaps we’ll be rapidly switching up our subscriptions to companies providing furniture, appliances and vehicles, much as we do with Netflix and Now TV today. Here’s how things might look. The living room Sensors, microphones, cameras, monitors – all of these are likely to become much more prevalent and much more discreet by 2050. The future version of Alexa might be embedded in a candlestick or a vase; it might blend in with trends for more natural materials (wood, hemp, straw, etc); and it won’t just respond to what you say, it will respond to the tone and volume of your voice too, and it will know when you shout at your kids. However, if we are able to take control of our own data, none of this need be a terrible thing, says Yvonne Rogers, head of computer science at UCL. “We can focus on the dystopian aspects here, but if we think more abstractly about how we can use the data that these devices are gathering, there’s all sorts of interesting things we can do.” Perhaps digital wallpaper that changes colour depending on the emotions present in the home, like a screensaver but for a wall. It might beam in a live relay from a patch of rainforest that your household is sponsoring. Maybe it will respond to the presence of a baby or a pet. With more of us working from home (or unemployed due to automation) and perhaps less able to travel, we will look for more ways to connect virtually. “We can probably be a bit cleverer than the Facebook metaverse,” Rogers says. Star Wars-esque 3D hologram projections of loved ones aren’t such a stretch. “You can already use augmented reality to try out Ikea furniture in your living room. That technology will develop. It might still involve augmented-reality glasses, but this superimposition of the digital on the physical is likely to become more prevalent, more advanced and much more cost effective.” We might even be projecting dead loved ones on to our sofas. The Tomorrow’s Home exhibition foresees AI avatars of dead relatives, created from the data they have left behind. This might be a way of alleviating loneliness in an ageing population. “It’s the sort of thing you can imagine a big-tech company providing on subscription,” Douglas says. “You might be encouraged to pay for an upgrade, say, if you wanted to discuss the football scores or have philosophical chat.” The kitchen This part of the home has seen big changes in recent generations: from a galley-like room designed for a servant to a large, communal space that’s the focus of family life, rendering the dining room obsolete. Not that this means we’re doing any more cooking. Drone deliveries, lab-grown meats and nutritionally optimised meal plans seem likely to de-skill the general population further, making cooking even more of a boutique hobby than it already is. Actually eating animals? That could go the way of smoking, seen as passé, unhealthy, mildly rebellious. How about a semi-sentient fridge that tells Aldi that you’ve run out of tofu via the “Internet of Things”? Rogers wonders whether we will actually want this kind of technological interference: “I’m not convinced people will submit to being lectured by their fridge for eating too much cake.” Intelligent bins might be more useful, however. The Tomorrow’s Home exhibition sketches out something like the Chinese social credit system but for recycling. Imagine if your bin could calculate how much you are throwing away and reward you with council tax rebates (or penalties). Another innovation on show is the “smart mug” – a drinking vessel that monitors your vitals and tells your mum you’ve been microdosing. But a truly intelligent home wouldn’t necessarily be filled with shiny new gadgets. As we move to a sustainable future, the £15 toaster, £30 air-fryer, and £80 smoothie-maker may become things of the past, says Kathryn Bishop of the Future Laboratory, which advises brands on consumer trends. “People are starting to realise that the sort of cheap, plastic-based homeware products put out by the likes of Urban Outfitters, Next and Ikea are just as damaging as fast fashion,” she says. The new “right to repair” legislation shows that elected leaders are finally willing to challenge our catastrophically wasteful models of consumption. “This feels likely to lead to more of an embrace of natural and reusable materials and more of a culture, with buying and trading in.” If items were designed to be more easily repaired, they should also become more customisable too, which may lead to far more variety in the sort of electronic products that we use. The bathroom The future is usually depicted as a gleaming, white, sanitised space. However, it is the “clean white spaces of modernism” that we need to fight against says Richard Beckett, who has won Riba awards for his work on what he calls “probiotic architecture”. “Now that we spend around 90% of our time indoors, we are missing an exposure to what we call “diverse nature”, which we would have evolved with over hundreds of thousands of years,” he says. “We don’t get the microbial diversity that our bodies need and it’s resulting in a lot of new chronic illness.” To counter this, he is developing building materials that bring nature indoors: think bathroom tiles containing spores which have beneficial microbes, the ceramic equivalent of sauerkraut. “Building materials might need to be more textural, more porous,” he says. “And we might be engaging differently with our walls or surfaces. A bit like how we water plants, we might be spraying our walls with nutrients.” Meanwhile, your smart toilet will obviously be monitoring your excretions, making sure your gut flora and hormones are OK and meanwhile treating you to your own bespoke douche. Just as long as you don’t sit on someone else’s toilet by mistake. “There is no item that brings home the invasiveness of pre-determined technical settings than the smart toilet,” Coldicutt says. And this is before we get to the knottier ethical issues. “What are people going to lose out on if they choose not to use those things? If you don’t give your data to the toilet company, might you be missing out when the magnesium supplements are handed out?” And your mirror will become much fancier. It will provide morning affirmations, remind you to take your pills, help you apply your makeup and encourage children to brush their teeth with augmented-reality filters and animations. Probably. The bedroom Your blanket or possibly your mattress will become the thing that monitors your sleep. “At the moment, when we think about wearable tech, we think of iPhone-esque devices with screens,” Douglas says. “Actually, we’ll see these data-gathering devices become much more humanised.” Douglas also foresees a big future for subscriptions. Instead of buying fast fashion online and taking it to the charity shop a few months later, she reckons we might see “community wardrobes” – virtual closets that allow us easily to swap clothes with friends and neighbours. It sounds delightful. But where are the profit margins? As long as our present economic incentives are in place, we are always likely to bump up against difference between what is actually useful – and what makes money for someone. “It would be really interesting to see if we could get to a point where domestic technology really does solve domestic problems,” Coldicutt says. “One of the hardest technical problems in the world is folding a sheet. Laundry continues to be an activity that requires physical intervention. But the likelihood of finding a robot that pairs socks seems remote. So we’re going to be left doing the tasks that robots can’t.” In the bedroom of the future: damp laundry. The playroom As a computer scientist, Yvonne Rogers is inclined to play the optimist. “So much technology is designed around tracking and counting,” she says. “It would be good to think about how to make devices that really do enhance play and allow children to create in their bedrooms.” She reckons toys are going to become much, much cooler thanks to the increasingly blurred lines between physical and the digital. Imagine if you could project a sea on to your bedroom floor; or use an actual rug as a virtual flying carpet; or create interactive cuddly toys, which might be a great comfort for sick children. “It would be really nice to think how we could make learning through the home more joyful and have technologies that really do encourage children to become more curious and creative.” Children’s boundless energy needn’t go to waste either. Bishop of the Future Laboratory points to the work of the wood materials science laboratory in Zurich, which has created wood that harvests static electricity when you walk over it. “Put something like that under a children’s playroom and you could power a few toys,” she says. The garden Naturally, we will be recycling our waste and creating closed-loop energy systems to power our homes. Possibly we will be growing more of our own food, too: prickly pears and pomegranates ought to suit the British climate by then. And we might be doing more of this communally. “One thing that’s crazy about the way we live now is having a little picket fence around a tiny bit of garden,” says Taylor, the architect. “It makes so much more sense to have a space communally shared between 10 or 20 houses.” It is in the spaces between homes that he feels the most hopeful solutions lie. “Even if we do still have cars, the model of ownership will have to change,” he says. “Leasing and rental makes so much more sense. Cars take up so much room, even to store them. But once you start taking them out, cities are much nicer places.” Imagine if the space currently given over to cars could be reclaimed by pedestrians, cyclists, parks, plants, humans, animals. Seriously: why not? Tomorrow’s Home is at the Museum of the Home, London E2, from 20 November to 9 January, museumofthehome.org.ukPosters for this sensuously photographed and affectingly scored drama suggest a rather glum combination of Gosford Park and Upstairs, Downstairs. Yet the film itself is nothing of the sort, dealing instead with altogether more intriguing themes of love, lust, grief and doubt, lacing its central portrait of an artist in the making with an air of unresolved intrigue, lingering guilt and transformative creativity. Adapted from a 2016 novella by Graham Swift, Mothering Sunday flits dextrously back and forth between distinct periods in the life of Jane Fairchild, a natural-born writer, vibrantly played by rising Australian star Odessa Young, and portrayed fleetingly in her dotage by Glenda Jackson. Jane’s story takes us back via her midlife relationship with philosopher Donald (the brilliant Ṣọpẹ́ Dìrísù, who was Bifa-nominated for His House) to her formative awakenings in the 1920s. Here, we find her as a maid (“an occupational observer of life” who grew up in an orphanage) working for Mr and Mrs Niven, over whose Beechwood estate the great war has laid a blanket of parental bereavement, a silent shriek of grief that seems particularly piercing on the titular festival day. While the once vivacious Mrs Clarrie Niven (Olivia Colman) appears flinty and broken, her husband, Godfrey (Colin Firth), does his best to put on a brave face, although his vacant smiles suggest a stunned retreat from, rather than an acceptance of, recent horrors. The Nivens’ closest friends are the Sheringhams, with whose son Paul (Josh O’Connor) Jane has been having an explorative affair, the boundaries of which (financial, emotional, sexual) remain tantalisingly fluid. The Nivens seem to treat Paul, who lost brothers in the trenches, as a substitute son and politely applaud his dutiful but loveless betrothal to social equal Emma (Emma D’Arcy), something Jane overhears while dutifully serving dinner for the wealthy families. Thus it is that on Mother’s Day, 30 March 1924, the lovers enjoy what seems to be their final tryst, leaving Jane (whom Mrs Niven calls “lucky” to have been “comprehensively bereaved at birth”, with “absolutely nothing to lose”) wandering naked among Paul’s rooms and bookshelves while he drives off towards another life and she discovers her own new horizons. French director Eva Husson, who made a splash with her 2015 Toronto hit Bang Gang (A Modern Love Story) and was Palme d’Or-nominated for Girls of the Sun (2018), describes Mothering Sunday as “a culmination of everything that I am passionate about in life: writing, sex, and pure cinema”. Sure enough, Husson, who reunites with versatile composer Morgan Kibby, brings a sense of candid energy to the production, particularly in the scenes between O’Connor and Young that sidestep the coy Brit-pic naffness of heritage dramas and period romances – there’s no squeamishness about body fluids here. O’Connor may have captured the uptight solipsism of Prince Charles in The Crown, but as he demonstrated in films such as God’s Own Country and Only You, it’s his peerless ability to register close-contact intimacy that marks him out as a genuinely remarkable screen presence. Alice Birch’s finely wrought script does an impressive job of capturing Jane’s emergent literary powers, allowing her creative abilities to grow organically on screen across disparate time periods. Having done sterling work on projects as diverse as the feature film Lady Macbeth and the TV series Normal People, Birch inventively shuffles the cards of Swift’s source in a manner that, at its best, makes the film feel more like an emotional memory than an unfolding narrative. Not all of it works. The brief wraparound scenes featuring Jackson as the now-venerated author strike an oddly contrived note, despite a crowd-pleasing Doris Lessing-style dismissal of glittering prizes. Instead, it’s the more deceptively restrained and poetic elements that strike home, not least an eerie overhead shot of a burning vehicle that seems to encapsulate the film’s warring elements of fiery passion and traumatic loss, dead-end stasis and phoenix-like rebirth.A company of men in dark uniforms and balaclavas, all carrying clubs. They are battering a group of people, repeatedly clubbing them on their arms, legs and backs. They push them into a river that marks the boundary of the European Union. “Go,” they yell. “Go.” It’s not an incident on the border between Belarus and Poland, the latest migrant flashpoint on the EU border, and one now dominating the news. It happened 1,000 miles to the south, between Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. And it’s been happening for months, but with much less publicity or scrutiny than that afforded the events in Belarus. The uniforms worn by the men in black on the Croatia-Bosnia border carried no insignias. An investigation by a consortium of European newspapers, broadcasters and NGOs has exposed them as members of special Croatian and Greek police units. Their job? To use violence to force undocumented migrants out of the EU and into non-EU states. The operations are deemed “pushbacks”, a euphemism for illegal, violent expulsion. They happen all along the EU’s south-east border. Not just on land but at sea, too. Men from elite units in the Greek coastguard, again all dressed in black, wearing balaclavas and with no identity markings, regularly seize migrants, put them on orange life rafts, provided by the EU, push them out to sea towards Turkey and leave them to their fate. To put in context the current events on the Belarus-Poland border, it is important to understand not just the nature of the Belarusian government but also the wider scope of EU migration policy. Belarus is a brutal, unforgiving regime, its president, Alexander Lukashenko, a butcher whose security forces have beaten all protesters into submission and tortured and imprisoned any opposition figures. Lukashenko’s use of migrants to put pressure on the EU has left some 2,000 undocumented people trapped on the border with Poland. However odious Lukashenko’s actions, the humanitarian disaster on the border is not the result simply of one nation’s actions. Polish forces, too, have trapped the migrants. Warsaw has imposed a state of emergency, denying migrants food, water or medical aid and refusing journalists access. New laws allow police to ignore asylum requests. Officially, eight people have died in sub-zero temperatures; the true figure is likely to be much higher. In her state of the union speech in September, the EU president, Ursula von der Leyen, condemned the regime in Minsk for having “instrumentalised human beings”, a claim echoed last week by the US and European delegates to the UN. It’s true that Lukashenko is using migrants as pawns in a cynical diplomatic manoeuvre. But “instrumentalising human beings” is exactly what EU migration policy has been practising, too, for the past three decades. “Fortress Europe” has been created by turning people into instruments of policy, viewing migrants not as living, breathing human beings, but as flotsam and jetsam to be swept away from Europe’s beaches and borders. To maintain Fortress Europe, the EU has funded a huge kidnap and detention industry right across Africa from the Atlantic to the Red Sea, from the Mediterranean to beyond the Sahara. The “Khartoum process” is a deal the EU stitched together with countries in the north and east of Africa to detain migrants before they can reach the Mediterranean. States involved include Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan and South Sudan, all countries facing civil war and mass famine. The EU has given money to Omar al-Bashir, the former leader of Sudan indicted by the international criminal court for war crimes, and to Isaias Afwerki, the Eritrean dictator whose viciousness outstrips that of Lukashenko. The Janjaweed, a militia that pursued genocidal violence in Darfur, now calls itself the “Rapid Support Forces” and hunts down migrants for the EU rather than rebels for Bashir. Europe’s policies have turned migrants into a resource to be exploited. Even worse is the situation in Libya, where the EU funds and trains coastguard units whose job is to capture and detain migrants fleeing in boats. Many are militias rebadged to win access to EU money. The number of migrants held captive in Libya is impossible to ascertain. In one week alone in October, 5,000 were arrested and detained. All are imprisoned in the most degrading of conditions, many subject to torture, sexual abuse and extortion, practices of which European governments are fully aware and in which they are complicit. The EU has long instrumentalised people by using aid as a weapon to enforce its migration policies. Countries that agree to detain anyone thought to be aiming for Europe receive money. Those that refuse to accept deportees lose funding. Niger has become the EU’s biggest recipient per capita of aid, not because it is the poorest nation in the world but because it is “Europe’s migration laboratory”, in which domestic policies are defined by the EU’s migration aims. The consequence has been a distorted economy, the flourishing of armed groups and the introduction of border checks on locals in their own country, because Europe demands it. Meanwhile, in Europe, undocumented migrants are treated as vicious criminals, even mass murderers. In Greece last week, the trial began of two survivors of a boat that capsized in the Aegean. The two were among 24 people fleeing Afghanistan. One, N, lost his six-year-old son in the disaster. The other helped steer the boat in a desperate attempt to save it. N is charged with “endangering the life of his child” and faces 10 years in prison. Hasan could be jailed for 230 years for the “transportation of 24 people into Greek territory”. Earlier this year, another migrant received a 142-year sentence in similar circumstances. These are not trials to exact justice. They are designed purely to send a message – “this is what will happen if you come to Europe”. As much as Lukashenko, the EU exploits people as instruments to pursue a cruel policy. From balaclava-wearing thugs beating people up to show trials to instil fear, Europe’s migration policies might receive an admiring glance from Lukashenko. The Belarus dictator is a vicious tyrant whose actions are unconscionable. We should not, however, allow the EU to use his immoral actions to whitewash its own, equally cynical, equally brutal, policies. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistThe Kid Laroi has scooped the top prize in the 2021 National Indigenous Music awards after an extraordinary year for the Kamilaroi rapper, which saw him storm up Australian and international charts, open the VMAs and collaborate with Miley Cyrus and Justin Bieber. The 18-year-old, who is now based in Los Angeles, took home the artist of the year award, beating nominees Sycco, Birdz, Miiesha, Baker Boy and Jessica Mauboy. The Kid Laroi (real name Charlton Howard) grew up in Waterloo in Sydney. He got his first break in 2018 as a finalist in Triple J’s Unearthed High competition and then in 2019 when he was signed to Grade A Productions, the labelmate of the late emo rapper Juice Wrld, who mentored the teenager. Earlier this year, on the back of his album F*ck Love (Savage), he became the youngest solo artist to have a No 1 album on the Aria charts. In September, he opened the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards, performing his mega-hit Stay with Justin Bieber. The Kid Laroi is set to tour Australia for the first time next May and June as part of his international End of the World tour. Sunday evening’s reimagined Nima ceremony was broadcast over two hours on Triple J, Double J, Triple J Unearthed and via the National Indigenous Radio Service in partnership with Triple J’s First Nations show Blak Out. The event was scheduled for August at the Darwin Amphitheatre but was cancelled due to Covid. Sunday’s broadcast was presented by Yuin rapper Nooky and Triple J’s Karla Ranby and featured performances by electronic duo Electric Fields and this year’s Triple J Unearthed Nima competition winner Tilly Tjala Thomas. The album of the year award went to Bundjalung rapper JK-47, also known as Jacob Paulson, for his debut LP Made For This. He was last year’s Triple J Unearthed Nima competition winner. Made For This explores intergenerational trauma, new fatherhood, racism and colonialism, and was up against Tia Gostelow’s Chrysalis, The Kid Laroi’s F*ck Love, Leah Flanagan’s Colour by Number and Benny Walker’s Chosen Line for the coveted album award. Gela, the highly anticipated debut album by Yolŋu hip-hop artist Baker Boy – who took home the Nimas’ artist of the year award in 2019 and 2020 – was not considered in the 2021 shortlist as his album was released on 15 October, months after the cut-off day for nominations. But Baker Boy (real name Danzal Baker) didn’t go home empty-handed on Sunday, edging out Budjerah, Troy Cassar-Daley, Sycco and Tia Gostelow to win film clip of the year for his high-energy single Ride, featuring his cousin Yirrmal – the pair’s first collaboration since Marryuna in 2017. The best new talent of the year award went to 19-year-old Coodjinburra musician Budjerah (born Budjerah Slabb), whose soulful R&amp;B and debut self-titled EP has been generating significant buzz. The Aria-winning Aṉangu and Torres Strait Islander neo-soul singer Miiesha, who won last year’s Nima for best new talent, picked up the gong for song of the year for her single Damaged, about her fractured relationship with her mother. “I wrote Damaged about a situation between me and my mum; we’ve always had a real rough patch since I was a kid,” Miiesha said as she accepted the award. “I definitely found healing through it; it actually helped me a lot and it helped her, too.” Mak Mak Marranunggu rapper J-Milla claimed the Archie Roach Foundation award, which rewards up-and-coming talent. Presenting the award on Sunday evening, Roach said: “I really like what [J-Milla] says about his people … I think we’ve got some great rappers here [in Australia].” Galpu singer Guwanbal Gurruwiwi and composer Netanela Mizrahi received the Indigenous language award for The Djari Project, a collaboration featuring exquisite choral arrangements in Indigenous languages. The community clip of the year award went to Kakadu Collective and Victor Rostron for Mayali, a collaboration with young people in Jabiru. Murri singer-songwriter and member of the stolen generations Kev Carmody, whose music career spans more than three decades, was inducted into the hall of fame. Carmody said he was “proud, humbled and honoured to accept the award on behalf of all of us. Past, present and of course future … I’m so proud of the young ones. It might be rap, it might be hip hop, it might be reggae; we’re still expressing [ourselves] through the oral cultural traditions, which is songs and storytelling, it’s just in a musical sense. “I can sit back now. I’ve played my four chords and that’s it.” Electric Fields performed a rendition of Carmody’s From Little Things Big Things Grow, a protest song he co-wrote with Paul Kelly. Kelly also paid tribute to his friend and collaborator, who he met in the 1980s “singing polemics that tore strips off the establishment”. He described Carmody’s body of work as “one of Australia’s enduring cultural treasurers”.Extraordinary details of how Boris Johnson allegedly overruled the advice of staff to promote the business interests of his former lover Jennifer Arcuri and win her affections are revealed in previously unpublished diary extracts by the US businesswoman. According to one entry, the then London mayor even offered to be her “throttle” in an attempt to accelerate her business career, claims that may reopen the possibility of Johnson facing a potential criminal investigation into misconduct allegations. The diary entries – which appear to have been written during Arcuri’s affair with Johnson and have been seen by the Observer – also suggest that he broke the rules governing ethical conduct in public office in his dealings with Arcuri. The handwritten excerpts portray Johnson as desperate to offer help to her in promoting her fledgling business as he pursued a sexual relationship with the then 27-year-old. One entry recalls how Johnson told her: “How can I be the thrust – the throttle – your mere footstep as you make your career? Tell me: how I can help you?” Arcuri gave her diaries to the veteran journalist John Ware in 2019 after he made an ITV documentary on her relationship with Johnson. At Ware’s request, Arcuri has now agreed to allow publication of some of the extracts following Johnson’s statements last week about public probity, including how MPs who break conduct rules “should be punished”. Despite the prime minister’s comments last week, he never mentioned Arcuri in his declaration of interests when he was mayor, and after news of their alleged affair broke in 2019, he said there was no interest to declare. The revelations will pile yet more pressure on the prime minister after 10 days of relentless allegations of sleaze and impropriety by Conservative MPs, and growing anger inside the Tory party over Johnson’s own responsibility for, and handling of, the crisis. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer today shows how the stream of damaging stories has hit Johnson and his party, with Labour now holding a lead over the Tories for the first time since January this year. The poll puts Labour on 37% (up 1 point), the Conservatives on 36% (down 1), the Liberal Democrats on 9%, the Greens 7%, and the SNP 5%. Johnson’s personal approval ratings have sunk to another all time low of -21%. A fortnight ago the Conservatives held a five-point lead over Labour. Responding to the latest Arcuri revelations, a government spokesperson said: “As mayor, Boris Johnson followed all the legal requirements in the Greater London Assembly’s [sic] code of conduct at the time.” The diaries, however, indicate that Johnson pursued Arcuri, offering to advance her business interests in the apparent hope that this might lead to a sexual relationship with the woman who dubbed him “Alex the Great”. One diary entry, from 2012, states that Johnson told her: “I can barely control myself whenever I see you. You make me too excited. Baby I couldn’t wait. All year I have been waiting for you. All year. You drove me nuts. I have thought about no woman as I have thought of you.” Potentially more damaging are excerpts that allege Johnson bragged about ignoring advice from his staff who urged him not to help Arcuri promote her tech company Innotech. After Johnson had agreed to Arcuri’s request to be the keynote speaker at the launch of Innotech, Arcuri states in a diary entry for 27 February 2013 that Johnson boasted to her how he’d rejected the advice of his staff not to attend. It states: “I just want you to know they came to me and I crushed them. They said: ‘You can’t do this Innotech in April.’ I said: ‘Yes, I can, I’ll be there.’ I only want to do this to make you happy. How I do wish to make you satisfied.” Another diary entry, this time from November 2012, alleges that Johnson told Arcuri: “You are going to get me in so much trouble.” She also claims that her lover admitted he was aware of a conflict of interest when she asked him to “validate” her tech work publicly. Members of the Greater London Authority oversight committee which is currently investigating allegations of conflict of interest during Johnson’s time as London mayor called the revelations “significant”. Committee chair Caroline Pidgeon, speaking in her capacity as an assembly member, said Arcuri’s diary notes were of serious concern. She said: “This new material from Jennifer Arcuri is significant and the IOPC [Independent Office for Police Conduct] may wish to consider whether they need to reopen their investigation.” Last year the IOPC said it would not be launching a criminal inquiry into whether Johnson abused his position as mayor to “benefit and reward” Arcuri. Arcuri received £126,000 of public money in the form of grants for her technology business and event sponsorship. In addition, she was given access to foreign trade missions led by Johnson. Arcuri insists that none of them were granted personally by Johnson and to date there remains no evidence that they were. IOPC investigators never had access to Arcuri’s handwritten diary entries in which she made “verbatim” notes of the highlights of his telephone calls and their conversations. For the IOPC to open a new inquiry into whether Johnson should be investigated for criminal misconduct it must receive a referral from the GLA monitoring officer – an ethics watchdog – to look into the fresh allegations made by Arcuri in her diary. A GLA spokesperson confirmed its monitoring officer would assess “any new significant evidence” into the relationship between Arcuri and Johnson. Although the police decided no investigation was warranted, the IOPC found his failure to declare the conflict of interest may have breached the GLA 2012 code of conduct. At the same time as pursuing Arcuri for sex in 2012, Johnson endorsed the code in which he undertook not to bring the GLA “into disrepute” by using his position to “improperly confer on or secure for themselves or any other person, an advantage or disadvantage.” In December that year, Arcuri returned to the US with Arcuri writing that Johnson was continuing to offer: “How can I be your footstool to your career?” She added how he was “always trying to think of ways to please me.” Arcuri says Johnson never explained that their relationship posed a head-on conflict with the Nolan principles – ethical standards expected of public office holders and which promote “selflessness, integrity, objectivity, and honesty” in public life. She says that she’d never heard of Nolan until after news broke about their relationship in the autumn of 2019.As someone who spends so much of his life fascinated by weeds growing in cracks in the pavement, I find it bizarre that to most of modern society plants are just a generic green backdrop to the natural world. I am not alone, either. Us botanists have actually coined a term, “plant blindness”, to describe the human tendency to subconsciously gloss over not just the importance, but even the very presence, of plants in our environment. Perhaps nowhere is this more the case than in the world of Hollywood, where despite every inch of each set being forensically agonised over by teams of specialists, there are almost always huge botanical errors. Niche pet peeve, I know, but I wonder how many of the following have also had you wanting to throw your popcorn at the screen. Sometimes it’s a simple matter of timing. When a background of North American giant redwoods pops up in Pride and Prejudice, set years before the plants were first widely introduced to Britain, I am sure no normal people bat an eyelid. But my mind starts to drift to how fascinating it is that the landscapes we so closely associate with particular eras never really looked like that at the time. The people planting these trees, which we in Britain named “Wellingtonias” in a tribute to the battle of Waterloo, would only ever have seen specimens that were tiny saplings. It isn’t just the species themselves though, but how they are grown. It’s become a running joke among farmers, for example, to point out the prominent tramlines running through the fields of wheat in Gladiator. These enormous tyre tracks caused by agricultural vehicles would be far easier to digitally paint out than, say, creating a CGI cast of thousands for the gladiatorial games or battles, but that would require people to actually notice or care about the plants. Now, I am aware that it’s the height of ridiculousness that I’m instantly snapped out of a cinematic escape when I see that the “Ugandan rebel camp” in Casino Royale is really a couple of potted houseplants stuck in a British silver birch forest, but I really am. I guess my mates are now used to eye-rolling when I point out the jungles of Wakanda are clearly just a US city park with a couple of Monstera plants chucked out. Even plant use doesn’t escape the clutches of Hollywood writers. At the age of 12 I was gripped by every scene in Jurassic Park, but had to ask my science teacher the next day how the botanist knew a long-extinct plant, only previously seen in the fossil record, was toxic simply by glancing at it. In The Martian, which gets so much of the science of growing potatoes spot on, I laughed out loud to see them being grown from cooked, shrink-wrapped spuds. These are just the examples that sprung to my mind. I wonder if there are any classic cases I have missed. Let me know on Twitter, I’ll share any howlers you have spotted. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekSeán Binder belongs to the band of committed humanitarians who rushed to Greece at the height of the refugee crisis. In other countries, and at other times, his idealism might have been celebrated. But the 27-year-old law student, who has spent the past two years in London, is a man living in fear. Though forced to abandon volunteering, the German-born Irishman and his Syrian friend, Sarah Mardini, are perhaps the most famous aid workers in Greece, for all the wrong reasons: a criminal investigation has hung over their heads for the past three years. “There’s nothing criminal, or heroic, about helping people in distress at sea,” he tells the Observer. “Legally and morally, it is the right thing to do.” The activists have been accused of human trafficking, money laundering, fraud and espionage – the last charge based on allegations that, while on Lesbos, the Aegean island at the centre of refugee flows, they monitored coastguard radio channels and vessels to gain advance notification of the location of smugglers’ boats. In an 86-page report, police also accuse them of being members of a criminal organisation that posed as an NGO with the aim of profiteering by bringing people illegally into Greece. The charges followed a six-month police inquiry: human rights groups championing the pair have called them “farcical”. “It’s been a sword of Damocles,” Binder says. “As absurd as the charges may be, they cast a shadow over your life that makes it impossible to move on.” On Sunday he flies to Athens before travelling on to Lesbos for a trial, four days later, that will see 22 other frontline volunteers also stand in the dock – a case described as emblematic for civil society activists facing unprecedented harassment across Europe. That hearing will mark the start of a judicial drama that could result in them spending 25 years behind bars. “I’m terrified,” Binder readily admits, recalling the 106 days he spent in pre-trial detention before being permitted to post €5,000 bail and leave Greece. “I’ve had a taste of life in prison on Chios. It was all scabies and bed bugs with 17 of us packed in a cell. The police holding cells were even worse, the most awful place on earth; squalid, windowless rooms full of asylum seekers just there because authorities had nowhere else to put them.” Binder was released on 5 December 2018. Hours later, Mardini, who also volunteered with the now defunct rescue group Emergency Response Centre International, was let out of Korydallos prison in Athens, Greece’s toughest jail. She was 23 at the time. Mardini had become famous three years earlier, saving fellow refugees from seemingly certain death when their dinghy capsized after departing Turkey. Only three of the 20 people on board knew how to swim. Sarah and her sister Yusra, a competitive swimmer who would go on to participate in the Rio Olympics, jumped into the sea, pushing and pulling the boat until it reached Lesbos – a feat to be immortalised in a Netflix drama produced by the British director Stephen Daldry and due for release next year. Thursday’s trial will focus on the accusations of espionage and the unlawful use of radio frequencies – considered misdemeanours under Greek law, punishable by up to eight years in prison. Despite wanting to attend, Mardini learned on Friday that she would be tried in absentia after a judge refused to temporarily lift a seven-year travel ban barring her re-entry to Greece. A non-EU citizen, she has been deemed a liability to public safety. “The inquiry into the felonies, which carry longer prison terms, is still ongoing,” says Zacharias Kesses, the lawyer heading the activists’ legal team in Athens. “This week, they’ll be put on trial for the baseless charge of using the encrypted application of WhatsApp to circulate information about migrant flows.” This is an extraordinary accusation, he says, when the data was publicly available and known to port police. Given the severity of the charges, his legal team has approached the American and British bar associations for advice. “Both have studied the case file and concluded that there is no legal basis for the accusations, that they’re aimed more at deterring volunteers than an honest response to evidence of criminality.” Aid workers, Kesses insists, are “easy targets” on frontline islands where there has been vast local pressure against NGOs widely perceived to be encouraging refugees to make the crossing from Turkey. “Some of the charges go back to 2016, when neither Seán nor Sarah were even in Greece,” the lawyer said. “It’s that absurd.” Hundreds of volunteers have left the country for fear they could be next. Amnesty International says it considers the forthcoming case to be “particularly symbolic” at a time when not only has the climate towards NGOs become more hostile, but Greece itself is in the line of fire over alleged pushbacks of asylum seekers at its increasingly militarised land and sea borders. “Human rights defenders across Europe are being criminalised and dragged through courts for helping refugees and migrants in need,” says Giorgos Kosmopoulos, a Brussels-based campaigner with the group who will be monitoring the trial. “Sarah and Seán should be role models for our societies but instead they risk spending the best years of their lives behind bars for simply doing the right thing.” On Monday, a solidarity rally outside the Greek parliament will demand that the charges are dropped. Binder, a trained diver before embarking on his legal studies, credits his heritage with his desire to make the world a better place. His father was a Vietnamese refugee who fled after the fall of Saigon to Germany, where he met Seán’s mother; his two grandmothers, “the first out couple in the west of Ireland”, did a lot of voluntary work. If he has any hope, it is for “conclusion”, so that he can get on with his life. But he is also pragmatic. “I haven’t bought a return ticket,” he says. “It could be over within hours. It could take months. We could be imprisoned. All I know is that anything, at this point, could happen.” • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 because an earlier version, due to an error introduced in the editing process, did not make it clear that Kosmopolous is with the Amnesty group who will be monitoring the trial.In his recent memoir, the Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell recalls a conversation with Boris Johnson more than 20 years ago that is sharply relevant to the rolling sleaze crisis now engulfing the government. Having made his name as a celebrity journalist, Mr Johnson’s ambitions had swivelled to politics. His hungry gaze alighted on getting himself selected as the Conservative candidate for the safe seat of Henley and he sought out Mr Mitchell for advice on being an MP. “What does one get paid?” he asked. Upon hearing the answer, he boggled at an income that to him sounded like a very trivial sum and expostulated: “I can’t possibly live on that.” As the public has been learning over recent days, the Tory leader is not the only politician to think that an MP’s salary, though nearly triple that of the national average, is a poverty wage. There are a lot with side hustles. While they may tell their constituents that it is a privilege to represent them in the Commons, they will eagerly serve other masters when the price is right. This is a stink bomb that has been ticking away under parliament for a long time. The euphemism “outside interests” makes it sound like we are talking about knitting or some other harmless hobby. “Second jobs” is more like it, but still doesn’t do full justice to what goes on because, in the case of some MPs, there are third, fourth and even fifth jobs. They may seek to delude themselves or fool others that they are employed by commercial interests because of the brilliance of their minds. Maybe a few are. Most get these gigs only because they sit in the legislature with the most remunerative earners ching-chinging into the bank accounts of former ministers. What persuaded Hutchison Ports that Chris Grayling is worth £100,000 a year to them? Was it the stellar success he made of being transport secretary? You may recall that his highlights included leasing ferries from a company that did not possess any. Many Tories are furious with their leader over the blowback from the Owen Paterson affair, but not all that anger is of the noble variety. A lot are cross because the prime minister’s shabby scheming has triggered a torrent of stories about moonlighting MPs and the voters, many of whom won’t have been previously conscious of it, don’t like what they see. Rather as I thought it would, the government’s grotesque and ultimately vain attempt to protect one former cabinet minister from his rule breaking has blown up into something much more toxic. So much so that Mr Johnson was forced to make an extraordinary statement to the world’s media gathered in Glasgow for the Cop26 summit in which he insisted that the UK is not “remotely a corrupt country”. He would not have felt compelled to say that were not a lot of people smelling something extremely rotten in influence-peddling by MPs and seat-buying in the House of Lords. If you fancy being an MP but wince at the salary on offer, there are four choices. You can decide that the personal cost of public service is more than you can bear and MPing is not for you. An alternative, if you have the ability, is to make your fortune before you enter politics. That is what Michael Heseltine did. For Rishi Sunak, the richest man in the Commons married to the daughter of a billionaire, his salary from the taxpayer makes scant difference to his family’s lifestyle. It is notable that the chancellor has apologised for the Paterson affair when the prime minister has conspicuously not. Mr Sunak may not be wrong to calculate that the public will be looking for a person with a clean reputation, rather than someone whose history is splattered with scandal, by the time the Tory party next chooses a leader. For a person eager to be an MP who shudders at the wages, a third choice is to campaign for an increase in the salaries of parliamentarians. You can make an argument for that and the case could be more attractive if the quid quo pro was a ban on MPs having any other job. But contending that MPs should be made wealthier is not a crowd-pleaser, especially not when public sector wages have been frozen, many in the private sector are feeling the pinch and taxes are going up by a lot. So MPs are not to be found marching the streets chanting: “What do we want? More dosh! When do we want it? Before the nurses get a pay rise!” The fourth choice is to have it both ways: satisfy your political ambitions and your appetite for more money by selling your services to private interests who think it useful to have a parliamentarian on their payroll. More than a quarter of Conservative MPs hold at least one additional job. They have been enabled by rules that have got stricter about declarations since the scandals of the 1990s, but remain very permissive about who MPs can take money from and with no limits on how much. In response to the furore, three defences are offered for multi-jobbing. One is that the House of Commons is “richer for having members who do other things”. Sir Geoffrey Cox is certainly personally richer, to the tune of at least £6m, thanks to the fortune he has raked in as a barrister while also being an MP. It is less obvious how the lives of those he is paid to represent in parliament have been enriched by his busy schedule of lawyering, which included working 4,000 miles away for the government of the British Virgin Islands. In an apologise-for-nothing statement, the former attorney-general contends that “it is up to the electors” of his seat “whether or not they vote for someone who is a senior and distinguished professional in his field”. Objection, m’lud. I very much doubt that “the electors” sent Sir Geoffrey to the Commons thinking they were granting him a mandate to spend weeks in the Caribbean working for the government of a tax haven accused of corruption. He is an MP because Torridge and West Devon is – or was – a very safe Tory seat. It is telling that MPs sitting for marginals are much less likely to have other jobs compared with those enthroned on large majorities. The most sleaze-intolerant Tory MPs tend to be those who came into parliament recently, often represent previously Labour constituencies and have smallish majorities that are in jeopardy if an appalled public turns on the Tories. An £82,000-a-year salary, plus expenses, is not only an extremely good wage in their localities, it was a pay rise for quite a lot of those first elected in 2019. The sleaze-tolerant Tory MPs tend to be those who have been comfortably ensconced in parliament for a long time. They sit on fat majorities and that has fed their sense of entitlement. It is often from them that we hear the self-serving argument that banning MPs from taking extra earners will deter “high calibre” people from standing for parliament. Really? Thinking of the personalities involved in the many sleaze scandals over the years, do we conclude that the quality of public life would have been worse or better if the remuneration on offer had stopped Neil Hamilton from becoming an MP? The hoariest justification for other jobs is that it enables MPs to “stay in touch” with the world outside Westminster. This claim would be more credible if loads of them chose to spend their time away from parliament serving in the community as care workers or supply teachers or bus drivers. No MP lists “street cleaning” as an outside interest. There are medic MPs who keep their hand in as doctors and the public don’t appear to mind that. The most serious objection is to the MPs whose concept of “staying in touch” is taking money from trade associations and other commercial entities. Even when properly declared, this reeks of private interests purchasing privileged inside knowledge, access and influence. It uses MPs as golden keys to the corridors of power. Legislators should not be lobbyists. A ban on MPs taking on paid roles as “consultants”, “advisers” and “strategists” was recommended by the committee on standards in public life three years ago and is now under consideration by parliament’s own standards committee. It ought to happen. Whether it does is another matter. That will depend on whether Boris Johnson fears the heat from the media and the disgust of the public more than he does the wrath of the many Conservative MPs who will hate being deprived of their outside earners because, like him, they “can’t possibly live” on an MP’s salary. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverModern humans made several failed attempts to settle in Europe before eventually taking over the continent. This is the stark conclusion of scientists who have been studying the course of Homo sapiens’s exodus from Africa tens of thousands of years ago. Researchers have recently pinpointed sites in Bulgaria, Romania and the Czech Republic where our ancestors’ remains have been dated as being between 40,000 to 50,000 years old. However, bone analyses have produced genetic profiles that have no match among modern Europeans. “These early settlements appear to have been created by groups of early modern humans who did not survive to pass on their genes,” said Professor Chris Stringer of the Natural History Museum, London. “They are our species’ lost lineages. “The crucial point is that the demise of these early modern human settlers meant Neanderthals still occupied Europe for a further few thousand years before Homo sapiens eventually took over the continent.” Modern humans first appeared in Africa around 200,000 years ago and slowly evolved across the continent before moving into western Asia around 60,000 years ago. Our ancestors then spread across the globe until every other species of hominin on the planet had been rendered extinct, including the Denisovans of east Asia and Homo floresiensis, the “hobbit folk” of Indonesia. Neanderthals in Europe were one of the last hominin species to succumb, dying out around 39,000 years ago. However, recent studies – outlined at a meeting of the European Society for the study of Human Evolution earlier this year – have shown that this takeover by Homo sapiens was not straightforward. On several occasions, groups of early settlers perished as they moved into the continent. In one study, international researchers re-examined a partial skull and skeleton of a woman found in the Zlatý Kůň cave in the Czech Republic. Originally thought to have been 15,000 years old, this new analysis indicated it was probably at least 45,000 years old, making her one of the oldest members of Homo sapiens found in Europe. However, the study also found she shared no genetic continuity with modern Europeans. As one of the research team – Cosimo Posth, of the Institute for Archaeological Sciences, Tübingen University, Germany – put it: “This woman did not contribute genetically to present-day Europeans.” Other sites where early modern human remains from around this period have been found include Peștera cu Oase in Romania and Bacho Kiro cave in Bulgaria. And again, neither has produced genetic profiles that left a significant trace in Europe. The discovery of these lost outposts of modern human expansion suggests that Homo sapiens dispersed into Europe in pulses, and raises critical questions for scientists. In particular, why did modern humans’ later forays into Europe succeed when earlier ones failed? The impact of this success on our world has been significant, after all. Some scientists argue that environmental factors played a key role in the Neanderthals’ demise. Possible triggers include the reversal in Earth’s magnetic poles that occurred around 42,000 years ago. Known as the Laschamps event, it could have increased cosmic radiation levels across the planet for several centuries. There was also a cooling of the climate that affected the North Atlantic at this time, as well as a major volcanic eruption of the Campanian ignimbrite caldera in central Italy. All of these would have put stress on populations. But some researchers question whether these events were damaging enough to lead to Neanderthal extinction. They would have been just as challenging to modern humans, they argue, yet we survived. Others have proposed that Homo sapiens were simply better at exploiting the landscape and hunted more effectively, a point backed by Stringer, who argues that minor changes in human behaviour at this time could have been enough to lead to the accumulation of significant improvements in the lives of men and women. “The behaviour of Homo sapiens was a big factor in our ‘success’, I think. Maybe we networked better, or accumulated knowledge more effectively, and so learned how to extract resources more intensively than Neanderthals did. Any slight advantage would have been critical. You’ve only got to increase survival of your babies by 1% and that is a huge advantage in a stone-age world.” However, there is another factor that has been put forward for modern humanity’s success in Europe. Genetic studies have made it clear that interbreeding between Homo sapiens and Neanderthals occurred many times. As a result, men and women of non-African origin today have genomes that are around 2% Neanderthal. That figure would have been much higher 40,000 years ago. “As numbers of Homo sapiens grew and we spread ever wider across Europe, it is quite possible that we ‘absorbed’ some of the other species – in particular, the Neanderthals – out of existence,” said Stringer. “If prime-age Neanderthals were entering the modern human breeding pool, whether voluntarily or otherwise, those individuals were no longer contributing to the survival of their own species. The end result would have been straightforward extinction for the Neanderthals – although, as a species, they still survive in the DNA of men and women today.”Britain’s financial watchdog has been accused of unlawfully changing its complaints scheme “via the backdoor” in an attempt to avoid paying compensation to victims of failed funds or investment scams. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is purported to have changed its complaints scheme just as it was facing hundreds of claims from savers who had lost more than £200m in the collapse of the investment firm London Capital &amp; Finance (LCF) in 2019. It denies acting unlawfully and insists it was “clarifying” the scheme’s guidelines. The watchdog is now being investigated by the Financial Regulators Complaints’ Commissioner over the controversy. The FCA is under fire after a string of scandals on its watch, including the closure of Neil Woodford’s £3.1bn Woodford Equity Income Fund which shut down in October 2019 with heavy losses for tens of thousands of investors. Under the current rules, the victims of financial scandals can claim ex-gratia compensation payouts from the FCA where it has failed to safeguard consumers. The regulator published guidelines in June last year which said consumers would only be entitled to payouts when the regulator was “solely or primarily” responsible for their losses. Andrea Hall, a member of the LCF bondholders campaign group, said: “They thought they would just change the rules and no one would challenge them. We wanted them to hold their hands up and pay compensation because they haven’t been punished.” “They wanted to shut that door on this wall of complaints on their regulatory failures. It is sheer arrogance.” More than 1,000 victims of the LCF scandal have complained to the FCA. Most have been refused compensation for its admitted regulatory failings, but have been offered settlements of between £50 and £125 because of the delays in dealing with their complaints. Amerdeep Somal, the Financial Regulators Complaints’ Commissioner, is now investigating the refusals. A confidential draft report of her preliminary findings seen by the Observer says the watchdog tried to make changes to its complaints scheme “via the backdoor” which appeared “contrary” to its statutory purpose. “The underhand manner in which the FCA set about changing their compensation scheme is utterly shameful,” said Gina Miller from the True and Fair Campaign, which campaigns for better financial regulation. She said the guidelines were “unlawful” and “should be immediately removed.” Amanda Cunningham, 53, who lives near Colne, Lancashire, invested £22,000 to help build a savings pot for her son Jack, 22, who is autistic, but the money was wiped out by the collapse of LCF. She said: “[The FCA] were there to protect people and they failed. They were asleep at the wheel. We want to know that lessons have been learned and that the public will be safeguarded.” A report published by the former court of appeal judge, Dame Elizabeth Gloster, last December confirmed a catalogue of failures by the watchdog over the collapse of LCF, which offered fixed interest on unregulated bonds. The Serious Fraud Office is now investigating the collapse. The Gloster report found the FCA failed to respond to repeated warnings of potential fraud at LCF because of a lack of clear policies on how staff pass on allegations of fraud or serious irregularities in the sales of unregulated products. These included several written warnings and calls, including one call from a member of the public on 15 July 2016 which warned LCF was operating a “pyramid scam”. The watchdog’s chairman, Charles Randell, announced his resignation last month, a year earlier than planned. He said it was the right time for a new chair to complete a transformation of the regulator. The Observer revealed last month that the watchdog has paid out bonuses of more than £125m to its staff since 2016. HM Treasury announced a £120m scheme in April to pay compensation to LCF bondholders. Some investors were also able to make claims under the Financial Services Compensation Scheme. The investors took separate action against the FCA because they want it to accept liability and pay compensation for its failures. The Financial Regulators Complaints Commissioner’s office said the investigation into LCF complaints was ongoing and the commissioner would be considering responses to the preliminary report. An FCA spokesperson said: “The statement we issued in June 2020 did not introduce any new test but instead set out our longstanding approach to offering payments in recognition of financial loss. There has been no change to the substance of the test and LCF complaints are being considered under the existing scheme. “It has already been agreed that investors who have experienced losses as a result of the collapse of LCF are able to receive compensation from either the government compensation scheme or the Financial Services Compensation Scheme.”Following on from last week’s stocking-filler ideas, here are some more. I make no excuse for this. I like to start celebrating early because for me autumn is just one big long flight path to Christmas. I wrote about Lakrids by Bülow chocolate-covered liquorice last year but they’ve started a new initiative whereby they want to send anyone and everyone in the world a free sample of their products, to try to convince people that liquorice isn’t disgusting (if that’s what you think). You go here to register: wemaketheworldlove liquorice.com. I particularly rate their coffee/liquorice bonbons, with bits of Kenyan ground coffee. But the real surprise was the passion fruit: pretty, crunchy, zesty. Both from £9 (125g). If you know someone who really loves liquorice, a set of the bigger-size tubs (£16, 295g) is a good out-of-the-stocking, quite unusual, chocolate present. Not least because the aesthetic is really cool. As one of my younger testers (AKA my youngest said): ‘These are good when you want something chewy but chocolatey, and the jars are great for use afterwards.’ She’s a big Home Edit fan. For something more traditionally Christmassy Montezuma’s Snowballs are white chocolate-covered balls with a few different centres. They are sweet – be warned if this isn’t your thing – but if you like white chocolate you’ll be in heaven. The peanut butter ones are particularly good, £4.49 (120g). Other flavours are caramel or peppermint and vanilla. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBGhislaine Maxwell is to emerge from her New York prison cell on Monday after a 15-month wait for the start of a trial for sex trafficking children, perjury and the enticement of minors while she was a close associate of the late financier Jeffrey Epstein. The 59-year-old, the youngest child of the British newspaper magnate Robert Maxwell, has been held on remand in a Brooklyn detention centre since shortly after her arrest in July 2020. During lengthy jury selection procedures, international interest will focus on two key issues: first, the likelihood that Maxwell and her lawyers will offer up details of prominent names implicated in the case, including Prince Andrew’s, and second, the alleged poor state of the defendant’s health. Maxwell’s elder brother, Ian, a British businessman and thinktank founder, alleges his sister’s incarceration, under 24-hour surveillance in a cell measuring just 9ft by 6ft, amounts to excessive cruelty. She has slept on a concrete bed beside a toilet and has had no access to natural light. Maxwell also claims her eyesight is failing and her hair falling out, while her guards repeatedly wake her by shining a torch in her face. Prison officials say the scrutiny is designed to prevent Maxwell harming herself in the light of Epstein’s cell suicide two and a half years ago, but her lawyers argue this is merely the cover story for a persecution campaign. Four applications for bail by Maxwell have been turned down, despite an offer of a $28.5m (£21m) from her lawyers. Judge Alison Nathan, a former associate White House counsel for President Barack Obama, has ruled that the accused woman remains a flight risk and has not been honest about her financial means. Maxwell went to ground after the arrest of Epstein in 2019. The FBI finally tracked her down in a secluded mansion in New Hampshire after using a mobile phone tracking device. Four accusers are expected to testify at trial, including one unidentified British woman, but others, including the Duke of York’s accuser, Virginia Giuffre, may come forward during the trial. The alleged British victim claims that Maxwell recruited her in London in 1994 when she was 17, asking her to massage Epstein. Maxwell’s defence team is expected to argue that she was also a victim of Epstein’s malevolent and controlling personality. This weekend, details of former Barclays Bank boss Jes Staley’s regular, friendly email correspondence with Epstein have emerged. Staley, who was Epstein’s private banker at JP Morgan, had stepped down from his role at Barclays last week following an investigation. The Financial Times revealed on Friday that Staley had reportedly exchanged 1,200 emails with Epstein over four years, some of which featured unexplained terms such as “snow white”. Staley’s lawyer, Kathleen Harris, has stated her client had no involvement in any of the alleged crimes committed by Epstein.On Friday, the Courtauld Gallery in Somerset House in the Strand in London will finally reopen its doors after a long revamp, a moment of excitement not only for the art world – “It’s too much!” wrote one blissed-out critic in his preview – but for anyone who has found themselves missing such masterpieces as Goya’s Portrait of Don Francisco de Saavedra or Manet’s A Bar at the Folies-Bergère. I can’t wait to gaze at the ceiling of the restored Great Room, for so long unaccountably partitioned. The heart lifts at the thought of seeing this huge space – until 1837, it played host to the Royal Academy summer exhibition – again suffused with light. But still, something in me rankles as I read of this comeback, phase one of which has cost £22m. Once again, London draws all the oxygen, not to mention the cash; once again, it’s as if nothing could possibly be happening anywhere else. I always carry a slight resentment of this metropolitan monomania: a bat-squeak grudge born not only of my roots, but also of the way I tend to side instinctively with the underdog. Last week, of all weeks, I was more than usually struck by the attention in which the Courtauld is basking, because only days before I’d visited an exhibition in a city other than London that I considered to be as beautiful and as important as anything I’d seen in years – and yet, veiled in silence, I’d found it only by accident. In York for a break, I went to see newly discovered drawings by Thomas Gainsborough at the city’s brilliant art gallery and they were delightful; it made me smile to learn that Gainsborough used broccoli as models for trees in his studio. But in truth, they were not half so fantastic as what was waiting for me upstairs in the ceramics gallery, where someone had taken the trouble to tell the story – or one of the stories – of 20th-century Britain via a collection of hundreds of pots. Slowly absorbing the bare bones of what this exhibition was about – its curator, Helen Walsh, spoke of one extraordinary, ordinary man and his obsession with the haptic experience of hand-thrown bowls and cups, vases and jugs – I was for a moment so utterly astonished I felt I needed to sit down. I looked around. The only chair was next to a table on which, at one end, there were yet more pots and, at the other, a typewriter, on which visitors were invited to bash out their thoughts. C-R-I-K-E-Y, I wrote. The exhibition is called The Yorkshire Tea Ceremony and is based around the 3,600 pots – the single most important collection of British studio pottery in the country – gathered in the years after the Second World War by a librarian from Wakefield called WA Ismay (they came to York after his death in 2001). In ceramics circles, Ismay is famous; Edmund de Waal is among those potters who once applied to visit his tiny terrace house to see the collection (Ismay liked to use his pots, hence the show’s title). But for most people, his name is unfamiliar. Like all the best and most passionate collectors, Ismay was not in this game for attention, for all that his doggedness and uncommon taste led him in time to become friends with such celebrated potters as Lucie Rie and Michael Cardew. His little home with its outside lav was like every other house in his street, save for the fact that on every surface, including his kitchen table, reconstructed by the gallery, complete with typewriter, there were precious works of art, some of which cost him a week’s, even a month’s, pay. Every name is here: Hans Coper, Bernard Leach, Magdalene Odundo, William Staite Murray, Emmanuel Cooper, Gillian Lowndes, Takeshi Yasuda… (500 potters are represented here). It doesn’t matter if pots are not your thing. Looking at the photographs of Ismay’s home, and watching a film in which those who knew him struggle to describe not only the nature of his obsession, but the precise quality and scope of his knowledge, you understand that this is social history too (a bath lived in a kitchen cupboard all Ismay’s life, a relic that never made it upstairs when the builders of the house he inherited from his parents ran out of cash). It makes you wonder about education, money and social class, about progress. Would it be possible for the son of a cloth presser to build such a collection now? But there’s something else here and perhaps it’s the more important thing. It’s right for the government, and all of us, to worry about the north-south divide; the Tories’ conviction that “levelling up” is urgent is not misplaced, even if their motivation for believing so is cynical. However, the feeling grows that this talk perpetuates a vicious circle by reinforcing the notion that the north is only deprived; that there is little else about it to be said or seen, or pondered, even that it has no middle class. Thanks to this, in the case of the arts in particular, the media will always ignore its riches in favour of (I’m thinking of the BBC here) yet another miserabilist vox pop in a market. For a long time, I haven’t always been able to connect the north that I know with the one the political pundits, and just about everyone else, tells me about. But this disconnect was never more confounding than the other day, when I stumbled on William Ismay’s pots, in all their lustrous glory, and wondered why I had not read one word about them, though perhaps this will change now. • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistThe historical roots of the Royal Ballet’s Giselle go deep. When the former principal Leanne Benjamin learned the part for her school performance in 1982, she was coached by Britain’s first great ballerina, Alicia Markova, who in turn had been inspired by Olga Spessivtseva, star of Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes. The memories of Spessivtseva’s coaches would reach nearly back to the work’s premiere in 1841. I love that lineage, a tradition being built from one performance to the next. However, what’s really impressive about the current Royal Ballet is how it takes this great Romantic period piece and makes it come vividly alive. As I watched their 601st and 602nd performances of the work, shown since 1985 in Peter Wright’s lovingly staged revival of choreography by Petipa after Coralli, I was struck by how every dancer, from the most lowly coryphée to the grandest principal, was determined the audience should understand each gesture and feeling. By investing so much, they remind us that Giselle was revolutionary in its time, with a real heroine – a peasant girl betrayed by a seductive aristocrat – not a fairytale princess. Dancing peasants pop up from behind picturesque cottages and the ghosts of betrayed brides stalk the forest, but the emotions are universal and touching. That’s why Giselle can make you cry. It’s also why, within the frame of John Macfarlane’s delicate settings, different dancers can find their own interpretations. At the 601st performance, Marianela Nuñez and Vadim Muntagirov took on Giselle and Albrecht, the breathtaking accuracy of their dancing making each moment look like an illustration from a 19th-century engraving. He plays up Albrecht’s aristocratic bearing; his remorse when Giselle kills herself after finding out he is engaged to another seems genuine but not transformative. Nuñez flies to the very heart of Giselle. Even when seemingly carefree, she is a girl touched with a grave premonition of her own frailty; her love for Albrecht ripples through her body; her descent into madness is one of terrible stillness followed by desperate jumps. When she reappears as a ghost, her lightness, the length of her line and the grace of her arms make her a vision of otherness. Nuñez has reached the point in her dancing career where however complicated the step, her movement seems simple, natural. Around them an entire world dazzled. Taking his place in the pas de six, William Bracewell gave an object lesson not just in dancing but in how to be easy on a stage; Lukas B Brændsrød was a convincingly jealous yet loving Hilarion (touching the top of Giselle’s grave as he left it); and Christina Arestis was so chilly and bored as Albrecht’s fiancee, Bathilde, that you understood why a loving peasant girl might have some appeal. I didn’t think I could enjoy another performance as much, and then two nights later I did, when Matthew Ball’s playful then devastated Albrecht rose to every challenge that the role threw at him and Yasmine Naghdi’s Giselle matched superb technique with a tender warmth. Nuñez was back, too, with a Myrtha who combined finesse with implacable authority, as she led her band of mourning brides. The corps de ballet on both occasions, coached by Samantha Raine, was a star in its own right, rightly applauded for the accuracy and commitment of its evocation of these sad ghosts. It’s this cast you can see on the Royal Ballet’s stream and it’s absolutely heavenly. Giselle is in rep at the Royal Opera House, London, until 3 December, and available online from 3 December to 2 January 2022. Built for Ballet (Melbourne Books, £35) by Leanne Benjamin with Sarah Crompton is on sale now. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyPlenty of outlier genres seek to take the listener elsewhere – through drumming, chanting, the devotional music of the east and south, drones, oscillations or electronics. Sometimes this altered state is helped along by useful plants; sometimes, it’s the more unadorned experience of great stillness allied to awe – which is where British electronic producer Jon Hopkins lands on his sixth solo album, a post-lockdown aural balm that sits usefully alongside Michael Pollan’s How to Change Your Mind: The New Science of Psychedelics (2018). In addition to his fine, beat-based output, Hopkins has previously worked with Brian Eno and released generative meditation tracks. His bona fides are hardly in question. Here, he improvises in response to the voice of the late mindfulness pioneer Ram Dass on East Forest: Sit Around the Fire; much of this ambient statement was inspired by a trip to, or in, an Ecuadorean cave. But in among all this pervasive beauty (which tends towards expansive prettiness and resonant succour rather than the sterner, more austere end of the ambience spectrum), it feels like only the eight-minute apex track Deep in the Glowing Heart rearranges the listener’s molecules in a transformational way.Friday’s liberation of Britney Spears from her nearly 14-year conservatorship was a landmark moment for the pop star. It was also a once-unimaginable triumph for the #FreeBritney movement, the fan-led campaign that was largely dismissed by the public and that Spears’s father had called a “joke” run by “conspiracy theorists”. Fans had been pushing to “free Britney” from the conservatorship for years, but the movement took off in 2019. With full-time jobs and no professional organizing background, they took it upon themselves to investigate the arrangement that controlled Spears’s life, scouring the star’s social media posts for clues, examining court documents, organizing online and holding demonstrations outside court hearings and concerts to raise awareness of what was going on. #FreeBritney organizers, many of whom have been fans for more than 20 years, say they were concerned about the conservatorship from the beginning but that it wasn’t until allegations emerged on a 2019 podcast that Spears had been held against her will in a mental health facility that efforts gained steam. Initially, Chris Rocha, a #FreeBritney advocate based in Fresno, said, people didn’t take it seriously. “I’m a 34-year-old man, I have a normal life, I have a normal job. In the beginning a lot of people would laugh,” he said. “We were called conspiracy theorists. People just thought we were speculating and were like, ‘Why are you obsessed with this?’” said Melanie Mandarano, a member of #FreeBritney LA. A security firm hired by Spears’s father, Jamie, reportedly investigated the group, sending infiltrators to their rallies, and issuing a “threat assessment report” of the fans. A lawyer for the firm, Black Box, said it was “proud of their work in keeping Ms Spears safe” and had operated “within professional, ethical and legal bounds”. But perception of the movement began to shift earlier this year with the release of the New York Times documentary Framing Britney Spears, which examined the conservatorship and sexist treatment by the media. The documentary also took a closer look at the #FreeBritney movement, spotlighting their allegations of abuse and interviewing organizers. “It did such a great job of reframing the way we look at Britney and creating some sympathy for her and showing how wrong it was the way she was treated. It showed these people how we are fighting for her,” said Leanne Simmons, a #FreeBritney organizer who was featured in the documentary. “This is a human rights issue.” ‘Part of me wished we were wrong’ The new attention on Spears’s case eventually led to major changes, including her father’s suspension and Friday’s ultimate dissolution of the arrangement that controlled Spears’s estate, career and aspects of her personal life. It also saw the star testify publicly for the first time about life under the conservatorship’s control, a hearing that confirmed many #FreeBritney advocates’ worst fears. “It was both shocking and horrifying. Part of me had always wished we were wrong, at least about the darkest details,” Simmons says. Last month, Spears thanked the dedicated group of fans who have spent years fighting to end the restrictive legal arrangement. “#FreeBritney movement … I have no words … because of you guys and your constant resilience in freeing me from my conservatorship … my life is now in that direction!!!!!” she tweeted in October. Organizing to support Spears and the end of her conservatorship was a full-time job for many #FreeBritney advocates. They coordinated rallies, worked on marketing for the cause and traveled across the country to attend demonstrations outside the courthouse. Some, like Mandarano, have moved to Los Angeles, to be closer to #FreeBritney events. “Anytime I thought it was too much or I didn’t have time in the back of my head I was like, ‘She’s being silenced,’” said Megan Radford, a longtime #FreeBritney advocate based in Oklahoma. “Britney was being silenced for years and years and years. I truly believe that without the movement she would not be getting out of the conservatorship.” Radford and other fans celebrated outside the Los Angeles courthouse on Friday. Supporters sprayed confetti into the air, while some broke down in tears and danced in celebration. They had shut down the street in front of the courthouse and invited families to come speak about their experiences with conservatorships. “All the hard work, the sacrifice and calling off work. It’s been worth it and I would do it all over,” said Junior Olivas, who helped organize the first fan rally outside the court in 2019. “This is life-changing for her.” The movement’s long-term effects Jasmine E Harris, a University of Pennsylvania law professor and expert in conservatorships, said that Spears’s case had demonstrated the power of transparency and public pressure, and that Spears would probably still be stuck in the arrangement had she not gotten the opportunity to speak in open court. The #FreeBritney movement brought attention to a major disability rights issue, Harris said, noting that many people with disabilities remain trapped in these arrangements: “It will continue to be incredibly difficult for people who are in conservatorships to restore their legal capacity.” She said there needed to be more investments in alternatives to conservatorships that allow people to get support while maintaining their autonomy: “This affects young people with disabilities across the country. And so this deserves our sustained attention.” The movement’s efforts haven’t ended with Spears. Advocates have turned their attention to the conservatorship system more broadly, advocating for the reform or end of the guardianships entirely and working with disability rights groups in California to sponsor legislation. “The #FreeBritney folks are very organized. They could write a textbook on community organizing, and this is from a woman who spent most of her career organizing,” said Judy Mark, the co-founder and president of Disability Voices United, a disability rights organization that has worked with the movement. “They went into it as fans but they’ve realized the power they can have.” Spears’s case and the work of #FreeBritney organizers have brought an unprecedented level of attention to conservatorships, Mark said. Her organization and others are working on legislation to dramatically reform conservatorships in California, which the governor’s office and legislature have expressed interest in. “That never would have happened a year ago,” she said. “All of this changed the day Britney Spears got on the phone and spoke to the judge about how bad things are and the only way that happened is because of the #FreeBritney movement.” But changes must happen quickly, she said, while people still remember what happened to Britney Spears, despite her wealth and resources. “We realize this is a moment in time that we must take advantage of. The moment may not come again.”The government’s green bond promises savers they will be able to “make the world greener, cleaner and more sustainable”. But what they won’t make is a return on their investment that beats other options on the market. When it was launched last month, the bond, from National Savings &amp; Investments (NS&amp;I), was described as a world first – people can invest money that is 100% secure and will be used for government spending on sustainable projects, such as cleaner transport and renewable energy. However, the return on your investment is just 0.65%, fixed for three years – a figure dubbed as “paltry” by the opposition and analysts. “This suggests to savers that green investments are less rewarding financially, when many studies have shown that this is not the case,” says Molly Scott Cato, the Green party’s economic spokesperson and former MEP. “People shouldn’t be offered a lower return for doing the right thing.” The green savings bond was announced by chancellor Rishi Sunak in the spring budget and went on sale at the end of October. Savers can invest from £100 and up to £100,000. The money cannot be withdrawn for three years. It is guaranteed by the Treasury, which means all of the investment is protected. Under the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), customers of financial services firms are protected for up to £85,000 is the firm goes bust. The fixed 0.65% rate means that someone who invests £10,000 will earn £65 a year in interest. The amount paid in will contribute towards government spending on green projects in six areas – cleaner transport, such as zero-emission buses; renewable energy, such as wind power and hydrogen research; preventing pollution; making buildings more energy efficient; protecting areas of natural beauty, and countering environmental threats by the installation of projects like flood defences. Figures on how much has been raised will be released at the end of the financial year, according to the Treasury. It says the money invested will be allocated to green projects within two years, and details will be published with the environmental benefits. The rate on the bond is well below that offered on comparable accounts from competitors. In some cases, savers can earn almost three times more. Both UBL UK and United Trust Bank offered 1.82% for a three-year bond – so the same £10,000 would earn £182 a year. JN Bank, meanwhile, offers 1.81%, according to financial information site Moneyfacts. On green bonds, the Gatehouse Bank has a three-year fix Woodland Saver account which pays 1.78%. For every account opened, a tree is planted in a UK woodland. Another option is the Oxbury Forest Saver, a one-year fixed-term bond, which offers 0.7%, The interest earned is not given back to the saver, but instead used to plant trees to mitigate carbon emissions. Green savers also have the option of putting the money into the stock market, but this carries more risk. Jason Hollands, of financial advisers Bestinvest, says: “If you are prepared to take a longer-term view, then FP WHEB Sustainability Fund is an equity fund that invests globally in the shares of companies that fit into nine themes: cleaner energy, environmental services, resource efficiency, sustainable transport, water management, education, health, safety, and well-being. Over the last three years it has returned 40%, but equities are volatile and the past is no guide to the future.” Anna Bowes of Savings Champion says the NS&amp;I bond is not for those who are solely looking for a return on their investment, especially at a time when interest rates are expected to rise and inflation is high. “For the environment’s sake it would be great to think that this bond will still prove popular, but it’s a real blow for savers to be offered such a paltry rate,” she says. Sarah Coles of Hargreaves Lansdown says that as interest rates are expected to rise in the near future, “we can expect fixed rates to keep climbing and 0.65% to look even less attractive by comparison”. The Treasury says that one of the benefits of the bond is that savers are guaranteed to get their money back. However, since deposits of up to £85,000 in other banks are covered by the FSCS, the government protection is, in effect, only relevant to people investing between £85,000 and £100,000. But the low rate will not turn off all investors, especially those who are committed to using their money for sustainable objectives. “For those who just want to know their money is a part of the solution, who want to park it somewhere safe and are really not bothered about real rates of return, then it might still be attractive,” says Rebecca O’Connor of Interactive Investor. “It’s unfortunate though, that this group may be a much smaller group than those who were initially keen on the idea.” Responding to the criticism, a the Treasury said: “NS&amp;I has to offer a fair interest rate to savers whilst offering value for money for taxpayers and maintaining a competitive position within the broader financial services sector. The interest rate reflects this.” • This article was amended on 14 November 2021. Molly Scott Cato is a “former” MEP; she served in the European Parliament until 2020 when the UK left the EU.Georgina Pazcoguin was a ballet-obsessed middle American kid whose talent led her to being given a scholarship to the School of American Ballet in New York at the age of just 14. She progressed to the renowned New York City Ballet and is now a soloist and star. Swan Dive is a coming-of-age memoir and a shocking, often disgusting – and, frankly, riveting – tell-all about the reality of the ballet world. In purely literary terms, Swan Dive doesn’t hang together. Attempts to come across as tough and cool are puerile and crude. The first line of the book is “Adrenaline is a great fucking drug”; when she is promoted she thinks, “Wait, I’m a soloist? A fucking soloist? … I was about to grace that stage as a motherfucking soloist”; she dreads performing in a skimpy costume “the day after fucking Thanksgiving”. She claims to “have the ability to dial up the charm when I need to. If I have an opportunity to flash my wit, even better.” And yet her accounts of her training and career bristle with fear, jealousy, self-consciousness and mistrust of the other ballerinas. However, strange boasting and off-key assertions cannot detract from Swan Dive’s message that the ballet world itself is rotten, no matter how exquisite its masterpieces. The central chapters are an addictive dive into a deeply unpleasant system. Pazcoguin embodies the drive, competitive determination, graft and single-mindedness necessary for dancers to succeed. But she and her peers have to fight for survival in an environment of everyday violation, objectification and exploitation. Early on, she is called into a meeting and told she doesn’t fit in with the company because her thighs are too fat. This “fat talk” is a ruse in itself: “What actions you took after your fat talk were a measurement of your loyalty. How badly do you want it and how far are you willing to go for it?” She visits a “doctor” who “prescribes” a diet of 720 calories a day. Later, a ballet master encourages his dancers by saying: “It’s spring! It’s beautiful! Think about it… women walking around in tank tops and short dresses, shorts! … It’s amazing more women aren’t raped these days.” The New York City Ballet has been under the spotlight in recent years, with the investigation of former artistic director Peter Martins over allegations of sexual harassment and abuse and the resignation of dancer Chase Finlay, who shared explicit photos and videos of his dancer girlfriend with fellow company members Amar Ramasar, Zachary Catazaro and others. The men traded gloating “banter” among themselves. Ramasar and Catazaro were fired and then reinstated. Pazcoguin had worked with Ramasar, who “used to greet me during company class by sidling up close, whispering ‘You look fine today,’ eyes locked on my chest, and then he’d zero in on the goal at hand by – surprise! – tweaking my nipples”. (Ramasar denies Pazcoguin’s allegations against him.) Pazcoguin covers these incidents, and others, with bald dismay and dark wit. “What recourse would I have had in that moment? Complain to Peter about Amar? HA! That seemed like complaining to Satan about his brother Hades. They both represented the same problem. They were dominators in a patriarchal environment.” (Martins denied the allegations against him and an inquiry by the NYCB found no corroboration for them.) She brilliantly evokes the skin-crawling sensation when a bully baits her in a meeting, the way time slows down when a perpetrator humiliates her. And she ties in her experiences to centuries of western ballet tradition, with male impresarios controlling the careers of expendable female dancers. Pazcoguin is eloquent on the euphoria of movement, the rewarding pain of hours of practise, the sweet spot where music and dance and costuming come together. She is also exceptional at describing the nitty-gritty of choreography, staging and performance, of capturing what it feels like to dance brilliantly in a masterpiece ( between running off stage during breaks to chug down a painkiller from a gigantic box in the wings). Swan Dive is a sharp plunge into the reality of ballet in all its perfectionist genius and rigour, and all its abuses and sadism. What makes Pazcoguin’s message so haunting is that exploitation and violation are seen as the price that female dancers have to pay to perform some of the greatest dances known to humanity. • Swan Dive by Georgina Pazcoguin is published by Picador (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThis was never going to be a summit that would solve the planet’s woes with a single wave of a diplomatic wand. The best that was expected for this month’s Cop26 meeting in Glasgow was for an agreement to set up a tight timetable that would commit the world to gathering regularly and frequently to hammer out even tighter agreements in future. And at least that provision – yearly revisits to strengthen previous deals – looks as if it going to be approved in some form in Glasgow. Whether such a provision is enough to head off global temperature rises of only 1.5C later this century remains to be seen. At present, most analysis indicates that we are heading for a greater rise, around 2.4C, a level of heating that could have devastating consequences for low-lying nations – including many island states in the Pacific and Caribbean. They face major sea-level rises triggered by melting ice sheets in Greenland and the Antarctic. At the same time, across the globe, storms could worsen, heatwaves increase in number and intensity, and floods and droughts spread – unless we follow up Cop26 with tighter and tighter deals. Whether we can now avoid breaking the 1.5C limit is therefore an issue that still hangs in the balance after Glasgow. Over the next 12 months nations are now going to be called on to announce individual, tighter emission goals. However, it should be noted at Glasgow, that for the past two weeks delegates have announced, one by one, that their nations could go no further in the deals they were offering. The inference is straightforward. Unless they change their minds in 2022, there is little chance of nations improving their offers and so avoid a world that heats up by 2C or more. As one observer put it: “The 1.5C goal is alive but only just. Effectively it is taking its last breaths and unless something remarkable happens next year, it will be dead by the next Cop meeting in Egypt.” On the other hand, Glasgow can at least claim to have hosted a Cop summit that was not an outright failure like the one that took place in Copenhagen in 2009. The door has been kept open – albeit creakily – to further improvements and accords over the next 12 months. In addition, there have been encouraging deals that have included a commitment to end deforestation by 2030, an agreement that was signed by more than 100 nations – including Brazil, which is generally seen as one of the worst offenders. There were also promises to make farming more sustainable and less polluting while five nations, including Britain and the United States, in collaboration with a group of global charities, promised $1.7bn to support indigenous people’s conservation efforts. In addition, the US and the EU launched an initiative to cut pollution from methane, a very powerful greenhouse gas, with emissions coming from fossil fuel extraction and livestock farming. The goal is to cut methane emissions by 30% by 2030. However, one of the most contentious resolutions – over the phasing out of coal and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies – remains vaguely worded. And that is a real worry. Energy experts are clear that phasing out coal is going to be essential to limit global heating, but the opposition to such a measure – mainly from major coal-using countries including China, India and South Africa – show how hard it will be to achieve that goal and avoid a 1.5C rise. In other words, the fate of the planet is still in the balance.Gareth Southgate has raised expectations that he will extend his England contract by saying there are few opportunities in club management currently and admitting it would be difficult to part with such a talented group of players. Southgate’s £3m-a-year deal runs out after the 2022 World Cup and he is ready to sign a two-year extension. The England manager remains invested in a job he started in 2016 and he spoke glowingly about the talent at his disposal after his team to all intents sealed their place in Qatar by beating Albania 5-0 at Wembley on Friday. “As a manager you want to work with good players,” Southgate said. “You can challenge them in a different way. There aren’t a huge number of jobs out there and being the manager of England is a massive privilege, so of course I take that responsibility really responsibly. It means a lot to me to be in the position I am.” A contract extension would see Southgate, who could double his money if he commits his future to England, lead the side into Euro 2024. The 51-year-old has been keen to delay negotiations with the Football Association until after qualification for the World Cup is secure but he wants to stay and there has been progress in private. Southgate, whose future has been uncertain since England’s run to the final of Euro 2020, is excited about his squad’s potential. England need only a point from their final qualifier in Group I, away to San Marino on Monday, and Southgate feels they are still getting better. “We’ve shown over the last couple of years that we’ve got some really good strength in depth,” he said. “I think that There is still a long way to go and room for improvement. “Even tonight we played exceptionally well in the first half but gave away three balls that could have ended up in the back of our net. One of them, Jordan Pickford had to make an excellent save at 1-0. We’ve got to keep evolving and keep improving. “There is depth, but we’ve always had depth in this country. We’ve always had good players. I’m not convinced that our players are better than the team in 2004 or 2006 and that sort of period.. I’m not certain we’re better than ’96 or ’98 when I played. “But this group have got a lot of potential and have really blended well as a team. They have formed a very strong bond and the way they have worked for each other has produced some really good performances and exceptional results.” Conor Gallagher has been handed his his first senior call-up against San Marino, while Jordan Henderson, Jack Grealish, Raheem Sterling, Mason Mount and Luke Shaw will not travel, the Football Association has announced. Gallagher has impressed at Crystal Palace, on loan from Chelsea. Emile Smith Rowe was called up from the under-21s after withdrawals and made his debut as a substitute against Albania on Friday. England have made huge strides under Southgate, who led them to the 2018 World Cup semi-finals. They have become better on the ball and are comfortable in a number of systems. Southgate switched to a 3-4-3 formation against Albania, who were demolished by England’s attack in the first half, and he was delighted with Reece James’s ability to drift into midfield from his starting position at right wing-back. “Reece did that really well against Denmark in one of his first games but then we ended up going down to 10 men and we had to change it,” he said. “But we know he’s a player who can do that. Against Andorra here he played in the middle of midfield for 20 minutes and was very comfortable. “I saw him do the same for Chelsea at Aston Villa last season. Reece is just a very, very talented footballer. Excellent with the ball and strong without it. His performance was really top level. His last games for us were a little bit quiet and I think we just had to remind him of the belief we’ve got in him. I think he’s got everything. He’s already a top player but he can be anything that he wants.” Southgate went on to discuss the tight buildup to the World Cup. The 2022-23 Premier League season will start on 6 August and pause after the weekend of 12-13 November for the Qatar tournament, which is due to commence on 21 November. “What’s important is that there is a break at the end of this season,” Southgate said. “Next season is unique. Normally we go into tournaments picking up the pieces at the end of a season but this will be during the season. The unknown is what will happen with the tight turnaround after the last league matches. Sometimes when you pick up injuries before summer tournaments you can have a few weeks to get things right. “That won’t be possible for any of the countries that qualify, so everybody is going to have to select their squad in a very short period of time. It is going to be key to get those decisions right.”Capitalism has divided opinion violently in Glasgow over the past fortnight. Prince Charles rewarded those global businesses delivering on their commitments to net-zero carbon emissions with his Terra Carta award, declaiming that only the private sector could and would deliver, while Mark Carney, co-chair of the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero, boasted of the $130tn (£97tn) of private investment funds – doubled in six months – committing to invest in companies signed up to net zero. But capitalism, growth, greenwashing and self-seeking lobbying were denounced by activists and NGOs as the root of the problem. Prince Charles and Carney were dismissed as little better than collaborators in our collective downfall. In truth, a complex but ultimately hopeful dance is being performed before our eyes. The growing conviction of voters and consumers, further intensified by environmental campaigners at Cop26, that the climate crisis is real is forcing change. Last week, rivalling in importance to what was unfolding at Cop26, came the news from New York that electric pick-up truck manufacture Rivian, hardly in production, had floated for more than $100bn, valuing it at more than Ford and General Motors. It’s the kind of mind-boggling welcome Wall Street gave to young companies making petrol-propelled cars a century ago. Money is flowing in epic volumes to those companies riding the new consumer tide: driving gas-guzzling pick-ups while forests burn and hurricanes rip through the country with unprecedented force wins disapproving nods even in the darkest recesses of conservative America. The same phenomenon is behind Tesla’s stunning $1tn valuation. Europeans – the British in particular – living in countries where the capitalism is more ossified don’t get to see first hand how rapid economic transformation can be once entrepreneurs recognise where the new markets are developing: they can do good and make billions. What we as individuals can do and how we think is too easily diminished by the despairing analysis that humanity is doomed by the refusal of governments and big companies to act. Yet, confronted by mounting green convictions, they are acting and with increasing urgency: 130 countries, including the US, China and Australia, are making commitments to net-zero carbon emissions. Sixty FTSE 100 companies have signed up to the UN’s “race to zero” campaign. Our changing views count. For proof, look at how societies have progressed. I remember when libertarians fulminated against requirements to wear seat belts. Councils now differentiate between recyclable and general household waste – unthinkable 40 years ago. The controversies over smoking in public places? Today, no one wants to inhale secondary tobacco smoke and smoking is seen as antisocial. It’s the same story with gay marriage. In all these areas, the cultural change preceded and laid the basis for progressive legislation cementing what we wanted into law and could not be resisted, however hard the right attempted obstruction. The environmental genie is out of the bottle. In Europe, greens are in government or coalition government in Austria, Belgium, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and Scotland – and about to be in Germany. Politicians are in the market for votes; Boris Johnson, who is closely tuned to voters’ preferences even if many in his party are not, has been quick to mount a volte face over the climate crisis. The consequences of the final Cop26 outcome are not clear, but more important is that it has happened at all. The momentum to “keep 1.5 alive” is obvious and that is as vital as the detail. What matters is how national governments and international agencies find ways of directing a capitalism that knows, given what its markets want, that it has to move in this direction. Here, some models are better than others. Germany’s social market economy is built on a dense interaction between state and business and a whole skein of public/private institutions that ensure that its capitalism is responsive to societal and stakeholder wishes. The transformation of the old iron and steel Ruhr region into one of Europe’s greenest industrial structures could not be achieved without the German business bank, the KfW, or the way German companies embed social purpose in their corporate strategies. The negotiations in Berlin between potential coalition partners over the phasing out of coal and internal combustion engine production – key Green demands – are protracted because, once set, they will be met. In the US, the extent to which politicians can muster the will to shape where Wall Street obviously wants to go, or whether capitalism might find the capacity to do it on its own, is an open question. Biden’s ambitions to phase out coal have been thwarted for now by Democratic senator Joe Manchin from coal state West Virginia, but the US asset management industry might achieve what politicians cannot. Coal mining may be investment-starved out of business. The UK is the outlier, suffering from the most ossified capitalism and a chronically underdeveloped framework between business and public institutions. Not for nothing, even predating Brexit, has the UK stock market been the world’s poorest performer for the past 20 years. The concern about our lack of innovation to harness the opportunities now opening up even prompted Sir Patrick Vallance and Lord Browne, co-chairs of the Council of Technology and Science, to write to the prime minister in September urging an overhaul of the financial system so it backs more risk, even extraordinarily advocating the creation of a UK sovereign wealth fund. Amen to that. Capitalism, as even Marx conceded, will ceaselessly seek out the new, but it has to be shaped by democratic governments. Just as it built railways and steamships in the 19th century, so it will build cars, planes and ships propelled by ammonia, hydrogen and electricity in the 21st. It will build space-based solar power stations supplying electricity to Earth. Companies such as BP and Shell, if they want to exist at all, will have to get out of the fossil fuel business by 2050; responding to shareholder pressure is what both have committed to do. What is vital is not so much Cop26, but, rather, the process, movement and social change it represents. Humanity has to save itself. It will be messy and imperfect – but we’ll get there. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistThe Shrink Next Door Apple TV+ Inside the Care Crisis With Ed Balls (BBC Two) | iPlayer Beat the Devil Sky Arts The Tower (ITV) | ITV Hub Will Ferrell and Paul Rudd starred together in Anchorman, but there’s no spritz of Sex Panther cologne from the aftershave cabinet to lighten the mood in their new eight-part Apple TV+ US dramedy The Shrink Next Door. Based on Joe Nocera’s 2019 Wondery podcast, developed from a script by Georgia Pritchett (Succession), and directed by Michael Showalter (The Big Sick) and Jesse Peretz (Girls), Shrink is so strange, so incredible (start at “batshit”, then keep cranking the handle), it could only be a true story. It relates how timid Martin “Marty” Markowitz (Ferrell) had his life taken over by manipulative psychiatrist Isaac “Ike” Herschkopf (Rudd). Ike, a turbo-powered narcissist who eventually had his licence revoked, dominated Marty’s life for decades, starting in the 1980s: extracting millions of dollars for dubious services and schemes and throwing parties at Marty’s house in the Hamptons as though it were his own. Ike also estranged Marty from loved ones, including Marty’s sister Phyllis, superbly played by Kathryn Hahn with increasingly fiery frustration. Over the first three episodes, Ike’s influence over Marty mutates to sinister levels (think 1963 Dirk Bogarde film The Servant, but with added pool parties). Just as romance scammers exploit those yearning for love, Shrink unfolds like a bromance scam, with lonely, gullible Marty giving himself over to Ike with cult-like zeal. “I feel like I’m on drugs,” Marty cries. “I’ve never taken them before, but I assume this is what drugs feel like.” Having watched all eight episodes, The Shrink Next Door drags on a mite: there are only so many times you can shudder at Ike treating Marty like he’s his personal Daddy Warbucks. Still, overall it’s an engrossing watch. Ferrell’s hapless naif is as heartbreaking as he is mystifying. Rudd, wolfish in a thick beard, adroitly unveils the cold conman grift (deception; exploitation) lurking behind the mask of larger than life charmer. Pathos hisses throughout like a gas leak. To the list of indignities of old age we must now add: former shadow chancellor turned Strictly hoofer Ed Balls scrubbing at your shins with a lukewarm flannel. In the first of his two-part BBC Two docuseries Inside the Care Crisis, Balls worked at St Cecilia’s care home in Scarborough in order to better understand the demands of elderly care. Early in the documentary, he expresses guilt for not doing more for the sector during his time in government – a wonderful gesture and, for Balls, a conveniently empty one. From there, he fully immerses himself: whether helping to feed and wash residents, sympathising with workers (paid an average of £9.50 an hour), airing grim statistics (the number of people with dementia is estimated to double by 2040), visiting his mother (who suffers from vascular dementia) in her care home, or outlining the complex problems facing the beleaguered industry, for which Covid was a hammer blow – although not the first. Next week, Balls looks into home-based care. I do wonder if documentaries such as this are tantamount to social care tourism. On a par with Tories doing programmes to prove they can survive on benefits for a week (a whole week, fancy!)? However, the odd quibble aside – Balls’s perpetual quarter-smirk might have wowed in Westminster but it needs to go now – this is a sincere, well-crafted documentary. I particularly enjoyed the care worker who rightly bridled at being deemed “unskilled” and sent Boris Johnson a frank personal message: “You’ll need care one day, and I ain’t wiping your bum.” Over to Sky Arts for Beat the Devil, playwright David Hare’s acclaimed pandemic play at London’s Bridge theatre turned one-off television drama. It sparked a recent furore when Hare (also directing here) railed at the BBC for turning it down on the grounds that “people are not interested” in Covid dramas. Oh dear, maybe not handbags, but definitely voice-memos at dawn. Was Hare right or the BBC? It’s complicated. Starring Ralph Fiennes as Hare, Beat the Devil is an autobiographical monologue about the septuagenarian playwright’s early bout of Covid, set in his real-life studio (lots of wood; a photo of wife, designer turned sculptor Nicole Farhi, on prominent display). While he wasn’t hospitalised, Hare suffered a “pageant of random symptoms”, from vomiting to tasting everything as sewage to “air hunger”. Along the way, there’s wry humour and social commentary, primarily focused on government incompetence and needless deaths, with Fiennes/Hare seething: “I don’t have survivor’s guilt. I have survivor’s rage.” In some ways I understand why the BBC baulked. Beat the Devil is very “first lockdown”: unnerving as the thought is, is this already dated? It’s also a stage-monologue: the most “action “you get is Fiennes/Hare waving around photocopied pictures of despised politicians. Still, the public is uninterested? Give over! Look at Help, the hugely successful Channel 4 drama starring Stephen Graham and Jodie Comer. Here, Fiennes single-handedly delivers a fantastic, unflagging hour, seamlessly swooping through all the different topics and moods. As a highly personal pandemic-era dramatic curio, Beat the Devil has its own cultural value. ITV’s three-part crime drama The Tower, based on Kate London’s novel Post Mortem, shown over consecutive nights last week, is dramatised by Patrick Harbinson and directed by Jim Loach. It has a strong, hardworking cast, headed by the ever classy Gemma Whelan, and including Tahirah Sharif, Jimmy Akingbola and Emmett J Scanlan. There’s also an intriguing premise: a policeman (Nick Holder) and a teenage Libyan refugee (Lola Elsokari) fall to their deaths from the roof of a tower block, witnessed only by a young police constable (Sharif) and a small child. Sadly, things soon degenerate into a blizzard of themes: police racism, organised crime, bent coppers, cover-ups and more, including casual homophobia (Whelan’s character, DS Sarah Collins, is a heartbroken lesbian). To make things even more untidy, there were so many flashbacks I felt like I should have my stomach contents tested for hallucinogens. I loved the performances though, particularly the increasingly fraught back and forth between Whelan and Akingbola. Bring back the characters, please, but with a less chaotic story. What else I’m watching In My Skin (BBC Two) Second series of the award-winning Welsh comedy-drama, starring Gabrielle Creevy as a lesbian schoolgirl with an abusive father and mentally ill mother. A semi-autobiographical passion project from writer Kayleigh Llewellyn (Killing Eve), it’s dark, witty and heart-rending. Kudos to all involved. Close to Me (Channel 4) Eminently watchable psychological thriller based on the book by Amanda Reynoldsabout a woman struggling with amnesia after a sinister fall. It stars Connie Nielsen and Christopher Eccleston; viewers will just have to be brave about Ecclestone’s alarming blond hair. MasterChef: The Professionals (BBC One) It’s back, with Marcus Wareing, Monica Galetti and Gregg Wallace. I sometimes feel conflicted watching this. It’s fine for amateurs, but couldn’t being reprimanded on a TV show for burning sausages, as happened in the opener, destroy professional reputations?While the global leaders were in Glasgow at Cop26 last week, trying to agree forms of words to convince us they were serious about saving the planet, I was peering into a soupy brook that runs through protected wetland on the north Kent coast. In the past few months, the tidal brook at Long Rock beside the Swalecliffe wastewater treatment plant near Whitstable has become a potent symbol of the battle to enforce that most basic of environmental principles: don’t dump raw human sewage into rivers and seas. I was standing beside the brook with Andy Taylor, a local musician and environmentalist. Most mornings for the past 15 years Taylor has monitored the big skies here for migrating birds that have decided to make a stopover – bramblings and fieldfares this morning – and also the quality of water in the brook. He points out to me the overflow pipes that sometimes feed untreated sewage directly into the stream. “Some days you come down here and it’s fine and you might even see kingfishers or water voles,” he says. “Other times it’s just dead and stinking, this nasty coffee colour.” Taylor has a file of pictures of eels, a protected species, floating lifeless on the surface of the water. “They have literally swum all the way from the Sargasso Sea to get here,” he says. “But whatever goes in the water on that last 100 yards of their journey, they cannot survive.” While we talk, we are joined by Jackie Kohler, who is walking her dogs and lives in one of a row of houses beside the brook at the entrance to the Swalecliffe plant. “What happens is when it rains the tanks overflow, the brook overflows and all the sewage starts running down the road, with all sorts in it and collects by our cars,” she says. “The kids have to use this bridge across the brook to get to school so residents have to come out and sweep it clean.” The brook merited a couple of paragraphs in the sentencing remarks of Mr Justice Johnson this July, in what was the most damning indictment of sewage management in this country since the Great Stink of 1858. The judge’s report effectively documented a surreptitious great stink that Southern Water had perpetrated over a six-year period from January 2010 to December 2015. The water company, whose major shareholders were a consortium ofAmerican and Australian banks, pleaded guilty to 51 counts of discharging untreated sewage into controlled coastal waters at 17 separate sites (including most frequently from the overflow pipes immediately offshore at Swalecliffe). “The total period during which untreated sewage was discharged was 61,704 hours, or just over seven years,” the judge noted. “It has been estimated that the total volume of untreated sewage across all of the sites was of 16-21bn litres or the equivalent of 7,400 Olympic-size swimming pools.” In fining Southern Water a record sum of £90m for its systematic breaches, the judgment noted that “history shows that fines of hundreds of thousands or low millions of pounds have not had any effect on the defendant’s offending behaviour”.That criminality was emblematic of a nationwide scandal that means only 16% of English waterways are classified in good ecological health, and which places Britain 25th out of 30 EU countries for coastal water quality, with 200,000 outflows of raw sewage into bathing waters from Whitby to Penzance in May to September of this year alone. The landmark ruling against Southern Water had several consequences. On a national level it focused attention on the ongoing scandal of so-called combined sewer overflows (CSOs) polluting rivers and seas. On a local level it prompted a wave of protest that has proved an object lesson in the capacity of community activism to shape the political agenda. The start of that was a public meeting in Whitstable in August organised by the MP, Rosie Duffield, in which representatives of Southern Water were invited to address local concerns. Among those who came along to that meeting were five members of the Whitstable branch of the sea swimming group Bluetits. One of the leaders of this group, Sally Burtt-Jones, sitting sheltered from the biting North Sea wind in her beach hut at Tankerton, half a mile along the coast from Swalecliffe, explained to me what happened next. “We had prepared quite well for the meeting,” Burtt-Jones says. She’s the daughter of an accountant and she’d gone through Southern Water’s investor reports to find a structure that transferred profits between various businesses with a Cayman Island holding company. “Given that they were supposed to be taking care of local drainage and water needs, none of that felt quite right to me.” There was a widely held belief, supported by the July judgment, that Southern Water had been accepting fines – even the monster £90m fine – as an anticipated cost, rather than addressing the problems that provoked them (the government claims, without showing its working, that the infrastructure work necessary to put an end to CSOs would potentially cost water companies and their bill payers “between £350bn and £600bn”; most observers put the cost closer to a tenth of that higher figure). “Southern Water sent two guys who were adamant they had been brought in to change things,” Burtt-Jones says (one of them, Toby Willison, was until November 2020 chief operating officer of the Environment Agency, which had brought the legal case against the water company). “They were still trying to have a bit of a pity party for their shareholders who hadn’t had any dividends since 2016,” she recalls. “I was like, ‘How dare you? You’ve got £340m in the bank.’ They told me I didn’t understand what I was talking about.” The Bluetits group left that meeting feeling there was no real commitment or genuine timeline from Southern Water to end CSOs; sitting in the pub they decided to set up a campaign, Save Our Seas, SOS Whitstable. They created a logo and put the notes from the meeting – inevitably headlined “tits against shits” – online. Within a few days, they had 2,000 supporters. That week, there was yet another mechanical failure at the Swalecliffe plant and with sewage being pumped out, the beaches along the coast were shut for four days right in the middle of August. The media attention helped the SOS group to start a campaign that focused on an amendment to the environment bill in the House of Lords. The amendment, brought by the independent peer, the Duke of Wellington, would hold water companies legally accountable to reduce the amount of sewage they were putting in the sea. “We were hoping to get maybe nine or 10,000 people to sign a petition,” Burtt-Jones says. “But then I bumped into someone at a party who knew Deborah Meaden and she tweeted it out.” They got further momentum from hooking up with the longstanding pressure group Surfers Against Sewage. By the time the 9th Duke of Wellington stood up to move his amendment, finding his own (overflowing) Waterloo, he could not resist “referring to a petition which has been circulating in recent days which already has over 90,000 signatures on it calling on the government to support this amendment”. Burtt-Jones shows me the footage of the debate on her phone. When the Green party peer Jenny Jones got up to praise the duke’s PR machine, he denied all responsibility: “Frankly I was as surprised as any of you that so many emails were sent out.” The Lords supported the amendment, but of course, the following week the government whipped backbenchers to vote it down, despite a great wave of anger partly directed by the SOS Whitstable group that had seen MPs’ inboxes flooded with outrage about that decision. The symbolism of that whipped vote was stark. The government’s refusal to back the duke’s amendment (on the grounds of the cost of investing in cleaner rivers and seas) exposed the flimsiness not only of their environmental commitment, but also of the loud election promises to rejuvenate Britain’s coastal communities after Brexit: how can you rejuvenate seaside towns when the beaches are closed and people won’t buy shellfish for fear of contamination? Some Tory MPs were affronted by the suggestion that in voting down greater legal powers against water companies they were voting “to dump sewage in the seas”. Their outrage ignored the fact that in the 30 years since privatisation successive governments had effectively encouraged utility companies to structure themselves as offshore debt instruments, beholden to shareholders not regulators. An investigation by the University of Greenwich, published in the Guardian, showed how since privatisation, £57bn had been paid out by water companies in share dividends – just about the precise cost of the criminally overdue infrastructure improvements that would prevent the sewage outflows. That impression of business as usual was compounded by the fact that in August it was announced that the Australian asset management group Macquarie had bought a controlling stake in Southern Water, promising £2bn to “strengthen a zero-tolerance mindset to pollution”. Those with not very long memories knew, following an in-depth BBC investigation, that in 2006, Macquarie had borrowed more than £2.8bn to finance the purchase of Thames Water (later repaying £2bn of the debt through new loans raised by a company subsidiary in Cayman Islands), effectively transferring the acquisition costs to Thames Water customers. In those 10 years, while Thames Water debt increased from £4bn to £10bn, share dividends averaged £270m per year. In 2015, when Thames announced a massive “super-sewer” investment project to help alleviate sewage outflows, the entire cost of the project was to come from increased customer bills. One other result of the national spotlight being shone on the Southern Water scandal was that for perhaps the first time since Brexit, here was an issue that cut across political tribes. Few places in this country were as divided about leaving Europe as the towns of the north Kent coast, but the SOS Whitstable campaign drew support from all quarters: trawlermen and surf schools and Airbnb owners; politicians of both right and left; remainers and Brexiters. Across all of those voters there is a growing campaign to withhold payment of Southern Water bills until action is taken. At the sharpest end of that protest was the Whitstable Oyster Company, which in the past 30 years has become synonymous with the growth of the town as a tourist and foodie destination. The modern business (which originally dates back to the 1400s) was established by Barrie Green in 1978. It is now run by his sons: Richard, who looks after the restaurants, and James, who manages the oyster farming. I spoke to James in their Lobster Shack restaurant on the seafront last week. “I used to say things couldn’t get any worse,” he told me, still just about retaining a smile, “but I stopped saying that a while ago. Covid we sort of dealt with, though the furlough scheme didn’t help us because we still had to work on the farm. We were building up a stock of oysters, and the plan was to sell those to France as a bulk commodity. But that didn’t happen, because in March, because of Brexit, that market was completely shut to us – despite the fact that Defra had assured us for three years that there would be a clause in the agreement that protected our trade. That was 50% of our business gone overnight.” Green looked in desperation for other markets. They started selling to Hong Kong and were doing OK up until the end of June. “Then,” he says, “we had a couple of cases of people who had eaten oysters coming down with norovirus, which is highly unusual in the summer.” With the details of the prosecution against Southern Water in the news, Public Health England connected the two and shut down the oyster farm for a month initially at end of June, while Green put “new testing procedures in place including pre-harvesting assessments”. “We couldn’t sell anything in July and August. We went from maybe £100,000 sales of oysters in June to nothing at all.” Green realises that talking about these issues is something of “a double-edged sword” for his business. “The fact is our oysters are safer now than they have ever been because we do so much testing and risk assessment,” he says. “But we have to build confidence again.” In Mr Johnson’s remarks he noted that the Whitstable Oyster Company should think about bringing a civil case against Southern Water. “We would need a class action to do that,” Green says. “You are taking on a $3bn company. They are not going to just roll over and give me £250,000 for loss of earnings – plus x for reputational damage – without a big fight.” It was the early warning system of oyster testing that first alerted the Environment Agency to the scale of the problems with Southern Water. The trigger was data from the Centre for Environment Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, which monitors the shellfish beds, whose classifications at Whitstable were declining. A similar picture was noted in the Solent, also part of Southern Water’s geography. That prompted the national enforcement service to bring a comprehensive case against a water company for the first time in its history. Owen Bolton, the Environment Agency’s senior crime officer, led that investigation. He explained to me on the phone the scale of the operation that was required, involving a team of 80, including 15 or 20 investigators in the field. “We collected 2 million lines of flow data,” he says. “And we also went into every Southern Water site to get site diaries, documents about incidents kept by the operator to hand over to the next shift, involving 27,000 entries.” At every stage, the judge noted, Southern Water attempted to obstruct this disclosure process. Alan Cansdale, the Environment Agency’s area manager, suggests that it was never straightforward for investigators on the ground to build a case. “Sometimes, as with the unfortunate events [when Prince Charles visited Whitstable] for the Queen’s diamond jubilee weekend and there was a massive pollution incident with sewage debris all over the beaches, the issue is very obvious,” he says. “But mostly you are looking for very subtle environmental indicators.” In the end, he says, the investigation against Southern Water began with a very experienced investigator standing with him on a beach suggesting, “something here doesn’t feel right at all”. One positive result of the July prosecution and fine is that Southern Water now reports CSOs from sites like Swalecliffe on an app almost in real time. The downside of that transparency is that it reveals just how often the discharges – which are supposed to be exceptional, storm-related events – take place. “We could cope if it was two or three times a year,” James Green says, “but we have had months when there have been eight or nine CSOs. Each time, we don’t harvest oysters for a couple of days afterwards, and then we make a risk assessment based on tides and weather conditions and then we test every single batch for E coli and norovirus until they are clean… It is shameful in my view that the government allows Southern Water to make large profits essentially at the expense of sustainable British companies like ours.” In its defence, Southern Water argues that the pressures on sites such as Swalecliffe, built in the 1960s when the population it served was less than half of the current 40,000, have increased, exacerbated by climate change. Owen Bolton suggests that during their investigation Southern Water was seen to “be investing many millions of pounds in improvements – though many of the infrastructure problems are not things the water companies can solve in six months”. Officials from the Environment Agency noted after the July verdict that the monitoring system can only work if there is a degree of trust in the operators: “We can’t be sat on every outflow, we can’t be monitoring every pipe.” In the absence of that trust, the system increasingly depends on community activists to hold the water monopolies to account. Rob Yates, a Labour councillor in nearby Thanet, is also a keen wild swimmer (“I have swum from Alcatraz to San Francisco bay in a pair of Speedos,” he told me). Increasingly, however, he thinks of himself as “a citizen journalist”. Since he moved to Margate he has been swimming in a tidal pool near to one of Southern Water’s pumping stations. “I’ve seen panty liners and stuff in there a day or two after a release,” he says. In recent months Yates has been doing painstaking work, using Freedom of Information requests to try to see exactly how often the water company breaches the terms of its permit. “The Environment Agency have had their funding cut by two-thirds since 2010,” he says. “They’re obviously going to focus on the big incidents, but if ordinary citizens started doing FoI requests you can begin to find out how many non-compliant incidents there have been and build a picture.” One of the consequences of that monitoring is that Yates is among the first to see the EA’s testing results. On the day we speak he has seen a reading for E coli that is “very, very high”. “Now the problem for me is, I know that test was done probably five days ago, and it’s taken three days to get test results. So how do I know whether the water is safe now?” * * * The morning after I met Sally Burtt-Jones, the wind had stopped blowing quite so fiercely and perhaps 40 of the Whitstable Bluetits had gathered on the shingle in the weak morning sunshine outside Tankerton’s Marine Hotel, stripping down to swimming costumes (and bobble hats and gloves) to plunge into the frigid tidal waters. You might think of them as a small army of very British Erin Brockoviches, increasingly expert in the nuances of sewer management and corporate responsibility. They include Dodda John-Baptist, 58, a recently retired headteacher, who moved down to Whitstable last year specifically so she could swim every day to ease her osteoarthritis. And Catherine Chapman and Jayne McClelland, who set the group up after the first lockdown as a way of rebuilding community. Watching the Bluetits plunge screaming into the sea, it’s impossible not to admire their collective will; afterwards, shivering on the shingle, several tell me that if it wasn’t for the group spirit they would not have had the courage either to swim or to stand up and be counted in the battle for cleaner seas and rivers. While she gets dried I chat to Jane Dean, a retired police officer who has come down from Faversham. “I’ve never taken drugs and I don’t drink,” she says “but I can’t imagine the elation you get from any of that matches this. It lasts for hours after you come out. My friend said, ‘I bet people walk past and think: look at all those funny fat old ladies in the sea’. Actually, I said, they are thinking: ‘I wish I had the balls to do that.’” Dean turned 60 was last week. She got her pension on Monday and spent the lump sum on Tuesday, buying a motorhome in which she and her swimming pal plan to tour the coast around to Devon, “tits on tour”, sewage permitting. “Sometimes swimming is the thing you look forward to all week,” she says, “and then you come down here and find the sea’s full of shit again and you can’t go in and your heart just sinks. These days it seems to happen every time it rains…” We turn to the £90m question of how you make monopoly water operators invest in infrastructure. The consensus is that the directors of these companies need to be held to account in some way for the environmental crimes that occur on their watch. (Southern Water’s CEO during the period for which it was prosecuted, Matthew Wright, announced himself “as shocked as anyone” by the judge’s findings. He left his £700,000 a year job in 2017 and became UK managing director of the £3bn Danish energy firm Ørsted.) I asked Anne Brosnan, the chief prosecutor for the EA in the Southern Water case, if the agency had considered bringing charges against directors as well as the company itself? “Yes,” she said. “We have prosecuted individual directors in the past and we will do so in the future. We are now looking at that possibility more closely than ever. But we obviously always have to follow the evidence.” Last Monday, as MPs were finally voting not to include the duke’s amendment in their environment bill, Southern Water invited a group of local residents – including Sally Burtt-Jones, Andy Taylor and Jackie Kohler – to tour its Swalecliffe site and hear about improvements that were planned. While they were being shown pristine overflow tanks and being told that the pipes into the brook would be capped in the next fortnight, MPs were announcing their partial U-turn on the duke’s amendment, which proposed “a duty of progressive reduction” on sewage dumping. Among those criticising the diluted legislation was former Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron. “There are no targets in terms of volume or in terms of timescale, which leaves water companies with the power to continue what they do now.” In the course of her tour at Swalecliffe, Burtt-Jones asked the Southern Water representative if at the very least the company would agree to pay for technology that could monitor sea water safety in real time. “The bloke behaved as if that idea had never occurred to him,” she says. There is no doubt a hope from the government that the stink surrounding this issue will fade. I wouldn’t be so sure. Having finally found an issue on which all of the country can agree, groups such as the Whitstable Bluetits – not to mention the hundreds of thousands of people who support Surfers Against Sewage and other local protests forming up and down the country – are not going anywhere. “The thing is,” Burtt-Jones says, “this is such a simple issue for anyone to understand. Even very small children get it: when they go to the beach, they don’t want to find that the sea is full of poo.”For some time, we’ve known we’d have to do something about my son’s hair. It’s never been cut and is so long that it constantly gets in his eyes, and is almost constantly striped with foodstuffs, bodily disjecta and miscellaneous muck. I have friends who cut their kids’ hair but I could never do that to him. I’m fairly sure some of my earliest cuts were done by whichever among my overzealous siblings had access to a pudding bowl. As a result, there exist no presentable photographs of my hair as a child. My teen years of spikes and curtains were worse, although these have luckily been obscured by the fact that my later school photos coincided with my father’s interest in digital photography, during which he eschewed expensive, professional shots in favour of taking his own with an early DLR camera. This was cheaper, but as our eyes have become attuned to the ever-increasing fidelity of high-resolution imagery, everyone else’s portraits have remained the same as before, whereas I look like a blurry, 4-pixel image blown up from a CCTV screen in a Bourne movie, waiting for a CIA commander to say, ‘Enhance.’ For the sake of my own self-image, it is a small mercy. I want better for my son, so I opted for one of those adorably kid-friendly places where he could be sheared while sitting in an aeroplane or a fire engine. Judging by the price, I presumed fish would also nibble at his cuticles and a valet would iron his newspaper while giving him tips for the derby. Things started well. He selected a police car, a screen spun toward him showing Paw Patrol, and chocolate coins were produced to distract him further. It’s tempting to say I had no such luxuries, as I didn’t get my hair cut in a salon that would shame Jeff Bezos (because of its fanciness, not the whole bald thing). But, we did have a hairdresser who came specially to our home. True, this was mostly due to the logistics of marching into a cramped space filled with hair and fag-smoke for the four-hour ordeal that cutting my own and my 10 siblings’ hair entailed for my dad. But there’s also the fact that I was so terrified of hairdressers, I more than once ran down the street, mid-snip, proving that the only thing worse than a pale, freckled child with a ginger, pudding bowl haircut is a pale, freckled child with 50% of a ginger, pudding bowl haircut, slowly running through oncoming traffic. Tragically, it seems my son may be cut from the same cloth, as the first dainty snips around his fringe caused him to sob uncontrollably, and he was soon standing in his police car, clutching my waist and begging to be taken home. In the end they managed to shear roughly one metric gram of hair from his head, just enough to get it out of his eyes, and for me to have to pay the £25 in full some four minutes after I’d entered the shop. Next time, pass me the pudding bowl. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsPeter Capaldi, 63, studied at Glasgow School of Art and landed his breakthrough acting role aged 24 on the film Local Hero. He’s best known for his Bafta-winning performance as spin doctor Malcolm Tucker in political satire The Thick of It and as the 12th Doctor in Doctor Who. His film roles include The Personal History of David Copperfield, The Suicide Squad and Paddington. As a director, he won an Oscar for his 1993 short film, Franz Kafka’s It’s a Wonderful Life. At art college, he was briefly in a punk band; four decades later, he is releasing his first solo album, St Christopher. You’re releasing your debut album aged 63. How did that happen? We just set out to have some fun. My friend Dr Robert from the Blow Monkeys is a terrific musician and every year he hosts a kind of happening where disparate musicians come together for a recording session. He knew I played guitar and leaned on me to come along. It was very exciting to watch the real deal at work, so I scribbled out a song and they turned it into proper music within a day. I loved that, so with Robert’s encouragement, I had a go at writing more. You wrote most of the songs in America, right? Yes, I was shooting the Suicide Squad film in Atlanta for four months and had a lot of downtime, so I bought a cheap electric guitar and made demos on GarageBand. I’d send them to Robert, who very sweetly rejected a whole pile of my efforts until eventually we had enough to take into the studio. We’d booked Konk Studios in Crouch End, north London, which was great because it was the Kinks’ old studio and I love Ray Davies. That was cancelled due to lockdown but we sent the demos back and forth until we had something that appeared to be an album. Why the title St Christopher? I was always intrigued why the Catholic church got rid of Saint Christopher, who was a fabulous saint. They decided he wasn’t real but by then, it was too late because everyone liked him. The public saved him, rather like a TV talent contest. It’s a very showbiz story. What are the album’s lyrical themes? I was in a band at art school and our obsessions back then were melancholia, punk, synthesisers, power chords, rain and being pale and interesting. I fell back into that studenty groove. Although when you’re making your first record at 63, some of rock’n’roll’s traditional subject matter is closed to you. Don’t worry, I don’t suddenly think I’m a rock star. It was just some friends doing stuff they enjoy that got a bit… elaborate. Have you sought the opinion of your cousin Lewis Capaldi? I haven’t. I’m so proud of him. I didn’t really know Lewis as he grew up – I was long gone from Glasgow by that time – but went to one of his gigs three years ago and was knocked out. I was thrilled when he asked me to be in the video for Someone You Loved. I had no idea it would be such a gigantic hit. He’s a great talent. I’m not in that league. Your college punk band was called the Dreamboys. That’s right, the worst possible name. We were trying for a nightmarish Kafkaesque or Dr Caligari feel, not a troupe of Chippendales-type male strippers. On drums was Craig Ferguson, who went on to become a comedian on American telly. Craig was always hilarious. A powerhouse of a drummer, too. How successful was the band? We did OK, got our record played by John Peel and were part of a thriving scene. But after a while, we were banging our heads against a brick wall. In the old days, we’d put a song on tape, send it to a vinyl pressing plant in France, then physically take it around record shops, begging them to take a few copies. Now, technology allows anyone to put stuff out there. It’s democratised music, although it’d be nice if streaming services spread the money around. Who are your musical influences? The usual suspects for someone of my generation: Bowie, Lou Reed, Talking Heads, Sex Pistols. At art school in 1976, we all arrived dressed as Neil Young, with long hair and army greatcoats. When the Pistols happened, we came back the next term with peroxide hair and leather trousers. OK, plastic trousers. It was only in later life that I got into Dylan and Leonard Cohen. When you’re trying to write lyrics, they’re the ones to study. Was your Doctor Who costume partly inspired by David Bowie? Yeah, him and David Lynch, who used to do that buttoned-up white shirt thing. Another reason was I thought kids could look like the Doctor without having to spend any money. Rather than buying a costume, they could just button up their school shirt. Your Doctor also wielded an electric guitar. Was that your idea? Between my first and second seasons, I said it’d be fun if the Doctor had a guitar to plug into the Tardis console. It was just an idea, I never dreamed it would happen. I imagined the Doctor might have invented the wah-wah pedal. We could’ve done an historical episode where he met Jimi Hendrix and introduced him to this piece of alien technology. I also thought there could be a great blues episode. When Robert Johnson meets the devil at the crossroads, the Doctor could discover something extraterrestrial going on. What would Malcolm Tucker make of the Owen Paterson and Geoffrey Cox affairs? The whole thing is so awful, it’s beyond a joke. I wouldn’t invoke Malcolm Tucker in these circumstances. We’re in real trouble and people have to wake up to this. Actually, maybe Malcolm could shout and help wake them up to this terrible government. Succession fans often come up to Brian Cox and ask him to tell them to fuck off. Were Thick of It fans similar? It used to happen a lot. You could say “Fuck off and get a life”, which was quite enjoyable. Sometimes they’d get me to phone up their mates and give them a bollocking. It’s great to see Brian’s success. He’s an astonishing actor. You can sometimes hear an echo of Malcolm Tucker in Succession’s dialogue. Well, some of the writing team are Thick of It veterans. Armando Iannucci’s influence over two generations of writers and performers is immense. You can trace Succession back to him in a way. Next up you play Siegfried Sassoon in Terence Davies’s film Benediction. What drew you to that role? Sassoon is a fascinating character and a wonderful poet but it was Terence who interested me more than anything. He’s an absolute artist who’s made some of the most amazing moments ever put on film. He’s a treasure of British cinema, a chronicler of our culture and it’s a scandal that he struggles to get finance for his not-very-expensive films. People like him should be cherished and supported. If you had your time again, would you still be an actor? I wouldn’t change anything. I would’ve loved to be a professional musician but that would’ve also had its ups and downs, so I’m happy to be coming to it at this late stage. My life has been enormously blessed. All the side-waters and strange corners I’ve gone around have made me who I am. St Christopher is released on 19 November by Monks Road Records. Benediction will be in cinemas early 2022.Conor Gallagher has received his first England call-up after making a brilliant start to the season, but Gareth Southgate will be without Raheem Sterling, Mason Mount, Luke Shaw, Jordan Henderson and Jack Grealish when his side look to seal qualification for the 2022 World Cup against San Marino on Monday. England are almost certain of qualifying for Qatar after their 5-0 win against Albania – they only need a point from their final Group I qualifier – but they will travel to San Marino without a host of influential players. Mount has not recovered from dental surgery, Shaw is suffering from concussion, Henderson and Grealish have left the camp after picking up knocks and Sterling has departed to deal with a personal issue. Southgate is likely to make changes against San Marino, although a host of withdrawals will make it harder to rotate. Marcus Rashford and Declan Rice both pulled out of the squad before the victory over Albania. The list of absentees has allowed Southgate to add more youth to his squad. Emile Smith Rowe was promoted from the Under-21s last week and Gallagher has followed in the Arsenal midfielder’s footsteps. Gallagher, who saw Smith Rowe make his debut as a substitute against Albania, has been on Southgate’s radar after impressing since joining Crystal Palace on loan from Chelsea. The 21-year-old midfielder has scored four goals and registered two assists for Palace this season. Gallagher has also done well for England at U21 level. His rise will underline the importance of young players representing the U21s.Dan Savage is not easily shocked, but recently, well. A few weeks ago he got a letter. A 24-year-old man wanted advice – he’d taken his partner, bisexual, older, to meet his parents for what both thought would be the first time. Except, it turned out he’d met them a decade earlier, when he’d joined them for a threesome. On Zoom from Seattle, Savage chuckles darkly and adjusts his cap. “I was like, oh God,” he says. “It’s all my fault! I felt implicated. Because I helped create a world where middle-aged, married, straight couples can have threeways.” He shrugs. He’s right. His advice column started as a joke; soon it cracked open, and revealed a map to new ways of living. When Savage Love launched 30 years ago in Seattle’s alternative weekly newspaper The Stranger, the idea was that a gay man – Savage, then 26 and working in a video shop – would give sex advice to straight people. “Hey Faggot!” each letter began. Early questions were easy. “Things like, what’s a butt plug? How do you give a good blowjob?” Straight people had always intuited that their gay friends knew more about sex than they did, “which is true, not because gay people are magic, but because we have to communicate about sex. Straight people get to consent and then… stop talking.” “Use your words!” he tells straights today, often. With the 1990s came the internet, and suddenly most of the answers were immediately Googlable. But the letters kept on coming. “Right away, it was no longer a ‘how to’ column but a ‘why?’ Why did they do that? Why did I do this? And what happens now?” Savage is 57 years old, with cropped grey hair and seal-like eyes, and he talks in full, considered essays, with pauses where you can see a virtual blinking ellipsis as he thinks. While his syndicated columns quickly made him the most influential advice columnist in America, it was his podcast (downloaded by 300,000 people a month) that brought him to the attention of the rest of the world, along with the It Gets Better Project. In 2010, after a number of gay teenagers killed themselves, Savage and his husband Terry Miller posted a video to YouTube sharing stories of their evolution from bullied kids to happy adults, who had recently adopted DJ, a son. It gets better, they said. Within a week, 1,000 people had uploaded their own videos; within eight weeks it had climbed to 10,000 (including one from President Obama). A decade later, Savage says, he is used to hearing from people who say, “‘You’re the guy who told us “it gets better” and now look at the world!’ But while it’s not perfect it has gotten better,” Savage sighs, a little itchily. “We always have to fight to make it better still, and fight to keep what we’ve won. One of the criticisms was that it was somehow passive, that we were telling young queer people just to wait, and rescue will come. But if you watch the videos, it’s all people talking about what they did.” There were explanations of the conversations they started with their families, or of how they moved town, or rid themselves of unsupportive friends in order to carve out happier lives. “Sometimes I think young queer people, because they’re not raised by older queer people, have a lack of perspective.” How does he feel about that message today? “I think it’s borne out by the facts on the ground. It has gotten better but we live in perilous times where things could get worse, and fast, if we don’t fight.” What does that fight look like for him? “It’s a fight for democracy. It’s a fight against authoritarianism and autocracy. Our societies are at stake. And it feels terrifying!” Unexpectedly, he chuckles. Politics are ironed into Savage’s sex advice. His podcasts begin with a monologue (recent subjects include abstinence-only sex education and anti-vaxxers) then expand into listeners’ questions (“Is it a red flag if the guy I’m dating’s previous relationship was with his own therapist?”, “I’m having trouble using the correct pronouns!”, “Is my dick racist?”), which Savage answers with personal anecdotes and not a flake of judgment. The responses are a delicious blend of raunch and empathy, delivered with wit and the correct amount of rage. He regularly consults experts (such as doctors and sex workers), and in dialogue with his listeners he revisits occasions he thinks he got things wrong (inevitably, for somebody whose job it is to stomp about in taboos and sexuality with vulgar jollity, he has pissed a lot of people off), and frequently rips Republican policies apart. “A right-wing sex advice column would just be the word no, over and over and over again,” he grins. “Although, I’m constantly telling conservative critics that my advice is informed by my Catholic upbringing. If you boil all the Savage Loves down to their essence, you’re left with, ‘Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.’” He says as much in his new book, Savage Love From A to Z, “a modern guidebook” for “anyone who’s had, is having, or hopes to have sex”. (It looks like a picture book – my seven-year-old picked it up and in a sing-song voice started reading, “A is for Anal…”) And yet, “There’s a strong moral code that sometimes upsets my lefty, progressive queer readers.” It’s a strange position to be in, he admits, with rightwingers complaining he’s an anarchistic hedonist who tells people anything goes, and the far queer left saying he’s a judgmental assimilationist. “When I’m in the middle trying to figure out how to make relationships work. That’s where I’m really conservative.” From the very start, Savage’s column has enacted a fairly unique form of activism, both insidious and thrilling, with moments that catch you in the guts, and others that require a drink. In one memorable column he talked about growing up gay and in danger. He wrote about the complicated fear that came with going to school beside the park where “gay serial killer” John Wayne Gacy was picking up his victims, then, in his 20s, discovering that a friend, Tony Hughes, had been the 12th victim of the cannibal Jeffrey Dahmer. And then he explained how neither horror could compete with those being inflicted on his community by Aids. “Back then, I wrote about straight people 90% of the time, so the 10% of the time I wrote about the HIV epidemic, or gay people adopting children, or the rights of trans people, straight people would wind up reading them out of a force of habit.” He’s long received comments from people who say, “Leave politics alone, stick to the sex.” “And my answer is always, ‘Sure, when politicians start leaving sex alone, I will leave politics alone.’” He lists the sex-adjacent politics of America, his voice growing slightly hoarser with every example – the banning of abortion, the persecution of gay people, the persecution of people for their gender identity… “If you write about sex and avoid politics, you’re failing. You’re not doing your job.” For all his weekly conversations about kinks, polyamory and the ethics, say, of orally pleasuring your masseur, the most shiveringly radical advice he gives is about maintaining a long-term relationship. He and his husband are what he calls “monogamish”, and he often uses their marriage as an example when illustrating a knotty truth about relationships. “One person can’t be all things to another, sexually or emotionally. And yet, we expect our long-term, committed romantic partners to be our best friend, our business partner, therapist and sex partner – it’s too much weight for any one relationship to bear. If you tear down all walls, and you’re just standing there staring at each other across a blasted heath, well, where is the opportunity for desire?” Desire, he says, is about bridging gaps. If you know everything about a person, “if they’re not allowed a zone of erotic autonomy, any privacy, any emotional separateness, so they’re exposed to you, then you lose all desire. And that destroys the relationship.” A breath. “It’s crazy to watch, when what people say they want is on a collision course with what they do, in theory to preserve what they need. Because in the end,” he shrugs, “it destroys.” One complaint he hears a lot is that he’s an “enemy of monogamy”. “I tell people that if you’re with somebody for 50 years, but he cheated on you once or twice, that was still a good relationship. That’s not me trying to destroy monogamous relationships – that’s me trying to save imperfect monogamous relationships. And all relationships are imperfect. We tell people that cheating is unforgivable. Then we turn around and redefine everything as cheating.” He is clear about this – if cheating includes watching porn, or being friends with someone at work, or keeping your exes’ photos on Instagram, you’re setting a relationship up to fail. He is scornful of the misinformation we share about sex and love, like a belief in “the one”, and every week he hints at the way things could be, if only we could untangle ourselves from the fairytales we’ve been fed. It’s not just readers who ask for his advice. “I have plenty of ‘physician heal thyself’ moments where Terry or my boyfriend will read back to me advice I’ve given that they think I’m not taking myself.” And he has friends who come to him and say, “‘It’s not fair that you found Terry, I can’t make anything last.’ I always end up talking about the bullshit reasons they dumped their last seven boyfriends. Because what they considered unforgivable? For us, that’s a Tuesday. We’ve had these conflicts too, and bigger ones. And the secret to our success is,” he leans into the camera, “we keep not getting a divorce!” Here’s his most universal piece of advice: people should have the most narrow definition of cheating as possible, and the broadest definition of sex. “In a way those are in conflict, I know. But couples who have a narrow definition of cheating are less likely to break up over cheating. And couples that have a broad definition of sex are likely to have an active sex life.” But for all his opinions, it’s the glossary he’s created – words he’s birthed to help articulate new and particular aspects of modern sex – that Savage will be remembered for. There’s “monogamish” of course, where a couple are “mostly monogamous”, and pegging (where a woman penetrates a man with a strap-on), or GGG, “good, giving and game” – good in bed, giving equal time and equal pleasure, and game for anything (within reason). There’s “the campsite rule” – older people’s responsibility to leave younger partners in at least as good a shape as they were at the start of the relationship. And there’s “santorum”. In 2003 Savage asked his readers to create a definition for the word in response to then-US senator Rick Santorum’s homophobia, the winning entry defining “santorum” as a frothy byproduct of anal sex. The word quickly displaced the senator’s name on search engines. “These words are going to outlast me by far,” he smiles. “As a writer, I’m very proud.” Occasionally Savage will be walking through an airport and somebody will approach him in tears. “It’s embarrassing to talk about because it sounds self-aggrandising. But people sometimes say that I saved their life, or their marriage, or they have kids because they read something I wrote and decided that it was possible for them. Those moments make me very uncomfortable, but they’re gratifying too.” And they make him consider who his column is really for. “One person sends a question, then countless people read the answer. But I can’t think about that too much because then I get self-important and sentimental.” After 30 years, a moment of self-importance is, I think, valid. His advice unpicks not only the problem, but the need for advice itself. Why do we read it? For the joy of rubbernecking, sure, but also to log the answer in case it’s useful one day in our wild and unknown futures, and because it opens hidden doors in the world we thought we knew. It is a rare thing he does, defining public conversations around sex in a generous way, elaborating on what consent looks like, offering a sophisticated and nuanced sex education to a country starved of it, remaining unblinkingly accountable, and also, reminding people that sex is meant to be fun. He’s not easily shocked, but this week he was sent a problem that rattled him in a very different way to the parents’ threesome. “It was heartbreaking, actually,” – in part, it seems, because Savage’s ethics appeared to have been weaponised against the letter-writer. “My boyfriend is a urophiliac,” she wrote, in cheery language scattered with LOLs. “If he doesn’t get to watch me pee every single time, he gets angry.” A shadow falls over the letter and it gets worse, and worse again, and then worse again, and then it becomes the worst. “This woman,” Savage explains, “agreed to indulge her husband’s kink, which then became basically a terror campaign being waged against her. She’s saying, ‘I don’t want to kink-shame my husband.’ And she’s so paralysed by the thought of somebody accusing her of ‘kink-shaming’ that she’s been manipulated into a relationship she can’t recognise as abusive.” They’ve just had a baby. “I mean,” he chokes, “These things can get you.” What does it feel like, I ask, to be the person people ask for help with a problem the size of this? “Sometimes it feels dangerous to give good advice.” I wait. “Because, often I’m in the position of telling people to leave someone who may be dangerous. And you know, somewhere in the back of your head you’re like, ‘Hmm, I hope he doesn’t come to my book event and kill me’.” He shrugs. At the beginning of the pandemic the Savage Lovecast started broadcasting “success stories”. “People who had figured out how to ask for what they wanted, or took pleasure in giving somebody else what they wanted. It’s some really excellent role modelling, and it’s titillating too. We wanted to show people who were…” he says, searching for the word, “happy?” For all the trickiness and woe in his work, it’s this – the glee, the joy, that lingers. He’s proud of the words he’s coined. But after immersing myself in his podcasts for one or two pleasant afternoons, it becomes obvious that while those words resonate, it’s the relationships they illuminate – their possibilities, their boundaries, the walls we didn’t realise we were propping up – and most importantly, Savage’s insistence on approaching them with kindness, that promise a kind of revolution. Savage Love from A to Z: Advice on Sex and Relationships, Dating and Mating, Exes and Extras, by Dan Savage, is out now (£14.57, amazon.co.uk)What’s that you say, Sweep? You hope you make a better price than Sooty? Well, history suggests the squeaky grey puppet might be disappointed, but the question will be decided on 18 November with the sale of two of the puppets used in the much-loved children’s television show. An authentic Sooty and Sweep, alongside a Soo, from the collection of the show’s former props expert and stage manager, the late Peter Jago, will make a special appearance at an auction held by Ewbank’s in Surrey. And so, too, will Sooty’s water pistol, a weapon that regularly wreaked damp havoc. Two years ago, a slightly older original Sooty puppet from the show sold at auction in Derbyshire for three times its initial estimate. The 50-year-old vintage model went for £3,100 to an American buyer, a birthday present for a “lifelong fan”. And in 2018, a Sooty puppet dating from the 1950s was sold by the auctioneer Hansons for £14,500. Masters of slapstick charm, Sooty and friends have been favourites for almost 70 years. The stars of TV’s longest-running programme for children, they were the creation of Harry Corbett. His son Matthew, who was known for appearances on the popular show Rainbow, took over as host of The Sooty Show in the mid-1970s and employed Jago, who had trained at the Central School of Speech and Drama in London, and worked in theatres, holiday camps and cruise ships. Beginning as a stage manager on the show in 1976, he went on to become production manager and one of the main puppeteers. Jago often played the role of Sweep’s dad and operated Sweep’s squeaky voice (originally created using a saxophone reed). And yet all the while Jago, who died in 2016, continued to make sets for the show, painting scenery and props. He even wrote music and several scripts for the programme. Sooty’s catchphrase “Izzy wizzy, let’s get busy” comes to mind. Jago left the show in 1985 but was drawn back into the world of Sooty and Sweep in 1993, working with Corbett Jr until the host’s retirement in 1998. Corbett, now 73, has since said he regarded Jago as the inspiration for the decision to frame individual episodes around a theme or narrative, rather than a series of sketches. The puppets and props from the show, including the notorious water pistol, are to go under the hammer together, but the star lot is the Sooty puppet used on the show during the 1990s, estimated to go for £1,000-£1,500. A Sweep puppet from the same period is guide priced at £500-£800, while a Soo, despite her colourful dress, is expected to go for £400-£600. Jago continued working as a stage manager and puppeteer with the Corbetts’ successor, Richard Cadell, who later bought the Sooty company, but he retired from the show in the early 2000s, occasionally returning to make a special appearance as a puppeteer. “This is a charming consignment from a talented man who devoted much of his professional life to keeping the Sooty flame alive for generations of children,” said Ewbank’s specialist Alastair McCrea. “As can be seen from his long association with the show, Peter Jago was held in high esteem by those he worked with. By maintaining his working materials so well over the years, he has left a legacy which will allow fans to hold on to their childhood memories. “This is going to be a memorable sale,” added McCrea, “but we are keeping a close eye on Sooty and Sweep to make sure they don’t try to take over the rostrum.”Amid soaring appetite for non-English-language shows and a growing global streaming market, it ought to be a golden time for subtitle translators. The popularity of shows such as the Korean megahit Squid Game, which attracted 111 million viewers in its first 28 days to become Netflix’s most watched series ever, the Spanish series Money Heist (La Casa de Papel) and the French drama Lupin have proved that subtitles are no block to pulling in huge global audiences. Last year Netflix reported that foreign language titles were up by more than 50% on 2019. But despite their crucial and highly skilled role, acting as conduits between the action on screen and millions of viewers around the world, the translators who painstakingly write the streamers’ subtitles – some of whom may be paid as little as $1 (75p) per minute of programme time – do not appear to have seen the rewards filtering down to them So bad is the status quo that after two years in the industry, freelance translator and copywriter Anne Wanders would discourage others from going into it at all. “It’s so sad that if anyone would ask me: ‘Oh, I saw this job listing, should I try to become a subtitle translator?’ I would have to tell them: ‘No you shouldn’t. It’s not worth your time,’” said the 40-year-old from Dortmund, Germany. Wanders, who translates English into German for streaming vendors, including one of the world’s largest subtitling companies, enjoys the job, which she finds both creative and challenging. But the pay, which she says can work out at below minimum wage, makes it unsustainable as a single source of income. “It’s great to have a job like that, but not if you need to side-fund it with your savings. Then it’s not a job. Then you’re being taken advantage of.” Professor Jorge Díaz-Cintas of the Centre for Translation Studies at University College London said that streaming platforms, which used to be largely dominated by English-spoken productions, have become “truly global”, and this, combined with the pandemic, has led to an explosion of demand. “The industry is experiencing a talent crunch because there aren’t enough experts in the subject and enough people qualified to be working in this field,” he said. Translators are paid per minute of programme time – even though a single minute of screen time can take hours to accurately and succinctly translate and subtitle – and usually work for outsourced companies known as language service providers (LSPs). “There is no lower limit [in pay]. It goes all the way to almost zero,” said Max Deryagin, chair of the British Subtitlers’ Association and a representative of Audiovisual Translators Europe. In theory, he added: “It should be a golden moment. We have insane volumes of work.” Instead, what he sees is widespread stress and burnout as subtitle translators try to make ends meet. This, he says, is leading the most experienced translators to leave the field for better-paid translation jobs or to switch professions entirely: “When the most experienced veteran subtitlers quit, they are quickly replaced with who? Amateurs, part-timers, students, people like that. Then, of course, that affects the quality – it becomes worse.” Many subtitle translators are bound by rules that prevent them from revealing what work they have done and for whom. Speaking out on Twitter, Los Angeles-based Japanese-to-English audiovisual translator Katrina Leonoudakis wrote: “Like every other industry that requires skilled labour, the problem isn’t that there’s a ‘shortage’. The problem is that companies don’t want to pay for the highly experienced translators that are available. ‘Shortage’ is always capitalist speak for ‘we don’t want to pay’.” Citing Pablo Romero-Fresco, honorary professor of translation and film-making at Roehampton University, who writes that more than 50% of revenue obtained by most films comes from translated and accessible versions, yet only 0.01-0.1% of budget is spent on them, Leonoudakis said: “Translation is a huge profit enabler for studios and streaming services. “Knowing that these multibillion-dollar companies refuse to pay a few more dollars to an experienced professional, and instead opt for the lowest bidder with mediocre quality, only speaks to their greed and disrespect not only for the craft of translation, but the art created by the film-makers they employ.” While in many ways an invisible art form, subtitles have the power to spark intense debate when they go wrong, as demonstrated by the criticism of Squid Game. Silhee Jin, president of the Korea Association of Translators and Interpreters and a professor at Chung-Ang University in Seoul, puts subtitle inconsistencies down to “chronic underpayment”, adding that it “discourages the right people from making a start in the market, and in some cases resorting to cheap machine translation solutions with minimal human involvement”. Outsourcing, she said, “leaves little left in the hands of the actual translators” and she believes there is a lack of motivation to train professionals.Another pressure for translators in today’s market is time. Mara Campbell, chief operating officer and founder of True Subtitles, which works for many of the vendors of the big streamers, including Disney+, Netflix and Amazon Prime , recalls that when she started translating subtitles in 1999 they would have a week to translate a film. Now they have two days. “I really don’t know if I was better off then than I am now, but it was always underpaid, that’s for sure. The turnaround times have been the worst thing,” she said. Today, she adds, professionals in the industry are still driven by passion, but pay is driving people out.Tiina Kinnunen, a translator who has beenin the industry for 30 years and subtitled Seinfeld and The West Wing into Finnish, says the LSPs have been putting money in the wrong direction “looking to automate lots of things”. She believes that technology has a role to play in the future of subtitle translation but that it needs to be handled carefully. “Whether it’s something that actually helps people do the job faster or whether it’s just technology for technology’s sake.”BT has come up with a brilliant way of stopping people phoning to complain when their broadband goes down. In future, if your broadband isn’t working, neither will your phone. This is because of something called Digital Voice that’s going to be rolled out across the BT network by the end of 2025. Digital Voice doesn’t mean that everyone making phone calls will sound like robots, fun though that would be. It means that, instead of plugging your phone into the telephone socket in the wall, you plug it into the back of your “wireless router”. You know, the object that makes the wifi happen – it’s got a light showing if it’s working and a range of lights for the various ways it might not be. A rainbow of illumination by which you are informed that now is not a moment when you’ll be permitted to buy cinema tickets. Obviously, this is an inconvenient development. You may not want to keep your home phone a wire’s length from your router. That may not be how your furniture is organised. Having said that, if your phones are those wireless handsets that live in charging cradles, it’s marginally less annoying because you only have to plug the “master” one of those into the router. The rest of the handsets can then soak in the invisible phoneability-juice that the main one has farted into the air (please excuse all the technical jargon). Thus you’ll still be able to phone people without being in the same room as the router. What a time to be alive! However, if you’ve got what I like to call “normal phones”, then only one will work and that has to be tethered to the router. For each of the others, you’ll need a “Digital Voice Adapter” (you get one free and have to buy any others from BT) that then plugs in, not to the phone socket, but to a normal plug socket. This is annoying in two ways: first, it uses up a plug socket, and they’re at a premium in this age of so many things needing charging. Second, it makes all the old phone sockets obsolete, like little wounds in the wall. BT isn’t going to be sending painter-decorators round to erase these defunct disfigurements that it induced us to fit. Maybe, in time, they’ll develop some charm and historical interest, like a Bakelite light switch or a servants’ bell, with particular cachet attached to those marked with the original British Telecom “T”, which date from the “Inphone” campaign of the early 1980s when the company was still in public ownership. But those aren’t the main disadvantages. And neither is the irritating fact that, for some reason, you’ll now have to dial the full area code even when phoning people in the same town as you. No, the big problem with it is that the phone doesn’t work if your broadband doesn’t, which also means that, unlike all previous sorts of landline, it won’t work during a power cut. If the electricity network is down, you won’t be able to ring anyone, including 999. But then, who ever heard of an emergency happening during a power cut? What does BT propose doing about this? In the instructions for the Digital Voice Adapter, it explains the new flaw that’s been introduced, adding: “So make sure you’ve got another way to call for help in an emergency.” Would shouting do? On the “Digital Voice migration” FAQ section of BT’s website, down near the bottom, it discreetly mentions the same thing, saying: “If you do not have a mobile or alternative means to call 999 please contact us on 0800 800 150.” Of course you’d have to do that in advance of the power cut. Maybe they’d send you a mobile? The postal system still currently works without wifi. What an admission of failure for a purveyor of landlines: make sure you’ve got a back-up phone. That’s like Ocado telling people to make sure they’ve got some food in. The landline was the back-up phone. Of late, that’s all it was there for: emergencies and ringing your own mobile when you’ve mislaid it. But I get it. Landlines aren’t used much. It’s like telephone boxes. Last week, it was reported that more than 1,000 phone boxes in the UK didn’t have a single call made from them for the whole of last year. Telecommunications are changing and the vast majority of people have mobiles and so this new system probably won’t meaningfully harm connectivity. I don’t like it, but I can live with it. What I can’t stand, however, is the way BT is presenting it to customers. I am aware of this because my landline was moved over to Digital Voice last week. This lamentable development was heralded by an email entitled “You’re good to go”. The message began by announcing, with eye-watering self-importance: “It’s the moment you’ve been waiting for.” The website continues this theme, characterising a reduction in service, an inconvenience and a tedious requirement to plug things in differently, as if it were a massive boon. It poses the question “Do I have to pay extra for Digital Voice?” and answers it proudly in the negative. But what kind of beaten-down, self-loathing, Ryanair frequent flyer would ask such a question? Do I have to pay extra for the new thing that’s worse? No? A free worsening! Oh my stars! There’s talk about marginal benefits “such as crystal-clear calls and the ability to block nuisance calls” and the nightmarish opportunity to buy new handsets with Amazon Alexa built in, but the basic pitch is that “upgrading to Digital Voice will have no impact on how you use your phone today”. Yet the scheme’s slogan is “Digital Voice. Your home phone, only better”. Surely “Your home phone, only sometimes it won’t work” would be more apt? This vacuous positivity belies a deep-seated contempt for the customer. BT is attempting to extort gratitude from the people on whom this system, for which they did not ask, is being imposed. How gullible does it think we are? It is not safe to let powerful corporations speak to us like that.Public toilets are not as convenient as they were. Getting caught short outside home has become an increasingly tricky problem as a result. The trouble has been caused by austerity-hit councils in the UK who are not legally required to provide toilets for the public and who have cut expenditure on them in order to protect services that they are obliged by law to provide for local people. The result is a major reduction of Ladies and Gents across the nation. According to Freedom of Information data obtained by local government researcher Jack Shaw and shared with the Observer, the number of public lavatories that local authorities have funded and maintained fell from 3,154 in 2015/16 to 2,556 in 2020/21 – a drop of 19% across the past six years, which comes on top of reductions in previous years. Public health workers have warned that this loss of public conveniences is now causing major problems for a range of people, including the homeless, disabled, outdoor workers and those whose illnesses dictate frequent toilet use. According to a 2019 report by the Royal Society for Public Health, imaginatively titled Taking the P***, the effect has been to create a “urinary leash” ,with one in five people stating that a lack of facilities in their neighbourhood means they restrict outings from their homes. This point was reinforced last week by Jyotsna Vohra, the society’s director of policy. “The dwindling number of public toilets is a health and mobility inequality that we cannot afford to ignore,” she said. “As is often the case with other health inequalities, the burden falls disproportionately on already disadvantaged groups, including disabled people, older people and people sleeping rough.” The closures of some public loos have, however, generated remarkable makeovers. One in Clapham, south London, is now a wine bar, for instance, with the “WC” standing for “wine and charcuterie”, while a former London Underground station toilet – said to have been frequented by Oscar Wilde and Joe Orton – has become a nightclub. Other ex-loos that have been put to alternative uses include one transformed into a cocktail bar in Kentish Town, north London, and another, in Devon, that has become a noodle bar. Old toilets also house art galleries in the south London boroughs of Kingston and Lambeth. Though pride of place for the most imaginative repurposing must go to the Theatre of Small Convenience, in Malvern, Worcestershire – the world’s smallest commercial theatre, according to the 2002 Guinness World Records. Once a gentlemen’s public toilet in Victorian times, it can accommodate audiences of up to a dozen playgoers. Apart from allowing the repurposing of their toilets, some councils have transferred ownership to local parish and town councils or community organisations as a way of keeping them open while simultaneously saving money. Powys council in Wales has transferred 56 toilets to other organisations, shutting another five and keeping only two, for example. Raymond Martin, managing director of the British Toilet Association, said that transferring ownership of public toilets could keep them open, but sometimes with a lower level of service. “You have a community group, or town or parish council, that’s trying to find something like between £2,000 and £5,000 a year to keep those toilets running,” he said. “So they’re having to do fun runs, or whatever: they’re trying to raise funds locally to do these things. In a lot of cases, they are successful – the toilets remain open – but they reduce the hours they’re open, and they have only limited resources to get them cleaned.” “A lot of them are doing an absolutely sterling job trying to keep these things open, but they’re really, really struggling in many cases to raise the money to keep these things alive.” Jyotsna Vohra warned that ad hoc community schemes could not on their own address the inequalities that were being caused by the closures. “The only way to achieve parity of access would be through appropriate legislation, backed with adequate funding.”The 2008 expenses scandal irrevocably damaged the reputation of British parliamentarians. It was only ever a minority of MPs who abused the system, claiming for duck houses, moat clearing and property renovations. Yet the revelations that a significant number milked the expenses system to get the most they could within the letter of the rules, and that a small handful broke the law, cemented many voters’ views that most MPs are primarily motivated by self-interest. That scandal should have been a reset moment, reminding MPs that the privilege of their office requires them to uphold the highest standards of integrity and to maintain the spirit, not just the letter, of the rules. But while there were many long-overdue improvements made to the rules around expenses, including the creation of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority and greater levels of transparency, the revelations about the number of MPs who are financially benefiting as a result of their office through questionable arrangements show that many did not learn the lesson of the expenses scandal. Owen Paterson’s egregious breaking of the rules on lobbying – and Boris Johnson’s botched attempt to help him evade accountability – has paved the way for renewed scrutiny into what some MPs still regard as legitimate ways to top up their salaries. The former attorney general Sir Geoffrey Cox has made at least £6m in additional income, including through practising as a lawyer, since 2005 and this is almost certainly an under-estimation. Some of that income has been derived by representing the premier of the British Virgin Islands in a British government investigation into corruption in the overseas territory; in a video, he appears to have done some of this work from the parliamentary estate, which would be against the rules, but which he denies. He spent considerable amounts of time away from parliament, in the Caribbean, while it was sitting, in order to do this work during the pandemic and made use of pandemic-related proxy voting rules to represent his constituents while absent. Cox has also been renting out the London home he bought with taxpayer assistance, instead charging taxpayers more than £22,000 a year for the rent on another flat. This is an arrangement that remains within the rules, which allows MPs who already own London properties partly funded by taxpayers under the old expenses system to act as landlords while they rent out other properties. It is not just Cox. Open Democracy has reported that the Conservative MP Marcus Fysh has a financial interest in a company that sells care insurance and tried to amend legislation to allow the government to use funds raised by the health and care levy to create cash incentives for insurance providers. Laurence Robertson, another Conservative MP, is paid £24,000 a year – £200 an hour – by the Betting and Gaming Council and has used parliamentary questions to warn ministers against introducing stronger gambling laws. Other MPs have taken lucrative private sector consultancy contracts: Sajid Javid earned £150,000 a year working for JP Morgan before he was appointed health secretary; Andrew Mitchell earns more than £180,000 a year for just over 30 days’ work advising various private sector businesses; Julian Smith earned £144,000 a year working for three companies including a hydrogen distributions company. Many more MPs have earned tens of thousands from their work outside parliament. The arguments for allowing MPs to undertake lucrative work outside parliament are self-serving in the extreme. We are supposed to believe that unless we allow backbench MPs to supplement their annual salary of more than £81,000 with additional work, this will compromise the quality of our elected officials. There is an argument for paying MPs more to bring their pay into line with other very senior public sector jobs, given their working hours, the nature of the job and their responsibilities. But if public service in the context of a generous remuneration package is not a sufficiently motivating factor for people to be an MP, they should not be in parliament. We do not hear the same arguments in favour of allowing headteachers or police superintendents to hold second jobs and for good reason. Allowing MPs to make lucrative sums from outside work opens up the risk of serious conflicts of interest that impede their capacity to represent their constituents. It encourages them to prioritise the needs of their clients above those of their constituents. The idea that some would not enter parliament without being able to boost their earnings ignores the fact that many are only able to command these positions and this level of compensation because they are MPs. The solution is simple: at the minimum, a cap should be introduced on outside earnings, which would allow MPs to undertake a very limited amount of modestly paid work. Rules on lobbying need to be more tightly enforced and the sanctions for breaking those rules increased to ensure MPs err on the side of caution in terms of taking on work that could pose a conflict of interest. But the huge unspoken problem is that we have a prime minister who – far from setting an example – is one of the worst culprits in parliament in terms of his lack of integrity and probity. He has been investigated by the parliamentary standards commissioner more than any other MP in the last three years; today, we report fresh revelations about his relationship with Jennifer Arcuri, whose company received thousands of pounds of public money while he was mayor of London. He embodies the damaging culture of entitlement that needs to be addressed. While he may eventually pay a personal political cost, the corruption of his premiership continues to damage voters’ trust in the political system.Nursing shortages are allowing “profiteering” staffing agencies to triple their rates, care leaders have warned, raising the risk of vulnerable patients being forced to move care homes and increasing the burden on the NHS. The crisis is forcing some nursing homes to become standard residential care homes without support for people with chronic diseases. The shortage also makes it harder for NHS hospitals to discharge patients. Some hospitals have redeployed their own staff into nursing homes to free beds in hospitals. In other places, NHS trusts are competing for staff with care providers. Geoff Butcher, director of Blackadder Corporation, which runs six homes in the West Midlands, said that he paid nurses about £19.50 an hour, slightly higher than the NHS rate of £16.52. “Two of our nurses resigned recently and they’ve gone to an agency for £35 an hour,” he said. “And that agency then came to us and said we can have these staff back at £52 an hour. They want £95 an hour for those nurses on a bank holiday nightshift. It’s utterly unaffordable. “Because the NHS can’t recruit they are having to use these agencies as well. So the NHS is bidding against us, therefore they’re pushing the rates up, and the whole thing has gone into a completely crazy spiral. The agencies are just grossly profiteering out of it. “Sometimes I’m finding out half an hour before the shift starts that people aren’t available. But when we see those agency workers again and ask what happened, they say ‘Oh we had to go to work for Wye Valley trust or Worcester general’. So we’ve been gazumped by the NHS or another operator. “We’re having to ask existing staff to do more shifts and backfilling with agency staff. We’re trying to find a way of recruiting people from overseas but that takes weeks rather than days.” In its annual report last month, the Care Quality Commission highlighted the case of “an established nursing home” that had deregistered because it could not find enough nurses, forcing 15 vulnerable residents to find a new home. The report said: “They said that there was such a shortage of nurses (and the fees were in the thousands every week for agency nurse cover) that it was untenable to continue providing nursing care.” Nadra Ahmed, chair of the National Care Association, said: “I think agencies have taken the opportunity to inflate their prices. It’s the effect of market forces, and that is really worrying. It’s profiteering. The government needs to step inin and moderate what’s happened. “You have an exhausted workforce, having come through Covid, when they were pretty much left on their own, and they have the option not to do it any more. They can choose not to work on Saturdays, or on nights. Agencies are aggressively recruiting and making money out of this, but you can see that some people do want a work-life balance.” She said the sector had always tried to recruit locally, but needed workers from overseas, adding: “That route is now closed and we’re not getting people coming through. Care workers are not on the shortage occupation list.” Vacancies in residential care have risen from 6% in April to 10.2% in September, and nursing vacancies are at 13.4%. Skills for Care data shows that 410,000 people left care jobs in the last 12 months. Care providers say they are unable to raise wages to compete with retailers such as Amazon because funding for many people in social care comes from government. Average weekly fees for nursing care paid by local authorities are £764 per person – much lower than the £1,075 required to generate a sustainable return, according to analysts LaingBuisson. NHS England began capping agency staff costs in 2016 by using approved “framework” agencies and running recruitment through a central body, NHS Professionals, although during the pandemic costs rose substantially. Eddy McDowall, chief executive of the Oxfordshire Association of Care Providers, said a similar system could be brought in by the Department of Health and Social Care. “A hidden issue has been nurses being poached by the NHS, either with subtle encouragement or overt recruitment,” he said. “An increasing number of care homes have been reporting care staff at all levels simply resigning and walking across to acute hospitals who were hiring.” A total of 45,328 staff working in older adult care homes had not had a second vaccination by 7 November, according to NHS figures. New rules on mandatory vaccinations for staff in care homes came into force last week, although workers have until Christmas to supply evidence that they are exempt from the requirement. More than 72,000 carers working in people’s homes or with younger adults have not yet had any Covid vaccination. They, along with NHS workers, will also be required to be fully vaccinated by April next year. The health department said: “We are working to ensure we have the right number of health and social care staff with the skills to deliver high-quality care to meet increasing demands. Care homes and home care providers will benefit from a new £162.5m workforce retention and recruitment fund to bolster the dedicated care workforce. “We also recently launched our made with care recruitment campaign to encourage people into a career in care. This follows the announcement of £5.4 bn of additional funding to reform social care over the next three years, including £500m to support training and career development for the workforce.”Mental health varies significantly across the country. Last year, estimated rates of mental disorder in children were as high as 20.5% in the West Midlands but just half that in London. There are also big gaps in how many people access mental health support. A new US study dug into huge variation among older adults across states: people over 65 in Massachusetts were twice as likely as those in Nevada to use mental health services. The records of those moving between areas reveals that most (60%) of the gaps in mental health care use were related to places themselves. That immediately makes you think about different levels of provision and quality, of the kind that encourages the setting of national standards; NHS England has just finished consulting on new promises, including that patients requiring urgent care are seen by mental health crisis teams within 24 hours. But differences in healthcare provision explain only a fifth of the place-driven variation - local attitudes towards mental health also make a big difference. This matters: higher use of mental health care services is associated with a lower suicide rate. This side of the Atlantic,we have our own variation, seeing 13.3 suicides per 100,000 people in the north-east last year v 9.3 in the East Midlands. The lesson? We need to improve the UK’s woeful provision of mental health services and maintain progress on attitudes towards asking for help. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgWhere is the border between real and imagined? In The Ocean at the End of the Lane, imagination cannot be trusted. This makes for an unsettling family show and not one for the fainthearted (or the under-12s). Neil Gaiman’s novel for young adults was published in 2013 and Joel Horwood’s adaptation was a hit for the National in 2019 – the transfer to the West End put on hold by the pandemic. This scarily arresting production opens on a glittery black thicket, arching over a wide aisle of stage that leads nowhere. James Bamford plays Boy, a bookworm who reads to escape his broken family, with nervy zeal. His mother has died, the lodger has killed himself in a car crash and a woman with designs on his dad has moved in. A black backdrop renders the domestic scenes unconventional (even the toast is reliably burnt and smokes hellishly). Throughout, designer Fly Davis honours the idea that what is imagined is as much about terror as salvation. Gaiman reveals, in a programme essay, that the story’s “interior landscape” is autobiographical, and it is this landscape that is externalised, with bold theatricality, by director Katy Rudd, lighting designer Paule Constable and a new cast. Boy ignores his annoying Sis (a convincing Grace Hogg-Robinson) to make friends with Lettie Hempstock, played by Nia Towle with radiant warmth. Lettie is no ordinary girl next door. The Hempstocks, a farming family, seem to exist outside time and be possessed of an outlaw wisdom. They are presided over by long-haired, clairvoyant Old Mrs Hempstock (“I remember when the moon was made”), played with eccentric verve by Penny Layden. But it is Nicolas Tennant as Boy’s father (doubling as a grown-up version of Boy) who makes the show credible, as an entertaining, troubling, shambolic presence who takes bad parenting decisions at every turn. Gaiman reminds us that knowing how, what and whom to believe are key challenges growing up. But in his world, this is complicated by primeval monsters: a larger-than-life flea with ravaged bones and ripped wings made me duck my head like a frightened child. The puppetry is phenomenal (directed by Finn Caldwell). Boy, taking a hint from CS Lewis’s cupboard leading to Narnia, decants himself through a window in what proves to be a terrifying miscalculation when his father’s fancy woman – Laura Rogers – descends, like a human puppet, looking somewhere between a Stepford wife and a corrupt Mary Poppins. Thankfully, the show has its doses of curative magic too. I particularly loved the idea that the fabric of family life could be restored by needlework – Old Mrs Hemstock’s invisible mending. Little Scratch is based on Rebecca Watson’s much-hailed and original debut novel, published last year. Four actors stand behind microphones as if about to sing, and what follows amounts to spoken music, a quartet directed – or conducted – by Katie Mitchell with perfect pitch. This is an interior monologue that follows a day in the life of a young woman (you would not expect it to translate to theatre at all). But the four actors play the woman and each exists like a layer of her mind, a competing thought, part of the whole. The overlaying sound effect is extraordinary. Her thoughts include entertainingly pedestrian shorthand about the mechanics of the morning: putting on tights, “push… wiggling… in!”, tube travel, checking a boyfriend’s movements on WhatsApp (“two grey ticks…”) and watching the clock. But the point is that this is a private mind unedited, exposed, revealing – on the loo, in a lift, in bed. The text is by turns banal, fresh, sexual, entertaining, devastating – always in the present tense. But what Miriam Battye’s accomplished adaptation awakens, above all, is outrage. The young woman has been raped by her boss (the “little scratch” refers to her self-harming). The wonderful Eve Ponsonby’s light-filled presence makes what she describes – her boss as predator, herself as prey – all the more distressing. She is unerringly supported by Eleanor Henderson, Morónkẹ́ Akinọlá and Ragevan Vasan (it’s pleasingly thought-provoking to stir a male voice into the mix). The irony of a play that speaks out about not being able to speak out intensifies as the evening advances. There is not a false note anywhere. I’ve never seen – heard – anything like it. It might, all the same, be fair to add that Little Scratch would not exist had Beckett, master of monologues, never put pen to paper. His plays are defined by desertion, as if his characters were the last people on Earth. In Footfalls (1976), an anguished middle-aged woman, May, in a grey cardigan (brilliantly played, with pinched anguish, by Charlotte Emmerson) paces up and down. The click of her heels is like the ticking of a clock. The marking of time is crucial to an evening that lasts 40 minutes but invokes eternity. May is carer for her mother, outstandingly played by Siân Phillips, who makes the maternal dangerous in a disembodied voice that exerts spooky control: “There is no sleep so deep I wouldn’t hear you there,” she confesses – the most unreassuring of assurances. Rockaby (1981) works as a lonely companion piece to Footfalls, a hopeless lullaby in which an old woman in a rocking chair approaches death. Beckett’s disturbed syntax is suggestive of a body breaking down. The word “end” proves repeatedly inconclusive, a conjunction, a desperate continuation. Phillips sounds civilised, composed, her consoling voice in contrast to her comfortless lines. You notice in particular the absence of the first person, as if “I” were a luxury that could no longer be afforded. The Jermyn Street theatre is to be congratulated on recruiting such star turns, intently directed by Richard Beecham, to an extraordinarily bleak mid-autumn project. Star ratings (out of five) The Ocean at the End of the Lane ★★★★ Little Scratch ★★★★★ Footfalls/Rockaby ★★★★ The Ocean at the End of the Lane is at the Duke of York’s, London, until 12 February Little Scratch is at Hampstead Theatre Downstairs, London, until 11 December Footfalls/Rockaby is at Jermyn Street theatre, London, until 20 NovemberClose to Me 9pm, Channel 4 Jo – still wildly suspicious of everyone, and feeling particularly alienated from her son – carries on trying to piece together the last year of her life. Tonight, will a mysterious visitor deliver an important missing piece of the puzzle? Despite verging on hammy throughout, this amnesiac thriller continues to be a guiltily good watch. Hollie Richardson Doctor Who: Flux 6.30pm, BBC One It’s the midway point for the Flux storyline, and the Doctor, Dan, Yaz and mysterious space-traveller Vinder are fighting for their lives (cue gravelly film trailer voiceover) “on a planet that shouldn’t exist in the aftermath of an apocalypse”. A classic set-up for a complex plot with various strands that will surely pay off later. Ali Catterall Top Gear 8pm, BBC One Laps of judgment: the latest series of the BBC’s enduring motoring magazine gets off to a high-octane start as three F1 drivers join Freddie Flintoff, Chris Harris and Paddy McGuinness at Silverstone to put three low-slung supercars through their paces. There is also an appreciation of revered stunt biker Eddie Kidd. Graeme Virtue Showtrial 9pm, BBC One The pace ramps up a bit halfway into the miniseries, picking up moments after Dhillon tells police that he and Talitha “didn’t have any intention of hurting Hannah”. Flashbacks from the night she was killed may fill in the gaps – but can we trust his take on events? HR Angela Black 9pm, ITV Joanne Froggatt’s praised performance comes to an end in the domestic abuse drama. With the evidence against Olivier destroyed, Angela must once again act with all the odds stacked against her. Will she finally be able to take him down? HR Tareena: Return from Isis 10.20pm, ITV What drives a young woman to take her one-year-old son to Syria and join Islamic State? This documentary follows Tareena Shakil, the first UK woman to return from Syria and be prosecuted, as she attempts to rebuild her life post-imprisonment. An illuminating look at radicalisation – and whether people deserve second chances. Henry Wong Film choice They Shall Not Grow Old, 9pm, BBC Four The colourisation of vintage black-and-white footage can be a fraught business – there are some horrific manglings of classic movies out there. But Peter “Lord of the Rings” Jackson is far from a slipshod film-maker. His stupendous first world war documentary, with computer-treated footage of the western front from the Imperial War Museum, is a faultless exercise in bringing the conflict to colourful life. Using audio interviews with veteran soldiers, and with actors lip-syncing any onscreen chat, the experience of war is grounded in individuals who live and breathe before our eyes. Simon Wardell Days of the Bagnold Summer, 11.20pm, Film4 The soundtrack of Simon Bird’s 2019 feature directorial debut, an adaptation of Joff Winterhart’s graphic novel, epitomises the emotional fine tuning at its heart. In the deliciously awkward spot between the teen angst of Belle &amp; Sebastian and the death metal loved by its 15-year-old protagonist sits a closely observed comedy about a boy and his mother. Daniel (Earl Cave, son of Nick) is in a sulk after his absent father in Florida cancels his holiday there; even worse, he now has to spend more time with his mum, Sue (the superb Monica Dolan). A low-key jewel. SW While We’re Young, 1.25am, Great! Movies A childless fortysomething couple – Ben Stiller’s Josh, who lectures about documentary film rather than finishing the one he’s been making for eight years, and his producer wife Cornelia (Naomi Watts) – are lured into the seemingly carefree lives of hip twentysomething film-maker Jamie (Adam Driver) and his spouse Darby (Amanda Seyfried). Noah Baumbach’s smart 2014 comedy plays slyly with notions of authenticity as the younger pair exploit Josh and Cornelia’s desire to fend off the evils of middle age. SW Live sport Women’s International Rugby Union: England v Canada 2pm, BBC Two. A friendly at Twickenham Stoop. International Rugby Union: Wales v Fiji 3.15pm, Amazon Prime Video. Autumn international from Cardiff.Fatima Ahmadi only stopped screaming when the Taliban held a knife to her child’s throat, and told her: “Shut up, or we will kill your son.” They had burst into the policewoman’s Kabul home one late September morning, demanding she hand over her weapons. She told the Taliban she had no guns at home, but they said she was lying, ransacked the house, then began beating her, pulling out handfuls of hair, and when she would not stop shouting, they grabbed her nine-year-old son. The knife was pressed so violently into his throat it left a red welt, visible in photographs seen by the Observer. Ahmadi’s back was covered with bruising from an assault so vicious that she lost control of her bodily functions. The men eventually left, but with an ominous warning. “We will come back.” A divorced single mother of two young children, Ahmadi had no idea who gave the Taliban her address, or what they might do on a return visit, but she knew the family couldn’t risk waiting to find out. There have been several murders of female police officers since the hardline group took control of Afghanistan, including a vicious attack on one woman who was eight months pregnant. So she packed her bags, went into hiding and days later managed to flee with her two boys to Pakistan. But their visa is only valid for 60 days and she is terrified about what will come next; Pakistani authorities are deporting Afghans without documents. “When I arrived, I slept for three nights and days, because I hadn’t been sleeping for weeks, but now I am worried again. And Mirwais, my son who had the dagger put to his throat by the Taliban, he wakes up screaming in the night,” she told the Observer. She has tried to apply for refugee status in Pakistan through the United Nations, but has had no response yet. Asylum applications to western countries that sponsored police training, and encouraged women to join the force, have met with silence, despite the documented evidence of threats to her and her children’s lives. “I don’t care about myself, I am already done. All I think about is a future for my children, somewhere peaceful where they can study,” she said. “I don’t want their lives to be like mine.” With the frantic evacuations that followed the fall of Kabul long finished, the risks to Afghans who fear for their lives under the Taliban are fading from the headlines. But there are regular reports of reprisal killings, despite an official amnesty for anyone who worked in the security forces or for the last government. Thousands of people are still in hiding inside Afghanistan and thousands more like Ahmadi are clinging to precarious safety in neighbouring countries. “There is a group of people we have heard less about in recent months, who have made it out of Afghanistan but not been able to reach anywhere that is safe for them and can be a new home,” said Heather Barr, associate director for women’s rights at Human Rights Watch. They have no legal status as refugees in the countries to which they have temporarily escaped, and live in permanent fear of deportation back to Afghanistan. Both Iran and Pakistan, which have taken in millions of Afghans over decades of war in the country, have said they will not accept another wave of refugees. “There are a lot of people out there who are in this kind of limbo like Fatima Ahmadi. They are really stuck and have claims to needing asylum in some of the countries that contributed troops to the Afghan mission, just as much as those who were evacuated, or those still trying to escape Afghanistan,” says Barr. Ahmadi does not know why she was targeted on that afternoon in Kabul, but her life was a template for the opportunities the west claimed to offer Afghan women, and her courage and achievements represent everything Taliban authorities hate. She was forced to marry an abusive, drug-addicted husband when she was just 12, and he beat her so badly she has been left with a permanent limp and memory problems. She was astonished and delighted when a decade ago, desperate for money and unable to work himself, he pushed her to join the police force. She loved her job and it eventually gave her the confidence and money to get a divorce. “I had always admired the police cars, the guns, so I was very excited and grabbed the opportunity. It was my dream to work as a policewoman,” she said. “It changed my life.” In 2020, confident that Afghanistan was changing, she went public with accusations of sexual harassment inside the police and the interior ministry. One of the men she says targeted her was a deputy minister. She put out a video of herself burning her ID documents in protest, but her public stance unleashed a torrent of online abuse and three physical attacks, on the street and at her own home, that forced her into temporary exile. Her own family refused to help her because they said allegations that she had to fend off lecherous bosses brought shame on them. After the publicity and fury died down, she came back to Afghanistan, and begged for her job back. “I got back my confidence when I was working again,” she said. But 10 days later, the Taliban swept into Kabul. “On the first day I went to work, but I was told to empty my office and go home. I felt destroyed, because I knew the Taliban wouldn’t allow women to work, and I was thinking about how I would feed the children.” She also worried that her husband might go to the Taliban and demand custody of their boys. Then the bodies of former policewomen started turning up around the country and she realised that the threats were even more serious. There was a long list of people who might wish her dead, from the criminals she had helped bring to justice, to former colleagues, perhaps even her own relatives and of course the Taliban, whose vicious attack finally pushed her into exile. “Until the flight took off, I kept thinking that the Taliban were going to stop me, take me off. I thought next time they come it will be to kill me, and I was so very scared they will get me in the airport.” Now she lives in fear of being sent back, but can only wait to see if the countries that claimed they went to Afghanistan to help its women, and urged them to sign up for the police force, will give her refuge. “I can’t make any plans,” she said. “Nothing is in my hands.”How close is the smartphone or laptop you’re reading this on from your eyes? Probably just a few inches. How long have you spent looking at a screen today? If you’re close to the average it’s likely to be over nine hours. New research from ophthalmologists shows that our constant screen time is radically changing our eyes. Just like the rest of our bodies, the human eye is supposed to stop growing after our teens. Now it keeps growing. When our eyes spend more time focusing on near objects, like phones, screens or even paperbacks, it makes our eyeballs elongate, which prevents the eye from bending light the way it should. This elongation increases nearsightedness, called myopia, which causes distant objects to appear blurred. Myopia affects half of young adults in the US, twice as many as 50 years ago and over 40% of the population. For adults this might cause eye strains or speed up existing vision issues. But for kids, whose eyes are still developing, the situation is so dire that the American Academy of Optometry and American Academy of Ophthalmology both consider myopia an epidemic. Working for prolonged periods, whether texting, reading or jotting emails is what optometrists call “near work”. The trouble with holding a screen close to your face isn’t about light shining into your eyes, it’s about the strain of the eye. For one, your eyes blink far less when they’re focused so closely. As you’re holding your phone in your hand, performing near work, your muscles stretch and your lenses shift since our eyes over-accommodate to constant close-distance tasks. That’s why they’re growing. When you put on a pair of glasses, your eye muscles relax because they’re no longer straining. Ditto if you put down your phone – sans glasses – blink a couple times and stare off into the distance for 20 seconds. Does this affect you? Probably. How much extra time on screen have you had in the past 18 months? How much work have you been doing from home? Pre-pandemic, our phones were already constant companions. When many of us began working from home and e-learning last year, researchers predicted this dramatic online increase would cause never-before-seen eye dysfunction. They were right. Last spring, Chinese researchers tested over 120,000 Covid-quarantined students aged six to eight and found myopia and other vision issues linked to home confinement increased up to three times compared with the previous five years – that’s with as little as 2.5 more hours of e-learning (not counting video games, social media, etc). Results for US students could be much higher since many American kids spend most of their days online. “Virtual learning has definitely increased myopia,” says Dr Luxme Hariharan, of the Nicklaus children’s hospital in Miami, Florida, who points anecdotally to a huge shift in cases in the last year. “Prolonged near work [like looking at screens up close] makes our eyes overcompensate.” “We can clinically measure the millimeter lengthening of the eyeball,” explains Dr Eric Chow, a Miami, Florida optometrist. “Studies have shown that the longer the axial length, the higher the risk of eye diseases like glaucoma, retinal detachment and cataracts.” Straining vision introduces a host of eye-related health problems. And it’s more than just kids needing prescriptions. “People say ‘oh, it’s just glasses,’” says Dr Aaron Miller, a pediatric ophthalmologist at Houston Eye Associates. “The nearsighted have much higher chances of retina tears and glaucoma, bigger issues secondary to nearsightedness. It’s the long game we worry about.” He adds: “The shape of the eye is round like a basketball,” he explains. “When an eye becomes nearsighted, myopic, the eye is longer, like a grape or olive. The retina – the coating – can get stretched and thinned. As we age, sometimes there can be breaks in the retina. Like cracks in wallpaper. When that occurs, these cracks cause fluid to enter in behind the wallpaper, that’s what we call retinal detachment which causes a lot of people to go blind.” This isn’t just a western problem. There is a genetic component here, but it’s clear that behavior accelerates the change. Poor eyes can lead to decreased work efficiency and huge loss of productivity – think money–for multinationals. That’s why nations like China are so worried about this that they have already changed their education system, limiting how long students study – even extra tutoring – to curb the near-work that heightens myopia. The US should do the same, says Miller. Labeling myopia a second public health crisis is no hyperbole. 10-year-old Aleena Joyce’s screen time tripled in the last 18 months, with many school days – and two-thirds of Aleena’s waking hours – held almost entirely on her iPad. The Illinois fourth-grader had already been diagnosed with myopia – nearsightedness – in kindergarten, and her eyes had worsened each year. “Sometimes we would have to go in prior to her annual eye exam because she noticed more difficulty with reading the board at school,” says Yusra Cheema, Aleena’s mother. Aleena was one of a handful of students who said that their vision had markedly worsened in connection with increased screen time. The parents of Alan Kim, the child actor and nine-year-old Minari star, said their son’s prescription doubled in the last year in part due to the near work of on-set studies held on his iPad. Each child now uses new FDA-approved contact lenses that effectively reshape the eye to slow down myopia. But most parents and their kids have no idea this issue even exists. These problems affect adults too. Constant connection can heighten high or degenerative myopia, severe nearsightedness that progressively worsens and can lead to cataracts, glaucoma and retinal detachment – since the eyeball stretches and the retina thins – but thankfully, it’s rare. Risk grows with age, and can speed up gradual loss of the eye’s ability to focus, called presbyopia. Detection can help. Home approaches like GoCheckKids, an FDA-registered vision screening app allows any parent to take a photo of their child’s eyes to analyze how light refracts and measure their risks for near or farsightedness and other eye diseases. Specialized contact lenses are another major tool, says Dr Michele Andrews, a vice-president of CooperVision, the company behind the FDA-approved MiSight contacts. “It’s a contact geared for children aged eight to 12 whose eyes are growing,” she explains, “Which slow down the progression of myopia and change the shape of the eyeball.” Last week at the American Academy of Optometry meeting in Boston, an annual eye research conference, Andrews presented the results of a seven-year study that showed abnormal axial length growth slowed by an average of 50% among eight-to-17-year-olds who wore her company’s corrective contacts. Perhaps most striking is for those who suffered from myopia, wore the lenses, then stopped wearing them, “we learned there is no rebound effect,” she says. “Myopia did not come back” after kids stopped wearing her company’s contacts. That’s because these lenses “change the way the light bends inside the eye and pulls the image in front of the retina”, she says, which slows axial growth because the clear image is now in front of the retina. If there’s no reason to grow then the problem resolves itself early. As myopia is typically most pronounced – and dangerous – as the eyes grow, this solution is geared for kids. But adults have hope too. “Spend more time outdoors,” recommends Chow, at least two hours daily. “Studies have shown that increased sunlight decreases myopia progression.” Most important is taking breaks which help eyes rest, blink and lubricate. Then there’s the 20-20-20 model. “Every 20 minutes, look at a distance 20 feet away, for 20 seconds,” Hariharan advises. “Being on the computer for hours on end isn’t good for your health. Don’t break to play video games or pick up another screen. Go outside!” This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to correct a typo and to clarify how MiSight contacts work.Céline Sciamma makes small films about stolen moments, secret selves and outsiders who have crafted a vital life in the shadows. Her subjects are the overlooked and the unrecognised, whether that’s a band of black schoolgirls from the Paris banlieue or windswept gay lovers in 18th-century Brittany. One way or another, these people are in search of sanctuary and empowerment. Her fanbase, I’m guessing, have already found both in her work. “In all my films, it’s always the same,” she says. “It’s always about a few days out of the world, where we can meet each lover, love each other. Also it’s always about female characters because they can be themselves only in a private place where they can share their loneliness, their dreams, their attitudes, their ideas.” Her pictures are intended as a kind of safe space. Obviously for the protagonists; hopefully for an audience, too. I’ve been following Sciamma’s career for more than a decade, fondly imagining her as a vibrant niche interest only to belatedly realise that I’m merely part of a herd – and that, moreover, its numbers are growing by the year. On the eve of her 43rd birthday, she’s jumped from the arthouse fringes of Water Lilies and Tomboy to score a cult hit with Girlhood and kiss the mainstream with 2019’s award-winning period romance Portrait of a Lady on Fire. At this year’s London film festival, the director is roared onstage like some conquering heroine; the creator of intimate human dramas that cry out to the world. “A victim of my own success,” she snorts. “Well, yeah, maybe that’s not a bad problem to have.” We meet one grey Saturday morning inside a cloistered hotel suite overlooking the road. She’s only just risen and is still readying for battle. She has sleep-dust in her eyes, a mask hooked about the elbow of her bomber jacket and a pack of Marlboro Gold on the table at her side. As soon as we’re done, she admits, she’s nipping outside for a smoke. Sciamma has grown big. Fortunately, the films have stayed small. Her latest, Petite Maman, is a gorgeous miniature, a fairytale of sorts, complete with a haunted cottage, a magic forest and a primitive treehouse that doubles as a time-machine. In the course of a svelte 72-minute running time, Sciamma spins the story of eight-year-old Nelly, reeling from the death of her grandmother, who befriends a girl in the woods behind the abandoned family home. A more conventional picture might have chosen to tease out the connection between these two playmates. Petite Maman, to its credit, cuts straight to the chase. “I’m your daughter,” Nelly tells Marion. “I come from the path behind you.” The trouble with drama, says Sciamma, is that it’s invariably built around ideas of conflict. It’s about rivals and enemies; resolution through violence. Whereas she wanted to do something different: to construct a tense, high-stakes drama in which the players are open and broadly on the same page. She says: “If you start a scene where the characters are negotiating and agreeing, I’m suddenly full of attention. Now what’s going to happen? The possibilities are limitless. This scene could go anywhere.” Specifically where Petite Maman goes is deep into the relationship between an unreliable mother and her bruised, anxious child. Its magic-realist conceit serves to erase the years and place its two protagonists eye-to-eye. The tragedy of families, Sciamma explains, is that we are only in sync with our parents when we reach the age that they were – and by that point of course they have already moved on. “We only meet our mothers politically when we grow up. We understand the decisions they made and the specific pressures they were under. The political system. The reproductive system. At some point we read the world the same as they did. But through fiction, through time-travel, we can do it from a place of equality.” Watching Petite Maman, with its spooky wood and eerie children (perfectly embodied by twins Joséphine and Gabrielle Sanz), I caught myself thinking of Angela Carter’s short stories, or some mysterious painting by Paula Rego. Sciamma cites Hayao Miyazaki and Back to the Future as other possible references. But inevitably the real inspiration was much closer to home. “I designed it as a kind of therapeutic tool,” she says. “And there was a personal question I asked myself with this film. If I met my mother when [we were both] eight years old, what would our relationship be? Would she be my sister? Would we be friends? Would we share the same father? All those kind of things.” It must have been strange for her mother, watching those questions played out on the screen. “Yeah, I don’t know.” She shakes her head; her earrings dance. “She saw the film. I know she saw the film. She didn’t comment on it.” You didn’t ask her? Another head-shake, this one almost frantic. “Ah,” she says. “No.” The penny drops. Oh, I say. You and your mum are not close. “No.” Sciamma winces. “I mean, this is not something to say. Not something to discuss. But I’m not going to bullshit you. It’s true, we’re not close.” * * * Sciamma was raised in Cergy-Pontoise, north-west of Paris, ostensibly by her parents, spiritually by the movies. Her paternal grandmother, she recalls, was a fan of classic Hollywood: Fred Astaire, Cary Grant and James Stewart. And then as a teen she discovered Utopia, an arthouse cinema in Cergy that she would visit as much as three times every week. It was inside Utopia that she got the idea of working in film, although her first job after college was in the marketing department of an internet startup. “It was the early 2000s, the moment of the startups. In nine months we lived the whole life of a business. It was a business flight simulator. We’re up, we’re flying. Argh, we’ve crashed.” She laughs. “After that I went to film school.” Sciamma’s plan was to become a screenwriter, possibly a critic. Directing felt too precarious a profession, too much a male-only preserve. In the event she promptly landed behind the camera, shooting the script she had written as her final-year project. It was, she recalls, her first time calling the shots. Her first time as the leader. She winces again when she says the L-word. “Yeah, leader, it sounds so arrogant and patriarchal. But cinema has a very strong hierarchy. And as a director you have to answer all the questions. If someone lights a cigarette they show you 10 boxes of matches and you pick the one to be used. Basically that’s the job. What kind of light switch do you want on the wall? What colour paint do you want on the wall? So yes, you’re the leader. But what you are doing is answering 50 or 60 or 100 questions a day.” The sexually charged Water Lilies was a classic first film, a statement of intent. Sciamma shot it in her home town of Cergy, installing her partner, Adèle Haenel, as the centrepiece of a synchronised swimming team. She wanted to bottle the confusion and longing of adolescence; to make every viewer see the world through the eyes of a teenage girl. But the shock of the new blindsided some critics. “Watching [Water Lilies],” wrote the Observer’s Philip French at the time, “makes male viewers feel like voyeurs.” “Ouch!” says Sciamma when I read this aloud. “That’s crazy. That’s not what I meant. But it’s always interesting, people’s perception of the film, because it’s always changing.” That’s the thing about films. They’re different each time we revisit them, but that’s because we’ve changed, or the culture’s changed. She explains that Water Lilies contains a scene in which one of the swimmers is pressured into sex with her boyfriend. Sciamma was thinking about it the other day and realised that what she’d actually filmed was a rape. “But I would never have called it that. It was just first-time sex going bad. And then later on the boy comes back and tries to kiss her and she spits in his mouth. Now at the time, 2007, everyone in the audience went ‘Ugh’, because they were disgusted with her for doing that. Now it’s different. Right before the pandemic, Adèle showed the film at a high school and she called me up after and said that the reaction had changed. Everyone was whooping and clapping. They thought she’d done the right thing.” At this point she is briefly interrupted by a coughing fit. She doubles over; her earrings jiggle. She says: “It’s OK, I got tested,” and gestures at the packet on the table. It’s the cigarettes – not the virus – that are messing with her lungs. Haenel and Sciamma’s relationship fizzled out after a few years. But their creative collaboration continues to this day. In Portrait of a Lady on Fire, Haenel plays Héloïse, an aristocrat betrothed to a Milanese nobleman, who embarks on a passionate affair with the artist (played by Noémie Merlant) sent to paint her. Again it’s a film in thrall to the female gaze, a story about staring at beauty and then painting it on the screen. Sciamma has likened the process of making it to a set of nesting dolls: her looking at the camera looking at Merlant looking at Haenel. Tangentially, the film explores the complexities of Sciamma and Haenel’s relationship – almost to the point where it dovetails with an older, more sexist tradition. Isn’t it, at heart, a film about the great artist and the muse? Sciamma has barely recovered from one coughing fit. Now I’m in danger of provoking another. “No, no,” she splutters. “It’s just the opposite. Yes of course it’s me and Adèle and of course it’s talking about the idea of the muse. But it’s subverting it, getting rid of it. Portrait is saying that there’s no such thing as a muse. It’s only collaborators inspiring each other.” Buoyed up by rave reviews, Portrait of a Lady on Fire picked up nine nominations at the César awards (the French equivalent of the Oscars). It took home only one (for Claire Mathon’s luminous cinematography). When Roman Polanski (who was arrested for drugging and sexually assaulting 13-year-old Samantha Geimer in 1977, spending 42 days in jail before fleeing the US) was controversially named as the winner of the best director prize, Sciamma and Haenel left the ceremony in protest. Footage from the event showed Haenel applauding sarcastically and shouting: “Bravo paedophilia!” Sciamma pulls a face. It’s a subject she would prefer not to discuss; the walk-out was statement enough. “It was a thing that happened,” she says. “It just happened, that’s all.” A public protest at the Césars doesn’t just happen. “No, OK.” She pulls a face. “But there was no plan. It’s all about the moment, a matter of seconds. It’s about moving your legs, as simple as that. And that’s hard. It’s hard to stand up, hard to move your legs. I understand why people don’t. But sometimes you have to.” In any case, the issue wasn’t so much Polanski as the culture itself. The French film establishment, she feels, is institutionally sexist, unapologetically hidebound. The industry is run by old white men who are terrified of change. That’s why she’s had to carve out a space on the margins, celebrating her rebel girls and their secret lives. She says that if her homeland won’t listen, maybe the rest of the world will. In July, Julia Ducournau’s bloody body-horror Titane won the Palme d’Or at Cannes. In September Audrey Diwan’s exacting abortion drama Happening took the top prize at Venice. Then, later that month, Petite Maman completed a hat-trick of French victories by claiming the audience award at the San Sebastián film festival. “So, you see, I think it’s finally changing,” says Sciamma. “French female film-makers are becoming more of a presence, because they are becoming more global, with more international funding and recognition. And yes, I see the Golden Lion in Venice and the Palme d’Or in Cannes being handed to French women by international juries and it makes me happy. It’s a good sign, a big change. It means we no longer have to rely on our own industry to survive.” That’s putting a positive spin on a bad situation. She’s saying French cinema is stuck in the mud but thankfully the world has now thrown it a lifeline. “Well, yeah,” she laughs. “But that’s better than us still being stuck in the mud, too.” We’ve talked for more than an hour and those cigarettes aren’t going to smoke themselves. We take the stairs to the street, where it has now started to rain. “You want one?” she says, but I reckon I’ve detained her long enough. She’s under an awning, her collar turned up, patting her pockets to locate a lighter. She’s finally earned a stolen moment of her own. This article was amended on 17 December 2021 because an earlier version had misidentified the character in Water Lilies who is pressured into sex with her boyfriend. Petite Maman is in cinemas from 19 NovemberHuma Qureshi has the perfect title for her short story collection. Things We Do Not Tell the People We Love strikingly encapsulates a major theme of the book: the inability to communicate honestly with the most important people in your life. Qureshi’s stories keenly identify the everyday tragedies of feeling profoundly unknown or unheard, of holding secrets and misunderstandings. Formerly a writer for the Observer and the Guardian, Qureshi published a memoir, How We Met, earlier this year about dating men her parents considered marriage material, before falling in love with a white British man. Her own story could slot neatly into this, her first fiction anthology. Qureshi’s stories feature a cast of – mostly – youngish women of Pakistani heritage, often struggling with overbearing, judgmental and oppressive mothers, blindly insensitive male partners, or both. These tales vividly capture the experience of feeling constrained by family expectations, but also of not quite fitting the norms of British culture either. The terrain can get repetitive; this dilemma is usually felt by women who’ve left behind immigrant communities for a white, middle-class London milieu; there are many writers and journalists. Pressure points recur, too: in several stressful holidays, tolerable relationships become intolerable. And occasionally, the responses to monstrous mothers tip into melodrama; although it won the Harper’s Bazaar 2020 short story prize, I didn’t quite buy the murderous intent in The Jam Maker. But usually, Qureshi takes the reader plausibly inside the inner recesses of characters’ hearts and minds. Premonition beautifully recalls the intensity of a first crush, developed via “a private symphony of glances”, before a bewildering first kiss leads to disaster. And she captures how such incidents can, in adulthood, seem insignificant and still life-defining. One of the strongest stories – and surely the most heartbreaking – takes the perspective of one of Qureshi’s forceful mothers, Shaheen, who remains oblivious to how she smothers her daughter. The author renders her incomprehension painfully acute, while allowing the reader to see the big picture Shaheen misses. There is, however, a tendency to spell out her characters’ feelings – needlessly, given we can easily read them between the otherwise well-crafted lines. She also occasionally overdoes the similes, but it would be hard to argue for much paring back when there are so many striking images to relish. A strung-out mother’s eyes feel “as thin as paper from sleeplessness, as though if she rubbed them too hard they might accidentally rip apart”. A hot summer is “as perfectly formed as a china tea set”. A grieving lover tastes their partner in “the glue of my raw morning mouth”. It all bodes well for Qureshi’s forthcoming novel, about – what else? – “family, belonging and identity”. Holly Williams’s debut novel, What Time Is Love?, is published by Orion next year Things We Do Not Tell the People We Love by Huma Qureshi is published by Sceptre (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe member of parliament for Yardley, east Birmingham, was born in the city and still lives there with her husband and sons. Before becoming an MP, she was a Labour councillor Food If there is one place in the world where you can find a good samosa, it’s Birmingham. There are obviously lots of places for a great curry but there are also some really brilliant Indian vegetarian sweet centres. Milan Sweet Centre in Balsall Heath is an institution – I’ve been going there since I was a kid and every week I buy at least 40 samosas. They also do great barfi and jalebi sweets. The best place for a coffee is Flock in Kings Heath – a pop-up inside the Grace + James shop, bar and deli – run by Alistair. It was called Flock after me and my friends as we’d go there every morning after the school run. At Grace + James itself you can get wine and cheese, and they also run the Poli pizza restaurant next door – the pizzas are great but I dream about their La Ratte potatoes cooked in lamb fat with fresh mint. In the evening I often go to Eat Vietnam in Stirchley – they do your regular big bowls of noodles with pork, but what I love is their Marmite peanut butter cauliflower. Inspiration As a child I would go to the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery pretty much every single Saturday. It’s full of beautiful pre-Raphaelite paintings. I absolutely love the building: it’s such a lovely, calm space. The surrounding area has also been completely revamped. I was a bit of a naysayer about the new Library of Birmingham at first, as I really liked the old brutalist Central Library building, built in the 1970s. But on reflection, it is a good thing, as the new one looks much better. The Lapworth Museum of Geology at Birmingham University is also brilliant. This part of town feels like a different sort of Birmingham to me – the Edgbaston campus is exceptionally green and beautiful. Neighbourhood Kings Heath, where I grew up, has a real mix of people and architecture. There are big Victorian and Edwardian houses as well as 1970s maisonettes and tower blocks. On my street there were bail hostels next door to the houses of professors and MPs. There is an amazing bakery called Earlybird, which is right next to the beautiful old Victorian library; and York Road, which has been pedestrianised, and has loads of bars, restaurants and independent shops spilling out on to the street. At the end of the street there is a great pub, the famous Hare and Hounds. Green spaces You’re spoilt for choice in Birmingham. It is an absolute canopy of trees, which belies its industrial reputation. If you fly over it, parts of it look like a forest. During lockdown I became well acquainted with the city’s parks. Sutton Park, which is so huge you can totally get lost in it, has stoats and weasels, waterways and forest; and Lickey Hills has great views of the city. Nightlife When I was a kid, Stirchley, a fairly industrial place, just had a bowling alley. But now the bowling alley has gone (it is missed!) and the area has become a bit trendy. Just a few doors down from a tyre shop and a carpet shop with an enormous King Kong on the top there is an incredible cocktail bar called Couch. I can’t tell you how incongruous this is considering what the area was like historically. The cocktails are wonderful – the mixologists are real enthusiasts and have been all round the world training. The nightlife and food scene in Birmingham is so good because it is driven by people who specialise in one thing – and the people at Couch are definitely cocktail geeks. Stay After being closed for almost two decades, the Grand Hotel reopened in May. It has been lovingly restored and is in a great location, right next to the cathedral. I fancied being a tourist in my home town for a night, so we stayed here following the lockdowns and had an incredible afternoon tea and drinks. It is really high-end quality, without being too expensive.The Courtauld Institute of Art has two main elements: a world-famous college for the study of the history and the conservation of art and a gallery with a boggling collection of masterpieces: Manet’s A Bar at the Folies-Bergère, Botticelli’s The Trinity With Saints, Van Gogh’s Self-Portrait With Bandaged Ear. Until renovation works started in 2018, the two were housed in the north wing of Somerset House in London, the grand 225-year-old complex designed for King George III by the architect William Chambers. It’s a building whose orderly facades belie convoluted interiors that were shaped around the multiple government offices and learned societies that it was built to house. Next week, the gallery reopens to the public after a makeover that seeks to make the most of the historic building’s glories and oddities and show the art to its best advantage. It’s also part of a plan, called Courtauld Connects, whereby the gallery, the college and the general public are supposed to be brought closer together. So far the project has cost £57m, a figure that includes both the construction budget and “wider costs” such as public outreach and offsite art storage. A second phase is planned to rehouse the students and staff – who are currently decanted to premises near King’s Cross station – alongside the gallery. Everything about it sounds great. Dedicated teams of craftspeople have attended to the sensitive and complicated historic fabric with scrupulous patience and care. They have been guided by skilled architects, the Stirling prize winners Witherford Watson Mann. The names of a glittering array of blue-chip donors appear on the gallery walls: the Ukranian-born oil and media magnate Leonard Blavatnik, the Garfield Weston Foundation, the luxury brand empire LVMH. Some of the renovation is indeed exceptional, but a series of perverse choices also stop it being the transformative project that the promises and budgets might lead you to expect. The architects’ response to the call for connectivity is what they call a “circuit of shared exchanges”, a way of moving round the building that encourages its different uses and users to interact. On the top floor, the 18th-century Great Room – the building’s star exhibition space – has been made the home of its star exhibits, the impressionists and post-impressionists. In the basement, a dramatic space has been hollowed out of formerly unseen vaults, where a cafe serving both gallery and college were planned. The two are linked by two elegant semicircular staircases that are part of Chambers’s original building. Between this grand attic and noble cellar is a sandwich of multiple volumes: the Fine Rooms, rich in ornamental plasterwork, plus more humble offices and backup facilities repurposed to show art. New education and exhibition spaces have been squeezed out where possible: as it’s impossible to extend this Grade I-listed building, the most had to be made of the volumes within its walls and roof. A huge amount of effort has gone into making it look as if little effort has been expended. Old doors have been remodelled so that they fold unobtrusively into the thickness of the wall when open. The copious ducts and cables needed to serve an art museum are located in ceiling voids, so that you wouldn’t know they’re there. Considerable craft has gone into this swan paddling under the surface. It is an exemplary demonstration of the magic whereby the bashing and shifting of large chunks of masonry, and the lifting of heavy steel beams, eventually devolve into mouldings and details of timber and plaster, where decisions of a few millimetres make a difference to the feel of a room. A nice moment comes in the vestibule, which is the refined, vaulted entrance to Somerset House as a whole, where historic diamond-patterned paving has been folded into a gentle ramp that enables wheelchair users to access the gallery’s front door. It’s an inconspicuous adjustment done with precision and grace. You could say that the project shows how you can spend tens of millions without anyone much noticing. Which is partly a good thing – you certainly wouldn’t want self-aggrandising architectural gestures. Both the art and the historic building are more important than modern ego. But so much having been invested in subtlety and unobtrusive betterment, a series of decisions undermine them. At the same time the dream of uniting gallery and college seems to have been all but abandoned. To take a small but significant example, the stairs and circulation spaces have been fitted with crude white rectangular light fittings that would belong better on the escape routes of a cheap hotel. To take something larger, those basement vaults do not in fact contain a cafe where the visiting public might mix with students and academics, but a large shop whose plywood shelves and piles of products will make a nonsense of the building’s otherwise careful details. There are other questionable decisions, including about the distribution of space. The impressionists now get abundant volume and headroom without obviously benefiting – I am not sure that they sing any more than they did in less capacious surroundings – while medieval art is consigned to a cramped and low-ceilinged room. Some of the new galleries have been so tortuously carved out of old fabric that you wonder if they were worth the effort. Above all, gallery and college seem further apart than ever, the latter being largely consigned to a different location until the unspecified future when enough funding might be found to bring it back to Somerset House. The stated aim of reconnection does not seem to have been rigorously pursued; the current outcome looks more like the glorification of the more glamorous part of the partnership, the gallery, at the expense of the other. The good news in all this is that there is some thoughtful architecture underneath it all. But it needs more intelligence to bring out its latent qualities. The Courtauld reopens on 19 NovemberVincotto is a non-fermented grape must which is reduced to a syrup. I came across it in Puglia. I go virtually every year to a converted commune in a little village near Lecce. Apart from the fact that it’s a lovely place to stay, I am particularly fond of the cookery in Puglia, and vincotto is a product of that part of Italy. It’s such a good way of enriching a red wine sauce. I do find red wine sauces quite acidic when you reduce them. Vincotto is very sweet so it balances the sauce very well. You start off by using a teaspoon of it and just build up. Bear in mind it’s a bit like balsamic vinegar, it’s that strong. I make a ragu, sometimes with red wine, sometimes with white. If I’m using red, I add some vincotto and it increases the concentration of wine and brings up the colour, so you get this really deep red. The other thing I do is make a simple dressing. I like adding a bit of sweetness as well as salt. It’s something like: 4 tbsp olive oil (not extra virgin), 1 tbsp red wine vinegar, ½ tsp of vincotto and a generous pinch of salt. It has a really lovely fragrance about it, and I’m sure if I thought about it I could come up with a lot of other things to pour it over – such as fresh figs. It’s one of those ingredients I use and don’t tell anyone about, but probably you would take some satisfaction in. Rick Stein at Home is out now (BBC Books, £26)Naturally, you would assume chefs eat well at work. These are food lovers surrounded by great produce doing long hours at weird times. Surely rustling up tasty staff meals is an established perk of the job? And in that assumption you would be wrong. When Sam Grainger, chef-owner of Belzan in Liverpool, started cooking 15 years ago, staff meals were “non-existent. You heard of it in hotels and Michelin kitchens that didn’t open until 6pm. But in full-on, city-centre, 11-to-11 places, you often didn’t have time. If you said, ‘I’m taking my break,’ you might be shunned for leaving someone else in a mess. Chefs lived on coffee, energy drinks, cigarettes.” Punishing yourself was part of chefs’ then “rock star attitude”. “A lot of managers and owners would say, ‘Go, eat,’ and assume everyone did. Not eating was definitely not a rule. You’d be hungry. The prep chef might throw something on, a stew or bolognese, easy, stodgy one-panners, and you’d end up binning it at the end of the night.” There has never been an industry standard on staff food, either on availability or quality, and provision was and is incredibly varied. In large, busy or chain restaurants, with many staff on various shifts, employees are usually entitled to eat from the menu for free or at a 50-75% discount (sometimes from a limited choice of lower-cost dishes). Some provide staff rooms or let staff eat in the restaurant. Others shoo them into back rooms. In smaller restaurants, a forward-thinking owner might set the tone. Selin Kiazim, the chef-owner at London’s Oklava, worked at Peter Gordon’s now closed The Providores and Kopapa. “Without fail, we had a generous, delicious breakfast and lunch. We were treated to all sorts of cuisines. Hainanese chicken rice was one favourite. With the restaurants trading all day, the only thing that was tricky was getting all the staff to sit down together.” Restaurants that “flat out refuse” staff food are rare, says Tom (not his real name), a veteran chef. But grumbling managers are common. “There are always employers who want it to be the absolute cheapest.” Years later, Grainger shudders at the memory of a staff meal of sausages baked in 5kg of cheese. “Two inches of fat on top, the worst thing I’ve ever seen.” This is counterproductive, at best. “If people aren’t fed,” says Tom, “they’re not physically up to it and you start losing people, mentally. What they’re producing won’t be good quality.” A new generation of head chefs is emerging who see manifest benefits in gathering their staff, late afternoon between services – usually at an undressed restaurant table – to eat what is often, rather sentimentally, referred to as the “family meal”. They want their employees to feel energised, valued, to bond as a team. At Stockport’s Where The Light Gets In (WTLGI), everyone meets at 11am in a dedicated staff room to have a team meeting and eat breakfast, be it congee or cured mackerel on toast. The chefs take it in turns to cook breakfast and a 4pm meal of, for instance, jerk chicken, bibimbap or homemade pizza. “I remember eating out of pans sat on top of fridges, and eating around a table is super important,” says chef-owner Sam Buckley, who usually handles Saturday breakfast. “It’s a courtesy to people who work hard for you.” Modern, progressive kitchens of course use trim from prime meat cuts or surplus vegetables in staff food, minimising waste. But most (instead of purchasing cheap jars and packets for staff teas, as was common) allow staff to buy extra ingredients, often from the restaurant’s suppliers. Some budget around £3 a head, others leave it open ended. “No one’s ordered a kilo of truffles yet,” says Buckley. As a young chef, says Stuart Ralston, owner of Edinburgh’s Aizle and Noto restaurants, “I weighed nine stone. I never ate.” That was often because staff food was poor. “At one place, as we made chicken stock we had to pick the carcasses to make staff tea. Now, buying staff fish and proteins is budgeted into our costs.” At Oklava, Kiazim concedes getting everyone to sit down together can be difficult. “You’re constantly working around obstacles, staff shortages, supplier issues, busy lunches no one saw coming. On those occasions the 4pm meal is eaten at different times by everyone.” But staff are fed “healthy, nutritious” food. “I insist on vegetables or salad next to the main and limit the amount of pasta. It can make staff lethargic and it shouldn’t always be the quick go-to.” When he opened Belzan in 2017, Grainger and his co-owners were determined to build the benefits of staff meals into the business in a self-sustaining way. His novel solution was that a rota of staff, including front-of-house servers (and the owners, periodically), would create a daily staff meal which, billed as such, is then sold on the evening menu as a £6 small plate. This was to ensure the staff meal would remain creative and high quality, and would pay for itself. It also meant junior chefs, who ordinarily have no input to menus, could see their ideas realised in plates of lamb kofta, beef rendang or, after prepping endless florets, a cauliflower stalk curry. “The head chef tests and plays around with the dish if he needs to,” says Grainger, before it is served to diners. But it is taken “extremely seriously”. Is it not unfair pressure on waiting staff? “No,” insists Grainger. Initially, they are eased in and assisted. “They really go for it. On days off, I get texts like, ‘Can we work on this dish together?’ It’s competitive.” That evening staff meal – nothing too heavy or carby – is eaten as the pre-service briefing takes place. The food, says Grainger, is an “amazing morale booster. They go into service really pumped with smiles on their faces talking about what we’ve just had for dinner. That’s hard to instil in people.” On one level, this contemporary reverence for the family meal is a fashion. In the 2010s, a crop of influential books extolled the virtues of restaurant staff feeding one another: el Bulli’s The Family Meal; Come In, We’re Closed; photographer Per-Anders Jörgensen’s Eating With the Chefs. As chef David Waltuck, author of Staff Meals from Chanterelle, told Food &amp; Wine: “In some ways it was more rewarding than cooking for customers.” Suddenly staff food was exciting. The world learned about Noma’s staff canteen, and how at Spain’s El Celler de Can Roca the Roca brothers would walk with their team to eat at their parents’ village bistro. In Come In, We’re Closed, Ferran Adrià insisted that properly planned staff food (dishes of roasted miso aubergine, mussels with noodles, crema catalana) “eliminated most problems” at a cost of €3 per person: “Where cooks eat well, you will eat better.” That mantra is now online on the ManresaFamilyMeal Instagram account, where three-Michelin-star Californian restaurant Manresa posts its incredible staff menus. In Birmingham, Carters of Moseley attracts up to 6,000 people each day to Instagram, where its tutorials on its staff meals, such as ramen or chicken kiev balls (the recipes are collected in the book Staff), have gathered their own cult following. This movement is also a generational and multi-generational shift. Most head chefs now pushing staff meals came up in the shadow of that changing restaurant culture. Kiazim, Buckley and Ralston are in their 30s, as is Grainger, who first experienced staff meals working at Jamie’s Italian. They also manage far younger chefs who – all kombucha, gym memberships and a keen sense of personal wellbeing – expect to be fed at work. Grainger also co-owns Liverpool’s Madre, a huge 342-cover bar and restaurant, whose 74 staff eat for free. “If those chefs didn’t get a break to sit and eat, they’d leave – in the middle of the day.” Given the industry’s recruitment issues, no restaurant can risk that. At Covent Garden’s Darjeeling Express, good staff food is a given. “You cannot serve on an empty stomach,” says chef-owner Asma Khan. “You can’t run a team on empty. It’s wrong.” The restaurant began as a supper club and, among its 30 staff, the value of eating together is embedded. For instance, its Ghanaian kitchen porters regularly cook plantain for everyone (“we love it”), while Italian or Georgian staff will return from trips home with cakes or cheese to share. Every day at 5pm, 12 to 14 waiting staff – some finishing their shift, some starting – eat a selection of dishes, which they can take home to their families too. “Sharing food is a great leveller. From comments about food come conversations about culture, identity, travel. It encourages them to discuss who they are,” says Khan. Not that she eats with this tight-knit team: “I don’t cramp their style. I’m the boss. The language can get interesting – they’re young kids – and if my son is working he’d be embarrassed I was there.” Instead, Khan eats earlier with her all-female kitchen team. Instead of the slow ’n’ low dishes served at Darjeeling Express, its chefs – as if still cooking in Khan’s home, where they could only spare one ring on the stove – prepare themselves hot, fast dishes such as chicken livers fried with dried red chillies, and lots of small fish. “You can’t serve them because, with a knife and fork, customers can’t find the fine bones, but all of us eat with our hands. It’s unique, quick stuff.” The waiting staff break again around 9pm, to eat food they boxed up earlier or leftover momos, lentil fritters and parathas sent up by the kitchen. “Even if we’re busy, we pull one person at a time. The shift won’t finish until midnight and it might take 90 minutes to get home. They’re not my children but I would want their mothers to know they’re not starving on their journey.” Sam Ward, managing director at Umbel Restaurant Group, which operates the chef Simon Rogan’s venues, would like hospitality to stop advertising staff food as a perk. “That’s a basic right. Our businesses work across times people normally eat. Feeding them is part of the deal.” Rogan’s four Cumbrian businesses feed about 120 employees daily, many twice. Zoom out and it is possible to see this conversation around staff food as one element in a wider reckoning in hospitality on pay, hours and welfare. “It’s a bit brazen, maybe,” says Ward, caveating his thoughts, “but most UK restaurants have operated successfully off the back of the personal sacrifice of people who work in them. We’re in the middle of a tectonic shift. All these things are coming to a change.” Belzan’s staff meal – roast pork belly, clementine, sage, star anise Sam Grainger: “This was created by our current head chef, Mark Dickey – the Christmassy dish you never knew you wanted so much.” Serves 4-5 pork belly 2- 2.5kg, deboned, skin on table salt 500g pork stock 250ml fino sherry 250ml star anise 2 honey 120g butter 200g, cold, cubed sage ½ bunch, finely chopped clementines 8, peeled and segmented sea salt to serve Preheat oven for at least 15 minutes to 160C fan/gas mark 4. Place the pork belly on a wire resting tray in a baking tray. Add a ½cm layer of salt to the skin on the pork belly. Place into the preheated oven for 1 hour 45 minutes. Remove from oven and allow to cool and dry for 1 hour. Preheat oven to 220C fan/gas mark 9. Carefully remove all the salt from the pork belly – try to not brush it on to the flesh. Place the pork belly in the oven for 30 minutes until the skin is puffed and crispy. While the pork belly is cooking, bring a large heavy-bottomed pan to a high heat. Add the pork stock, fino sherry and star anise. Bring to the boil and reduce by half. Add honey and continue to heat. When the sauce starts to thicken, reduce to a medium heat and add the cubed butter piece by piece, from the fridge, whisking to emulsify it. Add the sage and segmented clementines to the thickened sauce. Let the roasted belly rest for 20 minutes. To finish, with a serrated knife, slice it into strips (one per-person) and spoon over the sauce and clementines. Season and serve.HOTELS The ME Barcelona Located on the chic Passeig de Gràcia, the ME opens its doors on 16 November, promising a combination of art, technology and music alongside a rooftop bar, restaurants and a sprawling urban garden. Rooms are chic, if a touch corporate, in shades of stone and taupe, while the restaurants are swathed in greenery and serve Mediterranean dishes, with ingredients sourced from local producers. Resident DJs are set to keep the place hopping on evenings and weekends, with the bars and restaurants of the Gothic Quarter just outside the door. Doubles from £202, room only; melia.com Hotel Mirlo An elegantly restored mansion in the quiet Sarrià-Sant Gervaisi district, the Mirlo opened in April, offering a unique wellness experience – each of the 16 rooms has its own private hammam, while suites also boast their own sauna. Outside, pristine gardens surround the house and outdoor pool – perfect for cooling off after a day exploring, before dinner in the excellent restaurant. Breakfasts are superb: crisp patisserie, frisels (mini baguettes filled with jamon iberico) and piles of fresh fruit. The Mirlo is ideal for those who want to be out of the hubbub of central Barcelona, with the main attractions an easy 15-minute taxi ride away. Doubles from £168, B&amp;B; mirlobarcelona.com Kimpton Vividora The Vividora opened its doors briefly in February 2020, before re-opening in August. Set among the atmospheric streets of the Gothic Quarter, its big draw is the Terrazade Vivi rooftop bar and pool, complete with lush greenery, sunloungers and spectacular views of the city’s skyline. Rooms are stylish, with bold wall panels and splashes of blue, a nod to the city’s coastal location. Fauna restaurant serves modern Spanish cuisine and has an excellent regional wine list, while Café Got on the ground floor is coffee house by day, cocktail bar by night. Doubles from £154, room only; kimptonvividorahotel.com Nobu Barcelona The latest branch of Robert De Niro and Nobu Matsuhisa’s ever-growing hotel brand, Nobu partially opened in December 2019, and is now taking bookings from February 2022. The hotel promises its classic pared-down interiors, albeit with nods to Gaudí’s mosaic techniques. The restaurant offers spectacular views from the 23rd floor – and the trademark black cod dish; Kozara in the lobby will have lighter, more traditionally Spanish flavour. The hotel is close to Sants station, and all the main sights are within a 30 minute walk. Doubles from £174, room only; nobuhotels.com RESTAURANTS &amp; BARS Taberna Noroeste One of the city’s hippest places to eat, and located on a quiet street in PobleSec, this restaurant is helmed by two young chefs, one from Galicia in the north, the other from Salamanca in the west. The menu draws on traditional regional dishes, served as small sharing plates; highlights include octopus stuffed with chorizo and egg yolk, smoked sardines, and Tarte de Santiago, a Galician almond cake. Reservations are essential; ask for a table opposite the open kitchen to see the chefs in action. tabernanoroeste.com Besta Located in Esquerra de l’Eixample (recently named the coolest neighbourhood in the world by Time Out), Besta has a weekly seafood-based menu – think tortilla gazpacho with tuna belly, tortilla with just-cooked shrimp and asparagus, or pintxos of anchovies, olives and spicy guincilla peppers. Kick off with a gin infused with oysters, and ask the sommelier for wine suggestions from the interesting list. bestabarcelona.com Vegan Junk Food Bar Amsterdam’s most famous vegan restaurant opened its first outpost beyond the Netherlands in November 2020, when the VJFB landed in the El Born district. The place for everything vegan food is supposed not to be: sticky ribs, barbecue “no-wings”, fries smothered in jalapeños or garlic sauce, and burgers loaded with toppings. With a hip-hop and R&amp;B soundtrack and a backdrop of street art, this isn’t the place for a quiet romantic dinner, but there’s nowhere better in the city for a vegan blow-out. veganjunkfoodbar.com The Sips Drinkery House Possibly the hippest cocktail bar in the city, Sips has an impeccable pedigree, run by two of the world’s most famous mixologists: Simone Caporale, fresh from the Artesian in London (named best bar in the world for four years running) and Marc Alvarez, former head of mixology for Ferran Adrià’s restaurant group. At Sips, cocktails are served tapas-style: small measures and affordable prices, so drinkers can try several concoctions. A wide choice of wines and beers is also available. sips.barcelona ATTRACTIONS The Moco Museum The first outpost of Amsterdam’s acclaimed Moco Museum, this new gallery opened in October, and has a focus on combining iconic works by modern and contemporary artists and less-familiar pieces from rising stars in the art world. There are two permanent collections: Moco Masters Modern, including works by Salvador Dalí, Damien Hirst and Yayoi Kusama; and Moco Masters Contemporary, highlighting artists including David LaChapelle, Julian Opie and Takashi Murakami. Several spaces are given over to cutting-edge digital art, while the first guest exhibition is a collection of works by Banksy. Open daily, from €13.50; mocomuseum.com Gaudí at the National Art Museum of Catalonia Running from 18 November to 6 March 2022, this exhibition focuses on the architectural works of Barcelona’s most famous son. Guests can explore Antoni Gaudí’s creative process and ideas through the political, social and ideological upheavals that took place in Catalonia at the end of the 19th century. Alongside the chance to see Gaudí’s original drawings and impressions of the Sagrada Familia basilica and other buildings, the permanent collection houses a huge range of works by Spain’s most famous artists including El Greco, Velázquez, Picasso and Miró. Open daily, €12; museunacional.catThe world is now closer than it has ever been to the goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C, the US climate envoy John Kerry has said, after the Cop26 negotiations ended in Glasgow with an “imperfect” but widely welcomed deal. Kerry said: “We are in fact closer than we have ever been before to avoiding climate chaos and securing cleaner air, safer water and a healthier planet.” But he warned that Cop26 was “not the finish line”, and was never going to be. Nations would still have much more work to do on their emissions-cutting goals to ensure the 1.5C limit was viable. Kerry said: “Thanks to the work here in Glasgow, the goals we are setting ourselves are much, much closer. And we will come even closer if we implement and follow through [on the deal agreed] … As we leave Glasgow, our code word is going to be implementation, follow-up and follow-through.” He said there had been “a very aggressive increasing of ambition” by many countries, in terms of cutting greenhouse gas emissions, but that much more needed to be done. He quoted the International Energy Agency estimate that if all the current long-term commitments were fully followed through, the world would limit heating to 1.8C in the long term. But he stressed that there was a gap between those long-term ambitions and countries’ crucial short-term targets for 2030, which would result in heating of 2.4C, and so countries needed to do more. At Glasgow, nearly 200 countries agreed to keep pursuing the goal of limiting temperatures to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, as set out in the 2015 Paris climate agreement. But they recognised that the commitments made at the fortnight-long Cop26 were inadequate to the task, and resolved to return to the negotiating table next year. Kerry said the US would not need to revise its national target of cutting emissions by 50% by 2030, as it was strong enough. He indicated that other countries would be pressed to revise theirs, however, which presages fraught negotiations over the coming year before the next Conference of the Parties meeting in Egypt in November 2022. He pointed out that the US had rejoined the High Ambition Coalition of developed and developing countries, which Donald Trump had left. He said the deal reached in Glasgow showed the strength of the Paris agreement. “Paris built the arena, Glasgow started the race and tonight the starting gun was fired,” he said shortly after the deal was reached after 10pm. The tense final negotiations at Cop26 dragged on more than 24 hours past their deadline of 6pm on Friday, ending late on Saturday night after a marathon end session in which countries repeatedly formed “huddles” on the plenary floor to tease out details of the wording they would agree to. Kerry was in the thick of many of these huddles, seen at various points in close conversation with his Chinese counterpart, Xie Zhenhua, the Cop president, Alok Sharma, the EU’s executive vice-president Frans Timmermans, and consulting with many developing country representatives. Kerry praised the constructive discussions with many countries. He said the US supported demands from developing countries over “loss and damage”, meaning the destructive impacts of the climate crisis that are already being felt. However, he did not say how any funding might become available in future for such loss and damage. The language in the final text on loss and damage was a disappointment to many developing countries, as it contained no mechanism for such funding. There was also criticism from many observers of the talks for the final-hours watering down of commitments regarding the issue, although Sharma insisted in his post-plenary press conference that the very appearance of the concept in the final text for the first time in the history of climate negotiations since the Kyoto protocol was signed in 1997 was an indication of “a newly collegiate approach”. The Ugandan campaigner Vanessa Nakate singled out the Scottish government for praise after it became the first developed country to pledge money to a loss and damage fund. Responding to the final text on Saturday night, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said: “Over the course of Cop26, Scotland has put £2m on the table for loss and damage and, in doing so, we have become the first developed country to step up. Our action has already galvanised $3m of philanthropic funds to add to our contribution and a further €1m from Wallonia.” She added: “Developed countries can no longer in good conscience ignore this pressing moral issue. The demand for financial support for loss and damage must be met.” John Podesta, the former White House chief of staff, influential US political analyst and founder of the Centre for American Progress thinktank, said the US must “follow through” on its commitments through Biden’s domestic legislation, as well as through international diplomacy. “If we [as a world] plan to meet the increasingly challenging goal of limiting global temperature rise to 1.5C and avert the most devastating impacts of climate change, we need to go further, faster,” he said. “The level of our ambition has to continue to move up. We must turn targets into concrete actions during this decade and double down on climate financing to help developing countries transition and adapt. The language on coal in the final text does not meet the accelerated pace of transition to clean energy that the world needs to address the climate crisis. We must work to phase coal out.” He added: “The US must follow through on our commitment and pass the Build Back Better Act so we can tackle the climate crisis and build a just and equitable clean energy economy with good-paying union jobs for the American people.”“I can’t believe how early it gets dark here,” says environmental lawyer Patsy Contardo, who has spent the last two weeks experiencing Scottish culture, from Tunnock’s teacakes and shortbread to the great British weather. Contardo, a Cop26 delegate from Chile, was staying with Glaswegian hosts Fiona and Matt Hooker, who opened up their home to her as part of the Cop26 Homestay Network aimed at helping foreign delegates faced with sky-high accommodation costs in the city; rates rose to more than £1,000 a night in some hotels. “We’ve learned so much from each other and it was particularly great having a younger woman come to stay, as at these conferences there are often quite a lot of men who tend to be older,” said Fiona. “Cop has been great but having Patsy here to stay has definitely been a highlight.” About 1,200 Glaswegians took part in the network, organised by Stop Climate Chaos Scotland and the Cop26 Coalition, hosting 1,663 delegates from around the world and forming strong friendships with their guests – Fiona and Matt plan to stay in touch with Patsy after she leaves. “What has impressed me is that people from all walks of life – couples, individuals, families, older people – have wanted to do their bit and be a part of Cop,” said Fiona, adding that she hopes the diversity of delegates will have a lasting impact on the city. “One of my colleagues had a guest from Nigeria and she said it was fantastic for her son to be able to meet somebody from an African country because he doesn’t really know many people from different cultures.” For Patsy, getting to know the locals has also enhanced her experience of the conference. “I’ve loved learning about Scottish people’s ideas of climate change and how it affects them. Everyone has different perspectives because we have different lives, different governments,” she said. Glasgow has felt very different over the past two weeks, with Cop26 delegates exploring the city and stocking up on whisky and Irn-Bru, and many locals have relished the excitement of having a huge global event on their doorstep. “It’s been brilliant. It’s an experience we’re never going to get again,” said Thomas Cornwallis, 23, who took a week off work to soak up the atmosphere and attend events across the city. “It’s been amazing to hear all these different voices in Glasgow and hear the energy; I’ve met so many people. So it has been a great thing.” However, the conference has come with its fair share of inconveniences as well. As convener of the campaign group GoBike Glasgow, he knows many people have struggled to get around the city because of road closures, and there are plenty who are looking forward to a return to normality. “They’ve closed off a key corridor through the city and people just didn’t know where to go,” he said. “So I think some people want to get it over and done with, but I think they also hope the event has shown the need for more cycling infrastructure and a better public transport network.” Businesses near the SEC, where Cop26 took place, are also looking forward to some calm after a hectic few weeks. Gillian McIntyre, the owner of Mayze cafe, brought in extra staff to deal with the number of people coming through her doors. “It’s been a rollercoaster, but I think for the most part we’ve managed to keep on top of everything,” she said. Although businesses in the city centre have reported quiet trade as some locals chose to stay at home to avoid protests and road closures, McIntyre hopes on the whole that Cop26 will leave a positive legacy for the city. “It’s been truly amazing. We’re just really grateful to have been at least slightly a part of it,” she said. “Where else do you get exposure to such a vast range of people from around the planet all in one place?”I have seen the light, and I was not convinced. This month, I was invited to a party hosted by Friends With Benefits, an exclusive club of artists and investors who have access to a private chatroom on Discord and parties in cities like Miami and New York. The image has a subversive sheen: techno DJs and venture capitalists in ripped designer jeans throwing secret raves. The club’s “manifesto” describes a “bright future” for the “ultimate cultural membership” where “prosperity is abundant” and “data and payments are fluid”, just like gender. Friends With Benefits was founded in 2020 by Trevor McFedries who, after bringing the VR popstar Lil Miquela into the world, had higher ambitions than animating a robot to make out with Bella Hadid in an underwear commercial. “Capital as a weapon is intriguing to me,” said McFedries in a YouTube speech. Having seen Occupy “fail miserably” while GameStop “toppled a hedge fund in four days”, he set his sights on creating a DAO. DAOs have, in the past year, been generating millions of dollars’ worth of cryptocurrencies on Ethereum, managing to strike upon a technological model uniquely primed to drive up the value of their assets. At its most basic, “DAO” – which stands for “decentralized autonomous organization” – describes an online community that meets on a chatroom server such as Discord, decentralized insofar as the administration puts community decisions up to a vote, which can be recorded and verified on the blockchain using unique “smart contracts” that everyone can see. Not every DAO mints its own currency, but McFedries decided he wanted one. For his new DAO, Friends With Benefits, he established a native token called $FWB: a publicly tradable coin, minted on the Ethereum blockchain, that rises or peters in value like stocks. Membership to the community would require purchasing 75 $FWB. Before FWB began, McFedries decided to mint only one million $FWB tokens, so he could cap supply and hype demand. When I first heard about Friends With Benefits this year, membership was already valued at $350. Today, it’s over $9,000. $FWB’s value soared after Andreessen Horowitz invested $5m and Li Jin put in $10m into the community. It’s a “bull market”, in the words of the white shirt who prices the artist out of bohemia. One might question the very “decentralization” of a community’s governance that both establishes community rules and regulates its own currency, as if the president and the Federal Reserve were combined. Most DAO evangelists will tell you that DAOs allocate voting power on community decisions to their members. But FWB, like most DAOs, grants one vote per token, instead of one vote per person. This is profoundly undemocratic. While $FWB tokens are also granted to members whose comments on Discord receive the most engagement, like gaining “likes” on Facebook, any investor can buy up their share of votes at any moment with a click. The migraine-inducing difficulty in understanding the technological intricacies of DAO is built into its propaganda – the ignorant skeptics should trust the experts in the room who truly know what’s going on. They tell us that DAO is the beginnings of Web 3.0, pitched as the David against the Goliath of Web 2.0, which wrought monopolist platforms like Google, Facebook, and Amazon. FWB is rare in the world of DAOs because it professes cultural pretensions. But most other DAOs are simply devoted to trading assets; Flamingo and PleasrDAO, for instance, were created to pool money for speculating on NFTs. The most photogenic aspect of FWB is that its executive professionals can mingle with artists on its Discord server, the café to the Enlightenment philosophers. Except you can have this without a native token like $FWB. I happen to be a member of two collectively run servers – one is a community for critical analysis of art, tech, politics, and pop culture started by Berlin-based artists, and the other, started by a New York-based artist and internet researcher, is devoted to analysing internet culture and politics. These communities charge an affordable monthly subscription, cheaper than a bahn mi in Bushwick. Here, capital is not used as a weapon, but the discussion is lively. We talk about the racial bias of artificial intelligence, debate the role of the professional managerial class, share pictures of our outfits. Anyone can join. None of this is particularly profitable; a lot of us are a tad offbeat in real life and spend too much time on the internet. But it’s how I keep in touch with friends who don’t live in the city. Yet elsewhere in cyberspace, we are told of a future with abundant prosperity on the blockchain, where capital is a weapon, and the proletariat can pine for an invite to party with Diplo. “My next paper is probably in praise of exclusivity,” McFedries said recently. And the findings will tell us a simple truth as old as it is new: that the future is bright for those who can afford it. Geoffrey Mak is a New York-based writerMike Leigh’s comic masterpiece is as 70s as it gets – cheese and pineapple on cocktail sticks, Demis Roussos on the record player, and neighbours boasting that they bought their house for £21,000. Still, given that we’ve all had to resocialise ourselves since the pandemic, it’s not a bad time to revisit one of the most awkward drinks evenings of all time – a play that groans with gauche behaviour and embarrassing silences, amid a fug of gin and cigarette smoke. The titular party is, of course, the one happening next door; it’s the living room of the overbearing Beverly that we’re trapped in, as she and her husband Laurence (a wonderfully irascible Ryan Early) perform aggressive hospitality to their new neighbours Tony and Angela, (Matt Di Angelo and Emma Noakes). Beth Colley’s design, with its orange-and-brown patterned wallpaper, is as cartoonishly period as the characters’ dated gender roles: Bev henpecks her husband, flirts with Tone, gets drunk and gossipy with Ange, and patronises her poor nextdoor neighbour Susan (Barbara D’Alterio), who spends the whole night worried about what her teenage daughter Abigail is getting up to. It is, arguably, the original cringe comedy, a precursor to the millennial sitcoms of Ricky Gervais, Larry David et al, with a humour that relies less on the written word than the almost physical tension its heightened realism can generate. But as the characters were essentially created by Leigh’s original actors (not to mention the fact that his TV play has left a deep imprint on our collective memory), it’s always a tough challenge for a cast to find their own incarnation. Vivienne Garnett’s production gives us a hostess who’s trying too hard and lacks any shred of self-awareness, but Kellie Shirley’s Bev veers away from the XL personality that Alison Steadman crafted towards a more naturalistic portrayal, and the play lacks some frisson as a result. That said, the dancing scene is gloriously uncomfortable, Laurence looking on bug-eyed as his wife slow-dances with her friend’s husband. And if you’ve thought some of your Zoom calls were stilted, wait until you hear Ange desperately listing what you can cook on a barbecue. Abigail’s Party is at Park theatre, Finsbury Park, London until 4 December.In his directorial debut, Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda has made a movie-musical based on a musical about writing… a musical. It’s all a bit inside baseball and it won’t be music to everyone’s ears. Those not naturally inclined towards the form may struggle with its grating combination of earnestness and exuberance. The show tunes are an acquired taste too. Andrew Garfield plays the late Jonathan Larson, who went on to write the hit Broadway musical Rent. In downtown New York in the early 90s, procrastinator Larson has a week to finish writing his “sci-fi rock opera” Superbia. Distractions include his day job at a diner, his dancer girlfriend, a pile of unpaid bills and his fast-approaching 30th birthday. The actors play the stakes as though they’re enormous. Alexandra Shipp is a grounding presence as Larson’s girlfriend, Susan, while Garfield fizzes with energy and outsize emotion. He’s a fabulous crier and pitch-perfect as a shrill, preening narcissist who manages, against the odds, to remain resolutely likable.The Queen was absent from Remembrance Sunday commemorations on Sunday after spraining her back, leaving other members of the royal family to honour the UK’s war dead in public. The monarch, 95, had been under doctors’ orders to rest for almost a month after spending a night in hospital in October, but, until the last minute, was expected to attend a service at the Cenotaph in London on Sunday. Buckingham Palace said there was a late change of plans following her injury. A wreath was laid on her behalf by her son, Charles, the Prince of Wales. Boris Johnson, who left his own wreath, said it was a moment to “come together to remember those who sacrificed everything in service of our country”. The remembrance service in Whitehall returned to normal this year, after the coronavirus pandemic limited the number of veterans and military and closed the 2020 ceremony to the public. Hundreds of forces personnel lined up around the Cenotaph, and nearly 10,000 veterans marched past the war memorial, watched by large crowds. Only the rustling of leaves and the chirping of birds could be heard as thousands of people held the two-minute silence at 11am in honour of all those who have died in conflict. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, stood beside the prime minister and former prime ministers lined up behind Johnson, with John Major, Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Theresa May all paying their respects. The Duke of Kent, 86, with his sister Princess Alexandra at his side, stood on the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office balcony, leaving a space for the absent Queen. The Duke of Cambridge, the Earl of Wessex and the Princess Royal also laid wreaths at the memorial. The Duchess of Cornwall, Duchess of Cambridge and Countess of Wessex looked on from another balcony of the FCDO building. The palace said the Queen had made the decision not to attend “with great regret” and was “disappointed” to miss it. The rendition of God Save the Queen during the service was notably loud as the crowds of spectators joined in with gusto. On Saturday, Buckingham Palace had said it was the Queen’s “firm intention” to attend the annual wreath-laying service in Whitehall. She has missed only six other Cenotaph ceremonies during her reign: on four occasions when she was on overseas visits – to Ghana in 1961, Brazil in 1968, Kenya in 1983 and South Africa in 1999 – and in 1959 and 1963, when she was pregnant with her two youngest children. The Queen, who lived through the second world war, is head of the armed forces and attaches great importance to the service and to commemorating the sacrifices made by servicemen and women. She has missed several other events, including Saturday’s Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall, after being told to rest by royal doctors just over three weeks ago. Meanwhile, the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, laid a wreath to remember the fallen in war in a ceremony at Edinburgh’s Stone of Remembrance on the Royal Mile. The Lord Provost’s wreath-laying party joined the military parade before a gun was fired at Edinburgh Castle on the dot of 11am to mark the start of the two-minute silence. In Northern Ireland, the Irish taoiseach, Micheál Martin, laid a wreath to mark Remembrance Day at a service in Enniskillen, continuing a tradition begun by a predecessor, Enda Kenny, in 2012. Eleven people died in the Poppy Day Massacre in Enniskillen when an IRA bomb exploded near the town’s war memorial during a Remembrance Sunday ceremony in 1987.It was a messy compromise. It wasn’t nearly enough. In many respects it was a classic example of kicking the can down the road. But Cop26 wasn’t the car crash it could have been and, realistically, was always going to end in the way it did, with last-minute haggling over the text. Why? Because achieving a climate change deal at a meeting of representatives from 197 countries was always going to be tough. While there was general agreement about the need to tackle global heating, there were big differences about how and when to do so. Countries are at different stages of development. Some have contributed more than others to greenhouse gases in the past, while others have higher emissions now. Everybody wants the maximum amount of gain for the minimum amount of pain. Glasgow saw all these views expressed and more. Opinions differ about the optimal number of participants for a meeting but it is not 197. Anybody who has watched the struggle to piece together a new global trade deal understands the problem. Twenty years ago this month, the World Trade Organization launched a round of trade liberalisation talks in Doha, with the idea of coming up with a comprehensive deal that would include manufactured goods, services, agriculture and fishing. There was a time when developing countries were expected to approve trade deals that had been cooked up by the Americans and the Europeans, but those days are over. China, India and Brazil are now big players in trade talks and are quite prepared to say no to proposals seen as biased towards the interests of developed nations. The last-minute watering down of the text on fossil fuels in Glasgow is a reminder of that. The anger among the least developed countries over the failure of richer nations to meet their promises of $100bn (£75bn) a year to help them cope with climate change is another. Two decades since its launch, work continues at the WTO’s headquarters in Geneva on a multilateral agreement but it is proving hard to get all 164 members on the same page. Glasgow was in many respects no different. Many WTO members have become frustrated at the slow progress and now favour a plurilateral approach- a form of agreement between coalitions of the willing, pieced together in areas of mutual interest, but smaller than a multilateral deal. These include not just services and e-commerce but also labour standards and climate change. While there is not the remotest possibility of getting 164 WTO countries to agree to a deal that would link trade to eliminating fossil fuel subsidies, it is conceivable that 40 or 50 countries might come to such an agreement. Consumers would be told whether or not the goods they were buying came from a clean energy country and could act accordingly. Opinion polls suggest people are becoming greener in their shopping habits. Making action against climate change part of plurilateral trade deals would test how solid this commitment is. Even so, it is a weak form of redress. A country that signs up to a trade deal knows there are penalties if it breaks the rules. The WTO has a mechanism for settling disputes between member countries and, until recently, a functioning appeals body. Contrast that with the UN Cop talks. Sure, countries can sign up to targets to keep global temperatures to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. They can pledge to put in place policies to achieve net zero by a set date in the future. They can accept the need to “phase down” fossil fuels as a source of energy. But there is no comeback if they fail to hit their targets or renege on their promises. Breaking a trade deal has consequences for transgressing countries; breaking a climate change accord does not. Nor, if the WTO is anything to go by, will this change any time soon. A country can only face trade sanctions after it has been allowed the right of appeal before a panel of judges – international trade experts – appointed by the members. The US, quietly supported by other countries, has been blocking the appointment of new judges to replace those whose terms have ended and, as a result, appeals can’t be heard. What goes for trade goes for climate too. Countries – big or small, rich or poor – are going to be very wary about ceding control over their domestic affairs to an international body with serious enforcement powers. Would China put itself in a position where it could be sanctioned for investing in new coal-fired power stations? Would the US agree to a system in which it could be put in the dock for failing to hit net zero targets? It seems unlikely. As things stand, countries are more likely to face legal challenges for taking action to combat climate change than they are for failing to do so. Joe Biden, for example, wants US action against global heating to deliver green jobs, so his Build Back Better bill put before Congress includes financial incentives that would treat domestic car producers of electric vehicles more generously than foreign ones. It would be surprising if this did not result in a trade dispute. What’s more, trade deals agreed between countries often include provisions that allow companies to sue countries for policies that affect their profits. The Trade Justice Movement says five of the seven members of the G7 – Germany, France, Italy, Canada and the US – have faced challenges from fossil fuel companies for their environmental policies. Climate change and trade need to be linked. There is no point putting together the perfect climate change deal – which Glasgow is far from being – only to find that trade rules are inimical to it. Currently, trade is better policed and better protected than the environment, and that’s the wrong way round.A group of Hungarian soldiers have been tasked with disciplining civilians and dispensing with any “partisans’’ in Dénes Nagy’s bleak second world war drama. Deep in a sodden forest, in what would’ve been occupied Ukraine, corporal István Semetka (Ferenc Szabó) is starting to question his role. Or so we’re encouraged to infer. The film offers few clues to his interior world. The audience is invited to project guilt, regret or perhaps trauma-induced numbness on to Szabó’s blank, ambivalent face. Still, there’s a cold, sombre beauty to the compositions, which are rendered in varying shades of sludgy mud-brown. In theory, natural light is more forgiving than its artificial counterpart: in photographs, it makes the subject look less harsh. Less so here. In cinemas and on Curzon Home CinemaI’m looking at my name, handwritten in capital letters, neat as a button. Considering asking for another form to rewrite it, make it shakier. “Foeticide,” the doctor is saying. I can’t stop thinking about someone filing this consent form away, looking at my name, all straight lines and breezy curves. Just another Monday. Then I lie on a bed, see my baby on the ultrasound for the last time, an incomprehensibly long needle in my peripheral vision, feel a strong kick and then nothing but the doctor squeezing my hand. Five days earlier my three-year-old son blew raspberries on my swollen tummy, told the baby he loved her and made her a “bed” in his room. I complained about achy hips, moaned to my husband about people telling me I already looked ready to pop. We watched TV and I grabbed whoever’s hand was nearby to feel the baby kick. Then I walked into the hospital for my 20-week scan, expecting nothing more than the inevitable dance around whether we wanted to know the gender. When the sonographer said there was a problem I felt my face tingling, heard my heart beating in my ears and had a sense that nothing had ever really happened in my life until this point. The 20-week scan is called the “anomaly scan”. Its intention is to check that the baby is developing properly, but the chances that it isn’t are slim. When the possibilities are thousands to one, it’s no wonder most couples focus instead on this scan being the opportunity to find out the gender. But according to the charity Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC), 40,000 families in the UK will be told each year that there is a chance their baby has a genetic or structural condition. This will often happen at their anomaly scan, when names have been chosen, tummies are swelling and babies are kicking. We were told our baby had a congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH); her diaphragm hadn’t formed completely, resulting in her internal organs clustering in her chest. Her lungs wouldn’t develop properly and, if she survived until birth, there was a chance her life expectancy could be measured in single figures, a significant portion of it spent in hospital. CDH is a condition with many different outcomes. There can be mild cases and severe cases. It can sometimes be difficult to predict the impact until birth. The two days between the scan and meeting our consultant were filled with searches. Medical journals, first-hand experiences, newspaper articles. Lists were made of questions to ask, procedures that could be done in utero, miracle surgery. When I was looking for answers, trawling through the internet searching for direction, I found families faced with the same decision as us. They had proceeded with the pregnancy; couldn’t bring themselves to terminate a baby they already loved. When it came to the other route, there was silence. I tried not to look down, to feel my bump, to ignore my son as he kissed the baby goodnight. Clutching our questions, we met the consultant expecting to embark upon another round of tests, probabilities, choices. But the only thing in the room was a height measure on the wall. No ultrasounds, no examination tables, no need. Our questions hung limply in my husband’s hands; a life buoy in the middle of the Pacific. In our case the initial diagnosis was devastating enough without the need to check for anything else. We had to decide if we would proceed with the pregnancy. The void of people discussing termination for foetal anomaly is a silence fuelled by shame and fear. Because it is easier to stand up and say you fought for that little life. Deciding to terminate a pregnancy because the baby is desperately ill is messier. I wondered if I’d be called a eugenicist. I wondered how I’d explain it to people. I asked if I would regret it. But in the end, none of that mattered. What mattered was that this was my child, and I wanted to make sure I had done everything within my power to protect her from suffering. The prognosis was so extreme that this was the only way I could guarantee that. My husband agreed. We couldn’t continue with our pregnancy. The pain of the decision for both of us was so big it was almost a physical presence in the room. But there was also relief that we agreed. Then it was straight to logistics. I was to be induced. The baby would probably be born with signs of life, so I could choose to have a termination ahead of the birth, an injection into her heart to stop it beating. I waited for a third option, which never came. This was Friday. The termination would be on Monday. That weekend I walked around with a baby inside me who I knew would be dead in three days. As I sang my son to sleep she kicked harder than ever, as if making a case for her existence. I talked to her. I told her I loved her. We didn’t tell our son until after the birth, and so he continued to chat away to her as she kicked back and I stared hard into the distance. There was no escape from my body, from the pain and from the guilt. The two days between the termination and induction we tried to keep ourselves busy. We went to the garden centre and bought a fig tree for our baby. We went to visit a potential school for our son. The receptionist asked when I was due and I said, “Wednesday, but the baby is dead, so… we won’t need a nursery place.” I started to consider the birth. People who’d had ringside seats to this process told me it would be a life-changing experience. I would be a different person afterwards. When they said this, the breath caught in the back of my throat in panic. Who would I be, then? Now I was losing not only my baby but myself. When would it happen? And what would be left of me? Would I ever roll around tickling my son again? Would I belly laugh? Would I dance to Taylor Swift again? The induction was a slow process. We spent a lot of it in the park in the rain. My husband picked me a piece of lavender and I felt like I was seeing it for the first time, marvelling at the interlocking petals, the way it seemed so perfect and miraculous. Back at the hospital I found myself contracting in the corridor of the labour ward in the middle of the night. The primal screams of a woman bounced off the walls, suddenly replaced by the raw cries of a newborn. The midwife had warned me some mothers in my position were shocked. “They expect the baby to cry… it’s like they forget…” I was terrified. I didn’t know how I would look at her, or hold her. Knowing I had chosen this for her. The fear held up the labour. But when a friend sent me a beautiful, hopeful message, I broke into tears and had the most intense contraction and my husband called for the midwife. She rushed in, pressed a red button and the room filled with people. I wondered why there were so many, because our baby had died. No need for a rush. I felt a breaking sensation and she fell out of me as I collapsed, eyes squeezed shut, on to the back of the bed into a room of total silence. Then my husband was saying something about how beautiful she was. I turned around and the room was full of women with the kindest eyes I’ve ever seen. Their sadness turned to concern when they couldn’t get the placenta out; I was rushed to theatre where Magic FM played in the background, an epidural was administered and I became convinced I was going to die, shaking so much it felt like I needed to be held down. The doctor’s hands tugged inside me as the last parts of my baby’s support system were removed. Then I was lifted on a sheet to a clean trolley. I looked up at the ceiling. And that’s when I started to cry. It was a few hours until the sensation came back to my legs and I wanted to wait until then before I met our baby. I don’t know why. Perhaps I thought I might run away with her. The midwife asked if I was ready and then went to a small cot with a lid in the corner of the room. She handed our daughter to me. As I held her at first I cried so hard it made no sound at all. But then I started to really look at her. Her beautiful, rosebud lips. The golden arc of her eyebrows. Her fingers, her fingernails – tiny little replicas of her dad’s. The creases on the insides of her hands. She was beautiful. My sadness was temporarily replaced by wonder. In the moments that I held her, a lifetime of grazed knees, of runny noses, of broken hearts. I was her mother, she was my daughter, and I had done my duty – I had protected her the only way I could. I had kept her safe. In that moment, I felt more like a mother than I ever had. Mercifully, it’s rare for women to lose a baby once they’ve started showing. But when it does happen even the most insignificant things become hard. It’s a very visible loss, and so chance meetings on the street – getting coffee from the barista who sort-of knows you, picking your child up from nursery – become a bit of a minefield. “Aren’t you on maternity leave?! Where’s the baby?!” You explain, and then slope away, feeling awkward for upsetting them. But baby loss happens for many reasons, and it is important that women who have had a termination for medical reasons feel they can be part of a group that mourns the loss of their child without shame, guilt or judgment. We got pregnant again quickly and unexpectedly. Our 12-week scan took place on what would have been our daughter’s due date. After several tense months, our baby daughter was born healthy, strong, as a double rainbow emerged over London. She was delivered by the same midwives who had helped us through our loss, and we all held each other, crying tears of relief, joy, sorrow and love. In the end, they were right: I am not the person I used to be. This was life changing. There were times I felt I was at the bottom of the ocean, swimming in the inky black with terrifying creatures springing up at every turn. I have seen things, felt things that live behind a little black door in my mind. But another door has opened. The lavender in the park. My son making my daughter laugh, and the total and utter wonder of how it’s possible and what a miracle it is. And as I dance around my kitchen to Taylor Swift, I thank the universe for what I have, because I know how fragile it is.The outgoing head of the UK’s armed forces has said the military will have to be ready for war with Russia after recent tensions in eastern Europe, but he does not believe Vladimir Putin really wants “hot war” with the west. Gen Sir Nick Carter said Russia was now a greater threat in eastern Europe than it was when he started in the role eight years ago, as he gave a series of interviews before his departure as chief of the defence staff at the end of the month. He said he “distinctly hoped” there would not be a war with Russia and he did not believe the country wanted a physical war, but Nato would have to be ready. He spoke amid tensions on the border between Poland and Russia’s ally Belarus over refugees stranded in camps, as well as signs that Russian troops could be massing along the border with Ukraine. Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, this weekend urged Putin to intervene in the “shameful manufactured migrant crisis” unfolding at the border. Western nations have accused Belarus of attracting people wanting to come to the EU to the border, while Poland has been rebuffing their efforts to enter. The former MI6 officer Christopher Steele has said he believes Moscow thinks it is at war with the UK and its allies. Asked about this view on Sky News’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday, Carter said: “Russia probably regards the global strategic context as a continuous struggle in which, I think, they would apply all the instruments of national power to achieve their objectives. But in so doing, [the Russians] don’t want to bring on a hot war. “So, yes, in a way I think he’s right. The question, of course, is how you define war and I, as a soldier, would tend to define war as the actual act of combat and fighting, and I don’t think they want that. “I think they want to try and achieve their objective in rather more nuanced ways.” He later told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show that Russia was in a “hybrid playbook where you link disinformation to destabilisation and the idea of pushing migrants on to the European Union’s borders is a classic example of that sort of thing”. He said it was most likely that the Belarus and Ukraine border situations were “classic distraction” by the Russian government of the type that had been going on “for years and years and years”. Asked whether it could turn into a shooting war, Carter said: “I don’t know. I think we have to be on our guard and make sure deterrence prevails and critically we have to make sure there is unity in the Nato alliance and we don’t allow any gaps to occur in our collective position.” Carter also acknowledged that the situation in Afghanistan was “not good”, after arguing at the time of the Taliban takeover in August that the group had changed and should be “given space” to form a government. He said there had been “ghastly images … of a potential humanitarian crisis” and admitted the Taliban had “a lot of things that had got to change”. But he still insisted the Taliban were different from how they were in 2001 and claimed “the moderate lot are probably privately arguing to be a different sort of Taliban”. Adm Sir Tony Radakin, 55, the head of the navy, is taking over as head of the armed forces, with Carter due to stand down at the end of the month.In the 18 months since pioneering Afrobeat drummer Tony Allen died, the extent of his legacy has become increasingly apparent. Posthumous releases of exceptional new material continue to pour forth – from the audio-stitched hip-hop features of There Is No End, to the The Solution Is Restless with Joan As Police Woman and Dave Okumu. Nowhere is the range of Allen’s influence more apparent than in Tony Allen: A Retrospective, his musical tribute taking place as part of the 2021 EFG London Jazz Festival. Curated by longtime collaborator Damon Albarn, drummer Femi Koleoso, writer Ben Okri and Gorillaz bandmember Remi Kabaka, the lineup is one of the most extensive on the festival’s roster, featuring everyone from Finnish multi-instrumentalist Jimi Tenor to composer Nitin Sawhney, vocalist Wayne Snow, and Fela Kuti collaborator Dele Sosimi. It is a sprawling evening, running at almost three hours, and yet still struggling to encapsulate the full gamut of Allen’s creativity. Meandering through his catalogue, the 20-strong instrumental ensemble open with rousing renditions of Fela favourites Water No Get Enemy and Zombie, bringing the packed crowd to their feet. Highlights follow in personal moments where the musicians relay their individual musical connections to Allen. Joan As Police Woman duets with Albarn on Get My Bearings, from her beautiful collaborative record, while drummer Koleoso recounts how Allen mentored him. Ben Okri, meanwhile, delivers a powerful rendition of one of Allen’s final recordings, Cosmosis. The only missing section is Allen’s later, techno-referencing work with the likes of Jeff Mills; although to include this would require another hour. Rather, the evening has been curated with care to mostly feature the music that those on stage had a hand in creating with Allen – and it is all tied together by the rock-steady presence of his signature, syncopated groove. Ultimately, the Retrospective asks of us how we remember an artistic giant; someone who died with a vast back catalogue and so much creativity still left to give. The answer lies in the playing itself, in gathering those who his music has touched and allowing it to be interpreted anew for changing audiences. That way, there truly is no end.Sudanese film-maker Amjad Abu Alala’s radiant drama dares to wonder if death could inspire courage rather than fear. In a small village near the Nile, the sheik and his dervish declare that baby Muzamil will die on his 20th birthday. His mother, Sakina (Islam Mubarak), wears black, in premature mourning. Muzamil spends his sheltered youth studying the Qur’an and avoiding the Nile (too many crocodiles), not prepared to meet his end even a second early. Until he encounters Sulaiman (Mahmoud Elsaraj), a former journalist who feasts on movies, booze and girls. “Try sinning,” he suggests. But teenage transgression isn’t a foregone conclusion. Mustafa Shehata dials up the brooding Muzamil’s inner turmoil as he questions the beliefs he’s swallowed whole. In cinemas, on Curzon Home Cinema and BFI PlayerThe Cop26 climate conference finally came to an end on Saturday night, having overrun by a day. Here are the main points in the text agreed to by delegates. Emissions cuts (known as mitigation) Current national plans on cutting emissions by 2030, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), are inadequate to limit temperature rises to 1.5C, and according to analysis published during the talks would lead to a disastrous 2.4C of heating. Only one major emitter – India – produced a new NDC at the talks, so the work of getting NDCs in line with a 1.5C goal was always going to stretch beyond the end of the Glasgow summit. However, under the 2015 Paris agreement, nations are only required to return every five years to set new NDCs – and in 2025 are scheduled to discuss NDCs for beyond 2030. Sticking to that timetable would take the world well beyond 1.5C, so one of the crucial aims for the UK hosts was to draw up a roadmap for swifter revisions. That was achieved – the question of revising NDCs will be on the agenda for next year’s Cop, to be held in Egypt, and for the one following in 2023. This may seem like “kicking the can down the road”, but in fact provides those countries that want higher ambition on emissions cuts with an important lever to ensure laggard countries must step up. Glasgow was never going to be the endpoint in the process of tackling the climate crisis, so setting a roadmap for revisions next year, rather than several years away, is a good move. Coal Coal is the dirtiest fossil fuel and the International Energy Agency has made clear that if it is not rapidly phased out the world has no hope of staying within 1.5C of global heating. To hit the target, at least 40% of the world’s existing 8,500 coal-fired power plants must be closed by 2030 and no new ones built. One of the hardest-fought phrases in the text produced at Glasgow was a commitment to “phase down” coal-fired power generation. Originally that was a phase-out, but India insisted on the change, despite pleas from other developing countries. It may seem incredible, given how central fossil fuels are to the climate crisis, but since the Kyoto protocol was signed in 1997 no Cop decision has made a direct reference to phasing out fossil fuels. This reflects fierce opposition from oil-producing and coal-producing countries, and from those heavily dependent on consuming fossil fuels. This has stymied much progress at these talks, which rely on consensus for all decisions taken. So even the watered-down commitment was welcomed as a major step forward. Adaptation and climate finance Rich countries agreed in 2009 that poor countries would receive at least $100bn (£75bn) a year from 2020, from public and private sources, to help them cut emissions and cope with the impacts of the climate crisis. But by 2019, the latest year for which data is available, only $80bn flowed. Developing countries are angered by this, which was reflected at the talks, and have been promised that increases will follow in the next five years that will bring the finance for the next five years to $500bn. Crucially, they also want more of the cash to be spent on adaptation, rather than emissions cuts. This is important because most of the climate finance currently available goes to funding emissions-cutting projects, such as renewable energy schemes, in middle income countries that could often be funded easily without help, because they turn a profit. But the poorest countries who need money to adapt to the impact of extreme weather struggle to obtain any funding at all. In the end, the text agreed to double the proportion of climate finance going to adaptation. The UN and some countries were calling for a 50:50 split between funding for emissions cuts and funding for adaptation, so this has fallen short but is still an important step. Loss and damage Loss and damage refers to the ravages of the climate crisis that are too destructive for countries to prevent or adapt to them – hurricanes and cyclones, for instance, or the inundation of low-lying areas by storm surges. Countries have been talking about loss and damage for a decade but the discussions have made little progress. Developing countries say they are already spending large sums from their already stretched budgets to repair the damage caused by the climate crisis, but developed countries are wary of the way the discussion has sometimes been framed, as a call for compensation or reparations for climate damage, which they cannot accept as it would lay them open to endless legal liability. At the last Cop, discussions moved on far enough for the setting up of a database and communications and reporting system, called the Santiago Network. Many developing countries were hoping that Cop26 could provide a further step, towards some form of funding mechanism for loss and damage. That has not happened, and the issue will return to the talks next year. Reaffirming the Paris agreement Some countries came to Glasgow opposed to stronger action and tried to suggest that focusing on 1.5C was “reopening the Paris agreement”, the main goal of which is to hold temperature rises “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels while “pursuing efforts” to limit rises to 1.5C. The UK hosts and supporters such as John Kerry of the US repeatedly pointed out that “well below” 2C could not mean 1.9C or 1.8C, as those were not “well below”, and that going below that got close to 1.5C. There are also repeated references in the text to “the best available science”, which has moved on since the Paris agreement to show even more clearly that 1.5C is much safer than 2C and that every fraction of a degree counts. So the argument at Glasgow was firmly won in favour of 1.5C – in itself an achievement for the UK hosts, and much better for the planet.In 1741, a retired Dutch sea captain called Douwe Mout van der Meer brought to Rotterdam from India the first live rhinoceros to be seen in mainland Europe since 1579. He named this marvellous beast Clara, and for the next 17 years the two of them toured the continent ceaselessly; a modern map of their travels, all coloured arrows and sinuous lines, brings to mind a page from the back of an in-flight magazine. But for Van der Meer, such wanderings were worth the trouble (it took eight horses to pull Clara’s enclosure). His rhino was soon famous. For the pleasure of her company – in spite of her diet of hay, bread, orange peel and the occasional draught of beer, her temperament was ever placid – people were willing to pay the equivalent of half a day’s wages for a skilled tradesman. That armour-plated skin! The single horn that made her look, in the eyes of the public, just a little like a unicorn! And Clara’s appearance wasn’t only a hit with the crowds; artists loved her too, preserving her for posterity in marble, bronze and porcelain, in pencil, chalk and oil – and thanks to this, she’s about to enjoy a moment all over again. Since 1942, the Barber Institute of Fine Arts in Birmingham has owned a diminutive bronze of this extraordinary pachyderm (A Rhinoceros, called Miss Clara, c1750, after Peter-Anton von Verschaffelt), and it’s around this adorable sculpture – stubby, but determinedly proud – that the gallery has built its latest exhibition, one that features not only many artistic representations of Van der Meer’s rhinoceros, but depictions, too, of several other celebrity beasts, among them elephants called Hansken, Jumbo and Chunee; a hippopotamus who was known as Obaysch; and a nameless zebra from Ethiopia whose owner liked to boast of how its exquisite stripes produced “the effect of a little horse in masquerade”. The result, a veritable menagerie of a show, is just about perfect. Curated by the Barber’s head of collections, Robert Wenley, this is the best small exhibition I’ve seen in years: a single-room display that fills the visitor with wonderment at every turn. The earliest depictions of Clara date from 1749, and comprise, somewhat bizarrely, a pair of anatomical engravings, made by Jan Wandelaar for Professor Bernhard Siegfried Albinus’s treatise Tabulae Sceleti et Musculorum Corporis Humani, in which she appears next to a human skeleton; apparently, the “rareness” of the animal was felt by Albinus to be, in context, an “agreeable” ornament. But if she’s rather pushed out of the picture here – chewing the cud serenely, Clara is oblivious to the rattling bones close by – henceforth, she’s always centre stage. Johann Elias Ridinger, an artist from Augsburg in Germany, made six drawings of her when she visited the city on 12 June 1748, and now you can see her “personality” – or one of them – begin to emerge. In one, she lies on her side, seemingly about to fall asleep – in a vignette of her head on the same sheet, she appears to be yawning – while in a later engraving by the same artist (c1750), she’s depicted as an old crone, her eyes rheumy, her skin wizened; all she needs to complete the look is a bonnet. Both images make for something of a contrast to Study for the ‘Dutch’ Rhinoceros by Jean-Baptiste Oudry (c1749), in which, though her ears are up and her face friendly, she looks battle-ready, a breast-plate of skin slung about her middle; and even more so to Pietro Longhi’s oil, The Exhibition of a Rhinoceros at Venice (c1751), in which her appearance is almost velvety, the sable folds of her hide loose and luxuriant. In Longhi’s painting, a small crowd looks on, marking a minor shift in the exhibition’s tone. Skeletons apart, humans have not intruded until this point, and now the mind turns reluctantly to questions of freedom and captivity. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, Europeans knew next to nothing about how to keep the exotic creatures they prized. Even the habitats of these animals were impossible for most people to imagine: if rhinos are pictured in a landscape at all in this exhibition, it’s always fantastical, a hotch-potch of palm trees and dock leaves. But this didn’t stop the menagerie-keepers, of course. George Cruikshank’s Destruction of the Furious Elephant at Exeter ’Change, 1826 depicts the sad demise of Chunee, an Asian elephant who went “mad”, threatening to break out of his pen at Edward Cross’s menagerie in the Strand, where he’d been resident since 1814 (he met his end at the hands of a firing squad, an outrage that sent “elephant-struck” London half-mad with grief). Later known as Polito’s Royal Menagerie, this collection of animals, a camel and several kangaroos among them, inhabited the top floors of a shopping arcade – and it was very famous indeed, even if it did display a “hippopotamus” that was actually a tapir. Visiting it in 1813, Lord Byron recorded in his diary that “the Ursine sloth hath the very voice and manner of my valet” and that the pre-madness Chunee behaved so well, he wanted him for his butler. Rudolph Ackermann’s aquatint of the Exeter ’Change menagerie from 1812 is one of the most fascinating things in the gallery, the animals displayed as if in a department store, the fashionably dressed visitors gazing at them hungrily, as if they might be for sale. It’s horribly sad, of course: the creatures have no room to move. The sense of enclosure is crushing. (It’s a relief, as you move on, to read of the move away from amateur menageries and sideshows; of the pressure, not least from the public, that led to the establishment of the Zoological Society of London.) Yet here, too, is curiosity and excitement, the sense of a wide world yet to be discovered. You feel almost envious of the crowd’s goggled-eyed fascination. But perhaps there’s no need for envy. I must admit that in the grip of this quietly amazing exhibition, I was a child again. It’s just so delightful. Joseph Wolf’s watercolour (c1850/51) of Obaysch, an Egyptian hippopotamus that caused a sensation when he arrived in London, thousands flocking to see him at the zoological gardens, isn’t by any stretch the finest work of art in this show (that accolade might go to Rembrandt’s 1638 etching of Adam and Eve, in which an elephant stands for goodness in the face of the trickster serpent). But it was the one I felt most powerfully drawn to, the animal made to look so sleek, with a face as kindly as an old parson’s. On the train home, eating an indifferent sandwich, I read of what Charles Dickens called Obaysch’s “unctuous appetite for dates, his jog-trot manner of going”, and was filled with what I can only describe as sheer joy. What a world, that (still, just about) has such creatures in it. Miss Clara and the Celebrity Beast in Art, 1500-1860 is at the Barber Institute of Fine Arts, Birmingham, until 27 February 2022There is a sense in which we are all books of emotions: we flip through our pages and think we know how to name what we are feeling. What makes this book so fresh, fascinating and unusual is that it takes nothing for granted and raises new questions at every turn. It reminds us that the language we use to name and nail emotions is provisional (as rough and ready as pinning the tail on the donkey). In Marina Warner’s superb foreword, she mentions in passing that “the word emotion only emerges in English in the 17th century”. I read this with sudden insecurity. Without the containment of the word, what might emotion mean? “For something so powerful and fundamental, emotion is a slippery concept,” the book’s editor, Edgar Gerrard Hughes, suggests, before asking us to consider whether hope, curiosity, thoughtfulness, aggression and concentration count as emotions. But the overarching question is whether the concept of emotion is “too vague and multivalent to be of real use”. What follows is a meticulously chosen selection of serious and playful contributions that include blushing, the pre-history of emojis and disgust. There is a brilliant fictional piece, After the Party, by Natalie Hume, in which a woman writes a note to the father of her children in the sweetest tone (rage with sugar added) to explain why she no longer wants to live with him. We are encouraged to investigate our own emotions, with many opportunities to put ourselves to the test. I took the book on holiday and tried its intriguing questionnaires out on my husband and grownup sons. We were charmed, alarmed and entertained by turns. You might think yourself expert at reading the expression of human faces but it was startling to realise how limited our ability to translate that knowledge is when it comes to animal countenances. A scarlet chameleon that, in my judgment, looked gloomy and grumpy, was revealed to be excited. A chimp that looked confidently outspoken turned out to be in distress. And so on. Asked to guess the emotions of these animals, we were almost 100% wrong. There is a thought-provoking section in which you choose a landscape painting from a selection of seven to gauge your emotional state. In the grand tradition of Redstone publications, this book is eclectically illustrated. There is an amusingly conceived questionnaire that attempts to gauge levels of intolerance. Which of the following irritate? “Parents discussing their children’s virtues and achievements/Dentists who ask questions when it is impossible to answer/A person who asks for, and then instantly ignores, your advice.” A brilliant later section identifies words for emotions in different languages (for which there is no English equivalent). Iktsuarpok is an Inuit word I’d like to adopt (if I could pronounce it), meaning the state of waiting restlessly for company to show up. A word of caution, though, about the falling in love section. A benign questionnaire to enhance love is followed by a devious sequel calculated to demolish it. My husband and I decided against advancing beyond the first question: “If you could burn one possession of mine, what would it be?” Without drawing breath, my husband looked at me and said: “That jumper [of which I’m especially fond] you are wearing.” Read The Book of Emotions with bookmarks (and perhaps a stiff drink) to hand – there is much you will want to refer back to and reflect upon. It is tremendous company and leads to great conversations, providing you can avoid divorcing over it. • The Book of Emotions, edited by Edgar Gerrard Hughes, is published by Redstone (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyUnder £10 Bao sauces Hot Man Sauce, Plum Pickle Ketchup, Burnt Chilli Sauce, Tiger Dressing; condiments to complement your finest homemade meals. £6-£7.50, baolondon.com Ocelot chocolate Handmade chocolate produced in Edinburgh. £5.50, selfridges.com Andree Jardin solid dishwashing soap Suds up! Lather away – but do it plastic-free. £6.99, souschef.co.uk Vintage babycham glasses Antique coupes featuring the famous brand. £6.50, re-foundobjects.com Peas in a pod felt keyring Cute keyring for your veg-loving BFF. £6.49, souschef.co.uk Rooted spices and blends Fresh and fragrant, from the top spice movers and shakers. From £4.25, rootedspices.com Basil sprout pencils Plant your stubs, add sunlight and water… next comes pesto. £3, vam.ac.uk Luxury matches Pretty enough to sit on the table or mantlepiece. £8, jamjaredit.co.uk Ozeki one cup rainbow edition sake The No 1 Japanese cup sake celebrates diversity with this special edition. £6, harveynichols.com Crema di pecorino Seriously bougie cream cheese. £9, boccadilupoathome.com Spanish tinned fish and seafood Pescatarian stocking fillers. £2.99-£3.79, souschef.co.uk Chocolate turkeys Miniature gobblers with a creamy filling. £1.99, souschef.co.uk Rare Tea Co tea tins Carefully sourced tea served at some of the world’s finest hotels and restaurants. £4.99-£8.75, rareteacompany.com St Martin in the Fields tea towels Festive tea towels in shades of polar bear and lovable kitten. £7.95, shop.smitf.org Under £50 Biskut Bar Indian afternoon tea biscuits Spice up your cuppa. £33, biskutbar.com Elisabeth Luard prints Fingerling potatoes, curly kale, beetroot with leaves, lovely prints by the famous food writer. £15-£18, elisabethluard.org Torotoro No Umeshu Serve this plum liqueur on ice with a splash of soda. £40, umeshuya.co.uk Studio Ashby mitts Too hot to handle? £49, studioashby.com Niwaki mainichi snips Smart shears in buttercup yellow. £39, niwaki.com Margarita and espresso machine decorations Raise the bar this Christmas. £22-£26.95, selfridges.com, libertylondon.com Growing Through the Seasons 2022 wall calendar Planting tips to keep your veg garden shipshape. £16.50, vitalseeds.co.uk Spring-to-go breakfast box Walnut and raisin butter, Guernsey butter, eggs, postcard tea and apricot jam, ie the perfect Christmas breakfast. £38, springrestaurant-shop.co.uk Assorted White Mausu Move over crispy chilli, this is your new comndiment €36, whitemausu.com Miaow For Now mug Made for your cat-loving friends by artists at Arthouse Unlimited. £14.50, arthouseunlimited.org LIGA coasters Tableware made from cork and recycled plastic. £12, trouva.com Honey &amp; Co notebooks Nice notebooks decorated with pomegranates, oranges and lemons. £13.95, honeyandco.co.uk Tiger bar tools Seven-in-one knife, jigger, zester, muddler, corkscrew, bottle opener and strainer. £24, notanotherbill.com Popolo egg cup with saucer Dippy eggs but make it chic. £15, libertylondon.com Over £50 Hewn spoon carving set All you need to whittle teaspoons, soup spoons, tablespoons and more. £90, hewn.ie Our Place Always pan Steam, sauté and sear; there’s no limit with this pan. £140, fromourplace.co.uk Bubbleshop festive case Champagne to see you through from Christmas breakfast to Christmas dinner and beyond. £300, bubbleshoplondon.com Petersham Nurseries luxury gardening hamper For the ardent kitchen gardener. £390, petershamnurseries.com Odysea &amp; Rovies plant-a-tree fund hamper Proceeds go to Let’s Do It Greece, a charity working to stop destruction caused by wildfires. £60, odysea.com Karen Mabon chef’s table pyjama set Sweet (and savoury) dreams are made of these. £125, karenmabon.com Francois Doucet Provence confectionery chest Drawers of fig and grapefruit jellies, chocolate-coated hazelnuts, and almond praline. £55, souschef.co.uk The Source pure Cardrona gin Delicious gin made in New Zealand’s southern Alps. £54.90, specialistcellars.co.uk Kin oak carving board Artfully made with timber sourced from Suffolk, Essex and Norfolk. £110, kinwoodboards.co.uk Hay sowden kettle Danish-designed kitchen kit for the domestic goddess. £99, libertylondon.com Pooky Artur table lamp The ultimate lamp for cardoon lovers. £221, pooky.com Lagavulin 12-Year-Old OFM editor’s pick. £129.49, malts.com The Book of Citrus Fruits by JC Volkamer 170 varieties of citrus delightfully depicted. £125, taschen.com The cook’s hamper Angela Hartnett’s favourite ingredients, from Toscana olive oil to Pump Street chocolate. £220, cafemurano.co.uk Jikoni tablecloths Bright and beautiful, hand-blocked prints in Jaipur. £62-£85, jikonilondon.com Handmade stoneware fermenting crocks Think sauerkraut, kimchi and cornichons, and pickle your presents this Christmas. £59.99 each, souschef.co.ukNo one weaponises passion quite like Idles. While their arsenal may vary, the mode of attack is always guns blazing. Last year’s Ultra Mono was criticised for its simplicity and lack of development, as the West Country quintet reduced and perfected their breathtaking gut-punch, post-punk aesthetic. The same faults can’t be aimed at this expansive yet introspective sequel. Glass-gargling frontman Joe Talbot disinters his lifelong struggle with substance abuse over 14 songs, circling around a traumatic, drug-fuelled car crash. The band use everything they’ve got, from buzzsaw riffing to beatless orchestration, staccato rap to Sinatra croon, peaking with the stately, stirring grandeur of the remarkable The Beachland Ballroom – a stately grandeur that includes hollering the word “damage” until your vocal cords bleed. Some may bridle against their say-what-you-see songwriting, but few bands since Nirvana have excoriated themselves with such palpable joy. Who else could scream texts from their dealer and call it a song? Has anyone ever depicted taking drugs and causing a road traffic accident as perfectly as Car Crash? Songs such as The Wheel and Stockholm Syndrome offer thrills that can’t be denied, a preposterously exciting scrapyard soul.It’s Saturday morning and I’m standing in the middle of Osterley Park, west London, between my mum and dad, getting ready for the weekly parkrun. My dad is jogging on the spot, my mum is doing the same. I am thinking how do I get out of this? Both of them are full of energy, encouraging me to get warmed up. All I want is a chocolate and nice masala chai – my favourite spicy tea. I hear the countdown, getting nervous now, and off we go. My dad has sped ahead and with his hand he signals to me to keep up. Behind me is my mum. I can’t go anywhere, they are both watching me and I will have to finish this run stuck between them. Finally, we get to the finishing line and I’m shattered. My dad can do a 5km in 33 minutes. I can barely do it in 45. My mum and I walk and run together. Later on my dad will encourage me to do some skipping, and Mum will get me hula-hooping. This, along with their nutritional advice, has been my daily routine for the past six months. Who needs expensive personal trainers when I can turn to Mum and Dad? Last year I had a health scare; I found a lump on my neck. After a scan it turned out to be fatty tissue, which isn’t harmful but unless I lose weight, or I have surgery, it could get worse. My parents said to me: don’t get surgery, let us train you and you’ll feel much better. I was tempted to take the easy option and have it removed. But I also thought, maybe this is an eye-opener and a wake-up call for me to start getting fit. Over the years I’ve noticed how well my parents manage to look after their health and how healthy they seem in their 70s. I had never bothered to follow their example or been that curious about the secret of their good health, but then I realised what a great resource they could be. I would look at them both, so slim, strong and healthy – much more so than me – and think, how will I ever get to be like them? I’m constantly impressed by their resilience. They have never taken any sick days from work, unless they really needed to. They don’t need to visit the GP much. Their habits are ingrained and it works for them. Part of their success is how efficiently they control what they eat. Their diet is extremely healthy and they stick to it. For breakfast, it’s porridge; lunch is salad or a wholemeal sandwich with butter, turmeric, garlic, raw onion and black pepper. Dinner is boiled vegetables, or sweet potato, or lentils, or kidney beans. Both of them were born in India and grew up eating fresh, unprocessed food. My dad is a retired bus driver, and my mum still works part-time as a sales assistant. My dad started skipping at the age of six and my mum has won fitness competitions at the gym. They are seriously hardcore. In this respect, I was the complete opposite. I hated fitness and was very lazy, so our first step was to come up with an exercise regime that suited all three of us. As a bit of a lightweight, I had to start off slow. My dad told me what exercises I needed to do and designed my daily routine: I rise early in the morning, do some sit-ups and breathing exercises and then go for a run, which includes jogging, walking and skipping. Later on in the day, I’ll go for a long walk. I also eat less and drink more water. I have just one masala chai a day, and avoid crisps and fried food. My parents have also given me some traditional Indian remedies, featuring things like fennel seeds, cardamom, cloves and turmeric, which has been used for years as an anti-inflammatory and antioxidant. It hasn’t been easy – sometimes I feel like I am in the army when I hear them shouting at me. Yet training has bought us closer together. On the whole I would say they’re militant, but in a caring way. When my dad told me I should eat more raw ingredients – including onion, garlic, cumin seeds, turmeric and black pepper – my jaw dropped; I thought “seriously?” When he told me to stop eating milk chocolate and switch to dark, I tried it – I felt sick but I took his advice. But I’m slowly changing. For something sweet, my mum has a handful of dried sultanas or one date a day, and now I follow her example. I was in a dark place before I started my regime because of the pandemic, being unemployed – and also turning 40. I needed help with my mental health, and my parents were a beacon of light. Through this training regime they’ve designed, I have structure in my life. Last year, my dad became a social media sensation as “the Skipping Sikh”. He started a skipping challenge in lockdown and raised thousands of pounds for the NHS. He’s now a mini celebrity and admired by people worldwide with thousands of followers on social media. This year my mum became “Hula Hoop Kaur”, and I see how they inspire the world, especially the younger generation in the Asian community who all tell my parents that their own parents never exercise. Their standards are high and I have a lot to live up to – following their example makes me aware that I really need to improve my willpower. It’s not easy being Punjabi and saying no to samosa, onion bhajis and all the Indian sweets. Our food isn’t always very healthy, so I know I need to be more mindful of this when I am out with friends. It is these lifestyle changes I’ve introduced that have made a real difference to my mental health. Now I can feel the benefits, exercise has become a bit of an addiction. It’s a gamechanger; I feel more positive, and I want to help others – especially Asian women in their 40s who are at home, feeling dispirited. My parents have shown how exercising with simple things at home is possible; even a jog and a walk can help you stay healthy. They say the balance is 80% diet and 20% exercise. I have a long way to go. My parents’ fitness levels are still far higher than mine, but it’s an incentive to keep going. A few years ago, my dad told me I should follow his exercise and diet routine and I didn’t listen to him. Now I realise it’s never too late, and slowly I’m catching up. Life is very different for me these days – I realise it has to be if I want to be as healthy and youthful in my 70s as my parents. My dad is up each morning around 4am to pray and after that he does sit-ups, as well as skipping; my mum’s routine is similarly active. I see strength in their example. I, too, now wake early, do my sit-ups and drink a warm glass of water. Thanks to their encouragement, I put exercise at the forefront of my life – and everything else follows. The Kaur regime • I start every morning with 10 minutes of sit-ups on an empty stomach. I skip for three minutes, then have one glass of water and then, an hour later, one black coffee. • I exercise for 30 minutes each day. I make sure at least 10 minutes of my activity increases my heart rate. If I want to build on this, I try another 10 minutes of sit-ups before bed. • Our family’s 80:20 ratio means that we believe 80% of keeping fit is down to a healthy diet. The remaining 20% is down to exercise. • Wherever possible we stick to raw food – spinach, broccoli, red pepper, cauliflower, carrots – otherwise we only lightly cook things like sweet potatoes. • I treat myself to dark chocolate but avoid milk chocolate. We cut out frying and instead we brush food with olive or avocado oil and roast or grill it.“The most important thing is those who break the rules must be investigated and should be punished.” These words were uttered by the prime minister at Cop26, after a week where standards in public life have come into sharp focus. I am sure many people will find they ring hollow, given the recent actions of Boris Johnson and the government he leads. For an investigation to hold any weight, those making a complaint must have confidence in the process and those making the final decision must not have a conflict of interest – pretty basic stuff. However, this is where the current investigations under the ministerial code – the only mechanism to hold ministers to account for their conduct – fall wildly short, as the prime minister is the sole arbiter, acting as the judge and jury in any cases that reach his desk. We saw these failings play out in the most disappointing of ways after the ministerial code investigation into the home secretary, Priti Patel. Johnson’s own adviser on the ministerial code, Alex Allan, concluded there was evidence of bullying behaviour by Patel, and this was indeed a breach of the ministerial code. However, in an astonishing turn of events, we witnessed Johnson simply refuse to accept this advice and instead determine himself that there was no breach, leading to Allan’s resignation. The basis of this decision appears to be that, despite the evidence, Johnson sought to give weight to the home secretary’s assertion that any behaviour was unintentional, and he therefore concluded that she had not breached the code. The result, if left unchallenged, is that when it comes to standards of conduct it’s one rule for ministers and another for civil servants, even if they’re working in the same department or indeed the same building. It could also allow ministers to avoid the consequences of their behaviour in future by pleading that it should be the intent of their actions that is important, not the consequences. The foreword to the ministerial code, written by the prime minister himself, clearly states that “there must be no bullying and no harassment”, but civil servants now have little confidence this will be enforced. A recent survey of the members of my union, the FDA, which represents senior civil servants who are likely to work with ministers, found 90% have no confidence in the code as a mechanism for dealing with bullying and harassment from ministers. Civil servants deserve to carry out their work without fear of being bullied or harassed, and Johnson, who is also minister for the civil service, has a duty to ensure his ministers adhere to these most basic standards of conduct in the workplace. That is why we are asking the court to rule that the prime minister misdirected himself. This is not about forcing Patel to face sanctions; that is a matter for Johnson. This is simply about how the ministerial code is interpreted. In an attempt to avoid litigation, we offered not to pursue our legal challenge if Johnson amended the code to include a definition of bullying consistent with those that apply to civil servants. Unfortunately, this offer was refused and so we were left with no option but to seek a judicial review of his decision. After the circus we’ve just witnessed regarding the rules that govern standards in parliament, the prime minister really should learn from his mistakes and work with us to ensure the ministerial code is fit for purpose, and create an independent process for dealing with complaints about ministers’ conduct that carries the confidence of ministers and civil servants. Otherwise, he risks permanently damaging the public’s faith in the integrity of government, parliament and our public services. Dave Penman is the general secretary of the FDA unionFor more than two years during the second world war, 158 Squadron of Bomber Command flew missions over Germany and Nazi-occupied Europe from RAF Lissett, an airfield near the east Yorkshire coast. Since the 1970s, members of the 158 Squadron Association and their families have met for an annual reunion, including a Sunday morning service at Lissett’s village church; I attended this September. As the Last Post cut through the muggy air, it sounded an especially poignant note – 2021 marked the first 158 Squadron event at which there were no surviving veterans present. It was a deeply moving experience, and emphasised how quickly the second world war is passing beyond living memory. I used to buy my annual poppy from old servicemen wearing their second world war medals, collection boxes in hand, at my local railway station. It’s noticeable that as these people have left us, Remembrance has become the subject of bitter argument, with annual rows about who is or isn’t wearing a poppy. The Poppy Watch Twitter account, which collates some of the more tasteless examples of commemoration (pull the pin on a hand grenade of rum, anyone?), gets busier every year. Myths of plucky Britain struggling “alone” in 1940 shape our current moment, from Brexit to the government’s response to the pandemic, during which the implication often seemed to be that imbibing the “Blitz spirit” might be a magical medical treatment. A recent survey found that the majority of British adults regret not speaking to elderly relatives about the war before they died: what they may have found through those conversations is a picture of the war far less parochial or simple than that we are presented with today. And now that generation is disappearing, those born well after the conflict have a newfound duty to remember the war in all its worldly and diverse detail. The memory of the anti-Nazi war is frequently invoked by populist chancers like Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson and England’s rightwing press. But to allow the second world war to be used for dubious political ends is to obscure the lives of those who, often far from the frontline, endured boredom, fear and loneliness as they quietly got on with their duty in the biggest anti-fascist struggle in history. From their testimony, still being uncovered in archive material, unpublished memoirs, Mass Observation diaries and oral history transcripts, the moral and societal upheaval of the 1939 to 1945 conflict, and its continuing impact today, can be better understood. In my own research into a book on masculinity during the war years, I’ve discovered how extraordinary circumstances often forced people to overcome their prejudices, whether based on gender, class, sexuality or race. It shouldn’t even be seen as a radical step to reject nationalistic readings of wartime history and recognise that this was a global war in which many nations served a common cause. Following the Dunkirk evacuation and fall of France in the spring of 1940, the establishment periodical Punch published a cartoon of two soldiers looking out over the sea. “So our poor old Empire is alone in the world,” says one. “Aye, we are,” the other replies, “the whole five hundred million of us.” British Future’s Remember Together initiative, teaching children about the contribution made by countries in the Commonwealth and former empire, ought to be rolled out across the country. At the Lissett memorial service, the flags of Canada and Australia flew in the churchyard. Men from the Caribbean volunteered for service in the RAF, including the Trinidadian Ulric Cross, who flew as a navigator on more than 80 bombing missions. Māori soldiers from New Zealand were among the bravest troops resisting the invasion of Crete in 1941, even leading their British and Greek comrades in a traditional haka war dance before a bayonet charge. About 110,000 Gurkhas fought in various theatres, including bitter jungle fighting against the Japanese; nearly a third became casualties. Closer to home, the Polish 303 Squadron shot down more German aircraft than any other unit during the Battle of Britain. From 158 Squadron, Sri Lankan navigator Rohan Amerasekera’s life was changed by the war – he ended up commanding the then Ceylon air force, but also wrote a series of spiritual and religious tracts inspired by his wartime service. Part of our current examination of the legacy of the British empire – resisted by those on the right who regularly invoke the war – ought to be to commemorate the lives of those of its subjects who fought for the country that had ruled over them from afar. Even less frequently discussed are the LGBT+ men who bravely fought against fascism, such as Dudley Cave, an ordinary soldier who suffered in Japanese PoW camps but after the war sought reconciliation with his former enemies. This led to him becoming an activist and co-founding of the Lesbian and Gay Switchboard – a crucial lifeline during the HIV/Aids crisis; he was subjected to abuse for laying a pink triangle at the Cenotaph in recognition of the contribution of LGBT+ to the war effort. The site of RAF Lissett has since been returned to agriculture, with wind turbines named after 158 Squadron’s bombers turning in the Yorkshire air. Near to what was the main runway is a memorial, a silhouetted outline of the figures of an aircrew made from weathered steel. The names of the 850 men and one woman who died in active service with the squadron are etched into this simple and affecting tribute. A few dilapidated wartime buildings still stand nearby. Wandering through them, in the damp remains of the former guardhouse, I came across a swastika that had been graffitied on the wall. It was a troubling reminder that the values the wartime generation fought for are fragile and, like their memory, worth preserving. Luke Turner is the author of Out of the WoodsWhites under £10 Morrisons Soave Italy 2020 (£4.35, Morrisons) An unfussy, uncomplicated but very useful Italian dry white with a gentle, soft pear fruitiness and easy freshness. It’s fine as an aperitif, good for matching fish, seafood or salad, and cheap enough to cater for any larger gatherings. Taste The Difference Chilean Viognier Bío Bío Valley, Chile 2020 (£7, Sainsbury’s) Made for Sainsbury’s by the consistently good own-label supplier Viña Indómita, this is a nicely modulated take on the heady Rhône variety, viognier. The cool of the southern vineyards brings a breath of freshness to the opulent stone fruit and honeysuckle. Ferdinand Mayr Exklusiv Grüner Veltliner Niederösterrich Austria 2020 (£7.75, thewinesociety.com) The Wine Society describes this good value white as a “great example of bistro grüner veltliner”, but it works even if you’re not ordering schnitzel somewhere wood-panelled and Viennese: simultaneously leafy, racy, spicy and peachy-juicy. Marks &amp; Spencer Found Grenache Blanc Western Cape, South Africa 2021 (£8, Marks &amp; Spencer) M&amp;S’s range of off-beat “finds” is filled with good things, such as this South African dry white. It’s mouth-filling, heady (14%) and weighty with stone fruit but retains a freshening nip: all good for turkey-and-trimming matching. Waitrose Loved &amp; Found Bukettraube Cederberg, South Africa 2020 (£8.99, Waitrose) My Christmas pick from Waitrose’s equivalent of M&amp;S’s “Found” is another offbeat South African. Made from obscure German variety bukketraube, in a floral, citrus-inflected, tropical-fruited off-dry style. One to have with any spiced-up leftovers. Ormarine Villemarin Picpoul de Pinet Languedoc France 2020 (£9.99, or £8.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) A textbook version of the southern French seafood-matching specialism, Picpoul de Pinet, from vineyards near the oyster beds of the Languedoc’s Étang de Thau, this dry white ripples with breezy freshness and lemon zesty tang for fishy first courses. BEST BUY UNDER £10 Tesco Finest Viña del Rey Albariño Rías Baixas Spain 2020 (£9, Tesco) Albariño under £10 can often disappoint, but Tesco’s version of the seafood-friendly dry white style from Galicia in north-west Spain gets it just right: a lick of citrus, a splash of salt and sea-spray minerals, and plenty of apricot juiciness. Adnams Fine Dessert Wine Pacherenc du Vic-Bilh, France (£9.99, 50cl, adnams.co.uk) A classic Gascon dessert wine made from the local favourite grape varieties arrufiac, petit and grand corbu and petit manseng, this is tangy with crystallised tropical fruit and grapefruit drizzled in honey. Not rich enough for Christmas pud, but superb with cheese. Whites £10 to £20 Max Ferd Richter Riesling Classic Mosel, Germany 2019 (£13.50, tanners-wines.co.uk) Classic by name and by nature, this is a scintillatingly good dry German riesling from a leading Mosel Valley producer with 300 years of experience. Light and filigree, with apple and citrus and the style’s characteristic steely spine of acidity. Susana Esteban Inho Alentejo, Portugal 2018 (from £16, vinoteca.co.uk; philglas-swiggot.co.uk) A wine of enormous character and verve from the talented Susana Esteban, this rounded, ripe apple, melon and pear-scented blend of the local arinto, maria gomes and viosinho from high altitude vines fairly crackles with mineral energy. BEST BUY OVER £10: Waitrose No. 1 Sauternes Château Suduiraut Bordeaux, France 2013 (£16.99, Waitrose) Waitrose has teamed up with one of the best producers in the sauternes business, Château Suduiraut, for a flat-out gorgeous, amber jewel of a dessert wine, filled with butterscotch, honey, apricot and superbly tangy crystallised citrus. Scorpo Aubaine Chardonnay Mornington Peninsula, Victoria, Australia 2019 £17.25 as part of a case, Haynes Hanson &amp; Clark) Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula is a cool-climate hot spot producing some of Australia’s best chardonnay and pinot noir. This exquisitely balanced white burgundy-alike – all clean lines and subtle creaminess – is one for smoked salmon or turkey. Domaine Castera Jurançon Sec Jurançon, France 2019 (£17.95, Swig.co.uk) A superb example of the great south-western French grape gros manseng from the foothills of the Pyrenees, this livewire dry white combines honeyed tropical fruit with a ripple of mountain-stream purity and a grapefruit-citrus tang. Ver Sacrum Geisha Dragon Los Chacayes Uco Valley, Mendoza, Argentina 2020 (£19.95, thewhiskyexchange.com) A highly original blend (viognier, marsanne and criolla blanca), made in a highly original way (a portion of the blend is aged under a layer of yeast à la dry sherry), leads to a uniquely delicious, complex dry wine. One that is floral, fruity, savoury, nutty, and delicious. Le Morrete Benedictus Lugana, Italy 2019 (£19.95, independent.wine) From vineyards around Lake Garda, this is a beautifully poised and harmonious dry white, bright and full, rounded and soft, with a restrained summer-garden floral scent and lovely fruit concentration. A stylish choice for the main Christmas Day event. Pegasus Bay Aged Release Riesling Waipara, New Zealand 2009 (£19.99, waitrosecellar.com) It’s very rare to find New Zealand riesling with more than a couple of years of age, but this stunning example shows how much these wines can improve over time. It’s packed full of lime intensity and subtle caraway seed and illuminated with a sunbeam of acidity. Whites over £20 Luigi Maffini Kratos Fiano Campania, Italy 2020 (£22.95, or £20.50 as part of a case, leaandsandeman.co.uk) From coastal vineyards just south of Naples, this is a beautiful expression of the charms of the ancient local white variety, fiano. With notes of fennel and leafy herb behind ripe white peach, it’s intoxicatingly aromatic, sumptuously rich, yet vivacious. BEST BUY WHITES OVER £20 Domaine Philippe Colin Bourgogne Chardonnay Burgundy, France 2018 (£24, thesourcingtable.com) Very good value for a beautifully crafted Burgundy chardonnay from a leading producer in one of the region’s smartest addresses, Chassagne-Montrachet, this offers a pristine mix of concentrated golden apple, toastiness, creaminess and brightness. Gut Oggau Theodora Burgenland, Austria 2020 (from £30, buonvino.co.uk, rawwine.com) Made very much in the natural idiom, there is a love-it-or-hate-it savoury funkiness and haziness in play in this off-dry grüner veltliner, but it works so well in harness with the sweet ripe pear and gentle floral notes. Try it with a very stinky soft cheese. The Society’s Exhibition Hermitage Blanc Rhône, France 2017 (£38, thewinesociety.com) Both Jean-Louis Chave (the producer behind this bottling) and the vineyards on the hill of Hermitage are better known for intense syrah reds. The rare dry whites can be just as beguiling: full, rounded, soft and billowing with nougat and candied citrus. Reds under £10 Co-op Romanian Pinot Noir Romania 2020 (£5.50, the Co-op) The pinot noirs made under both their own name and in many a supermarket own-label by Romanian producer Cramele Recas are consistently great value. This Co-op bargain is no exception: soft, light and filled with juicy red berries and cherries. Alain Grignon Carignan Vieilles Vignes IGP Pays d’Oc 2020 (£8.99, or £6.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) The titular old carignan vines lend plenty of depth and sinew to this ever-reliable southern French red from one of the region’s biggest producers, which is filled with vivid finger-staining blackberry juiciness offset with a sprinkle of spice. Aldi Specially Selected Lebanese Red Bekaa Valley, Lebanon 2019 (£7.95, Aldi) The Aldi wine department has grown increasingly confident and adventurous, with this bold and robust red one of several striking new additions. A richly warming blend reminiscent of the southern Rhône, it’s also strikingly good value. Finest Peumo Carménère Peumo Cachapoal Valley, Chile 2019 (£8, Tesco) Consistently one of my favourite wines in Tesco’s Finest line-up, this is made by Concha y Toro (of Casillero del Diablo fame among other things) with carménère’s characteristic leafy-herbal and red pepper joined by ripe, pure blackcurrant fruit. Fleur de Moussas Médoc Bordeaux, France 2019 (£8, Marks &amp; Spencer) A delightfully crunchy, succulent youthful claret, unoaked and all the better for it: it’s all about the fragrant, just-ripe blackcurrant but there’s plenty of depth and freshness, too. Ideal for mopping up the cold cuts between Christmas and new year. BEST BUY RED UNDER £10 Yalumba Galway Shiraz Barossa Valley, Australia 2019 (£8.99 reduced from £12.99 until 30 November, Waitrose) This would be a fine buy at the full price, but it really comes into its own on offer, when you’re getting a lot of dark, spicy, savoury wine for your money, with notes of aniseed, white pepper and juicy dark brambly berries. Morrisons The Best Valpolicella Ripasso Veneto, Italy 2018 (£9.75, Morrisons) Morrisons has two very good and good value Veneto reds made either entirely (The Best Amarone; £16) or partially (this Ripasso) from dried grapes. This is the one I’d have with Christmas dinner: rich with chocolatey dark cherries, but with a lively sour plum tang. Taste the Difference Old Vine Garnacha Calatayud, Spain 2019 (£10, Sainsbury’s) Scottish expat winemaker Norrel Robertson is a master of untapping the potential of the once neglected, decades-old, garnacha bush vines of Aragon. He’s at it again here with a wine that gushes with bountiful paprika-inflected berry juiciness and soft tannin. Reds £10 to £20 Agricola de Vinos la Higuera La Pinada Bobal Utiel-Requena, Spain 2017 (£12.50, leaandsandeman.co.uk) Once considered a workhorse fit only for the most basic bulk wines, bobal has been thoroughly reappraised by Spanish winemakers. This high-altitude, old-vine take on the variety is lithe, lively and gently grippy with rosemary-inflected cranberry and plum. BEST BUY RED £10-20 Oenops Wines Apla Red Drama, Greece 2019 (£12.88, laywheeler.com) This heart-stoppingly beautiful Greek red is astonishing value. A blend of local varieties xinomavro, limniona and mavroudi, it’s pitched somewhere between pinot noir and northern Italian nebbiolo in its mix of elegant, fragrant red fruit and supple texture. A pure joy. Domaine de la Rochelierre Cuvée Tradition Fitou, France 2020 (£14.85, privatecellar.co.uk) From the hills of Mediterranean France just an hour north of the Spanish border, this deeply flavoured and scented red blend sings of its origins in the purest voice with garrigue herbs, pepper and dusky blackberry fruit. A superb value alternative to Châteauneuf du Pape. Domaine Filliatreau Saumur-Champigny Loire, France 2019 (£15.25, yapp.co.uk) Light and coursing with energy, raspberry, cranberry and blackcurrant, moreish acidity and just enough crunchy tannin. This effortlessly charming cabernet franc sends a postcard to dark winter direct from a sun-dappled, early summer Loire day. Château Sénéjac, Cru Bourgeois Bordeaux, France 2017 (£17, the Co-op) Made by the same people responsible for classed-growth Bordeaux estate Château Pontet Canet. Château Sénéjac is always one of the best-value clarets in the lower cru bourgeois division, with, in this vintage, impeccable cedar and cassis and fine, polished tannin. Giulia Negri Langhe Nebbiolo Pian delle Mole Piedmont, Italy 2019 (£18.50, corneyandbarrow.com) Langhe nebbiolo is generally thought of as entry-level barolo; for this wine from Giulia Negri, however, it’s better to think of it as its own delectable thing. More immediately silky, pretty and aromatic than its big barolo brothers, it’s an ethereal beauty for drinking now. Querciabella Organic Chianti Classico Tuscany, Italy 2018 (£19.99, Waitrose) A relatively affordable example of the impeccably polished Querciabella house style, this is Chianti Classico at its most stylish. Made solely from the region’s great local grape sangiovese, it balances the purest of red cherry fruit with notes of tobacco and oregano. Whistler Wines ‘Get In My Belly’ Grenache Barossa Valley, Australia 2020 (£19.50, thewinesociety.com) One of the best examples of a modern Australian way of grenache made from very old vines in a decidedly elegant style: pale, red-fruited and light on its feet, it has more in common with pinot than shiraz. Ideal for turkey; great with cold cuts, too. Reds over £20 BEST BUY RED OVER £20 Bodegas Valsardo Reserva Superiore Ribera del Duero, Spain 2002 (£22.50, swig.co.uk) Made in an unusually restrained, traditional style at a time when Ribera del Duero’s winemakers were going all out for big fruit and alcohol, this is now beautifully mature in a way few of its peers could match. An amazing, savoury, elegant, hugely complex find. Zaha Toko Vineyard Paraje Altamira Malbec Uco Valley, Mendoza, Argentina (£25, thewinesociety.com) The wines made high up in Altamira in Mendoza’s Uco Valley under the Zaha label by Alejandro “Colo” Sejanovich and Jeff Mausbach are among the purest expressions of malbec around. Playing up the variety’s floral-aromatic and swooningly silky-textured side, this is world-class fine wine. Domaine Bachelet Monnot Maranges La Fussière 1er Cru Rouge Burgundy, France 2015 (£23.38, justerinis.com) Talented winemaking brothers Marc and Alexandre Bachelet produce wines in a number of top grand cru sites in Burgundy, but this bottling from a lesser known premier cru shows their skill just as well: filled with berry fruit, it’s just so fine, graceful and supple in texture. Patrick Jasmin La Girofleurie Côte Rôtie, Rhône, France 2017 (£49, yapp.co.uk) From one of the winemaking stars of the northern Rhône, Patrick Jasmin, this is a typically dramatic expression of syrah grown on the steep slopes of Côte Rôtie just south of Lyon. A wine of peppery, meaty, dark, almost elemental intensity that will age for years to come. Sparkling and champagne Specially Selected Sparkling Shiraz South Australia, Australia NV (£6.99, Aldi) Very good with the cheese course, but also working well with antipasti (especially salami and other cured meats), this punchy example of the uniquely Australian take on sparkling red wine is a deliciously sweet-sour explosion of inky black fruit. Monteolivo Moscato d’Asti DOCG Piedmont, Italy 2020 (£8.99, waitrosecellar.com) With its 5.5% alcohol and easy fruity sweetness, gently foaming Moscato d’Asti makes the perfect Christmas morning partner for presents and panettone. Monteolivo’s example is a joyful mix of muscat grape, wild flowers and sweet honeydew melon. La Gioiosa et Amorosa Prosecco Rosé DOC Millesimato Italy 2020 (from £10, Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Waitrose, Majestic) The marketer’s dream of combining two of the 21st century’s most successful wine styles – rosé and prosecco – got the official go-ahead in Italy in late 2020. La Gioiosa’s is one of the best around: a rush of raspberry cream soda, it’s just right for festive parties. Marks &amp; Spencer Classics Crémant de Bourgogne Burgundy, France NV (£10, Marks &amp; Spencer) Slightly counter-intuitively, given the price of its best still wines, Burgundy makes some of the best-value sparkling alternatives to champagne around. Made in the same way and from similar grapes as its northerly neighbour, M&amp;S’s version is richly creamy and full of life. Bernard Fouquet Domaine des Aubuisières NV (£15.45, Haynes Hanson &amp; Clark) Burgundy is just one of many French regions to have upped their sparkling game in the past couple of decades. Fizz in the Loire, too, has arguably never been better, with wines such as Bernard Fouquet’s pristine chenin blanc and its crisp apple, honey and subtle buttered toast. Can Sumoi Ancestral Montònega Catalunya, Spain 2020 (£23, shrinetothevine.co.uk) A spin-off project from the Catalan sparkling master Pepe Raventós, this naturally made “pet-nat” is a million miles from so much of the ordinary cava produced in the same region. It’s so distinctive and alive with soft foaming bubbles, preserved lemon and tarragon. Morrisons The Best English Sparkling Vintage England 2010 (£25, Morrisons) This is one of the more remarkable supermarket wines around: it’s sourced from a mysterious firm that’s rumoured to be connected to England’s most celebrated fizz producer, and, at 11 years old, it’s unusually mature. It’s also brilliant: richly savoury with toasty yeasty notes and baked apple pie, with still-steely acidity. Best buy Wiston Estate South Downs Cuvée Brut West Sussex 2015 (£40, wistonestate.com; laywheeler.com; swig.co.uk) Now firmly established as one of the handful of England’s finest sparkling wine producers, Wiston Estate’s wines get better with every year. This vintage blend of pinot noir, chardonnay and meunier is unusually deeply flavoured and pillowy textured but has that distinctive searing English acidity. Louis Roederer Collection 242 Champagne, France NV (£52, Waitrose) A new cuvée that replaces the deservedly popular Brut Premier from the house behind Cristal, Collection 242 quickly erases any disappointment at the demise of its predecessor. A base of 2017 wine blended with older, reserve wines from six vintages, it’s indulgent, glossy, luxurious. Vouette et Sorbeé Fidèle Champagne, France NV (from £64.95, thewhiskyexchange.com; Harvey Nichols; vinetrail.co.uk) If Louis Roederer represents the best of the haute couture Champagne houses, Bertrand Gautherot’s Vouette et Sourbée is one of its finest artisan grower-producers. His Fidèle is a 100% pinot noir of serious dry savoury, red-fruited intensity and fathomless depths.Where should I move to in order to best survive the climate crisis (thinking within the UK, but open to other suggestions)? Pamela Gray-Jones, London Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Walking into the restaurant to meet Stephen Graham doesn’t just feel like walking on to the set of his latest film. It is the set of his latest film. Boiling Point – in which the Merseyside actor plays on-the-edge head chef Andy Jones – was shot in Jones &amp; Sons, a modish London restaurant with a modern British menu, 24 hours before the first lockdown was enforced in March 2020. (Or “When Big Fuzzy Bozza said: ‘That’s it now, everyone get in your doors,’” as Graham recalls.) The movie is a “oner”, a dizzying single-take drama that goes some way to conveying the hypertension of kitchen life on “Magic Friday”, the last Friday before Christmas and the busiest night of the year. Battling debts, addiction and an imploding personal life, Graham’s kitchen nightmare unfolds in real time as he serves up the food, deals with difficult customers, berates his staff, gets ticked off by a restaurant inspector, and so on. Boiling Point is also a small slice of cinematic history. It is the first British one-take movie. (Of Sam Mendes’s war epic 1917, filmed to appear as one continuous take, Graham says: “Don’t get me wrong, as a feat it’s magnificent. But we’ve been lied to [by the media]! It’s not one shot. Why don’t they just say it’s a film of 17 really long takes, do you know what I mean?”) Today Jones &amp; Sons has opened just for us. We will eat what the kitchen serves in Boiling Point, our menus coming with notes on key dishes from key scenes. To make things more meta I am greeted by the real Andy Jones – the restaurant, in a hidden Hackney courtyard, is his. (Graham is keen to point out that the tribute is name only, the IRL Jones shares none of his fictional counterpart’s “issues”.) The real Stephen Graham is hidden behind him. Five-foot-five but built like a brick outhouse, he is a tower of unshaven charisma in a black tracksuit and baseball cap, humming expensively of designer scent. Boiling Point was brought to Graham by Philip Barantini, who worked with him in Band of Brothers, and who writes and directs from experience. “He was an actor and he had the odd job here and there but, you know, he fell on difficult times,” Graham says. “So he trained to be a chef. And he worked in some really big kitchens.” The result is the first film from Matriarch Productions, the company Graham set up last year with his wife, actor Hannah Walters, to tell “authentic and real” stories. “We wanted to raise awareness of mental health issues, the amount of pressure in this industry,” he says. “And have a fair representation of what it’s like in a London kitchen. We wanted a completely diverse cast, you know? ’Cos the front of house can be considered very white, in elitist restaurants. But if you go in the back…” Our starters arrive. Grilled mackerel with curry mayonnaise for him, salmon cured in seaweed for me. Even given his stellar record, Graham has had quite the year. In Jack Thorne’s Help he was excellent as an early-onset Alzheimer’s patient in a care home during Covid, opposite Jodie Comer’s helpless carer. But in Jimmy McGovern’s Time, playing a compromised prison officer to Sean Bean’s floundering first-time inmate, he was astonishing. Both can take their place among the very best of what TV can be. Enraging, unmissable, inescapably harrowing dramas that show our institutions under duress and wanting, heartbreakingly so. Graham, who broke through playing sociopathic skinhead Combo in Shane Meadows’s This is England, seems to be on a one-man mission to revive the working-class social realism of Play for Today-era telly. (Insert your own “kitchen sink drama” pun vis-a-vis Boiling Point here.) Graham bangs the table. “Yes! Thank you! Thank you!” he says, possibly out of all proportion. “That was exactly my intention. I’ve made a conscious decision, going: ‘Do you know what? Them voices that I heard on telly that made me want to be an actor, the likes of Andrew Schofield and Ian Hart and Cathy Tyson [all cast in Help], they’re not around that much. So, I’m going to spend a couple of years just doing my own accent.’” There have been exceptions, notably Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman, playing Anthony “Tony Pro” Provenzo, opposite Robert De Niro and Al Pacino. But Graham remains largely impervious to the Netflix tractor beam. “A lot of people have said: ‘You shouldn’t be doing this. You should be doing big movies,’” he says. “But I think British films are in danger of being a dying art, if I’m honest. Where’s the next Jimmy McGovern going to come from? It would have been very difficult for Shane Meadows to make Twenty Four Seven today.” Because no one would take a punt on it? “Possibly, possibly,” he says, through bites of the same venison dish that necessitates a 999 call in Boiling Point, “but one of the first things out of people’s mouths is: ‘Well, maybe Netflix’ll like it.’” The kind of acting where Graham’s happiest is improvisation. Being given the freedom to put his own meat on a writer or director’s bones. Boiling Point required piles of it by necessity. And it’s how both Meadows and Scorsese work. Graham likes to get involved – the prison-made box that Combo uses to profess his love for Vicky McClure’s Lol in an outrageously good scene from This Is England (it’s on YouTube) was his idea. So was whacking a bowl of ice-cream across the room from under Al Pacino’s nose in The Irishman – something the cameraman and the props department were in on, but the director and actor were not. (“Did you see that, Marty? That kid frightened me!” is the anecdote Graham likes to tell on chat shows – as you would too if you’d earned Scorsese’s respect by going off-piste with some dessert.) Still, there are plenty more writers and directors who want things exactly as the script dictates – without hesitation, repetition or deviation. Jed Mercurio is apparently one. It makes me wonder how Graham found doing Line of Duty, playing undercover DS John Corbett in series five. “He was like that,” he says, laughing, of Mercurio. “Until he’s got me phoning him at half-ten on a Sunday night, going: ‘I’m learning this for tomorrow and it just doesn’t feel right…’” Apart from entertaining the notion of becoming a youth worker and getting as far as passing the exams to be a fireman (you can imagine Graham being, or at least playing, either), acting is all he’s wanted to do since he was 10. You won’t be surprised to learn he’s not bothered by the fame, only that it might be to his detriment. “I worry that people will think, ‘Oh, he’s in everything.’ But I’m trying to tell stories that need to be told.” Besides, it’s only Line of Duty that has made him feel recognisable. McClure had warned him – “I know you’ve done Hollywood but once it’s on, be prepared. It goes nuts” – and after episode one he knew what she meant. “The next day I went to Co-op and it was on another level.” What did people want to know? “‘Who is H?’” he laughs. His school careers officer told him to forget acting (“get a trade”), advice happily ignored by his stepfather, “Pops”, who took him down the video shop and rented Taxi Driver, The Godfather and The Deer Hunter. If he was serious about acting this was the stuff to aspire to. He had a freak-out in his 20s, a pile-up of family and work stuff, and in 2019 told Lauren Laverne on Desert Island Discs that he tried to kill himself – an audible bombshell. “I tell you why that was, she was such a great interviewer,” he says. “I wasn’t expecting to say any of that. I wasn’t prepared. It just came out.” Afterwards he was inundated with thanks from people for speaking up (there were similar messages in response to his recent work from care home workers and prison staff). These days he is teetotal, practises Buddhism and meditates. We talk a little about what sort of dad he thinks he is. One that his kids can tell anything to, he hopes. He says son Alfie is like a best mate, that they’re always getting into trouble for play-fighting and knocking a football about. And that he will encourage his kids to be whatever they want to be. Given his own stepfather’s encouragement, I wonder which of Graham’s roles he likes the most. “I don’t know, I’ve never asked him,” he says. “Shall we ask him?” So he phones him up. “Dad! What are you laughing at? Right, listen, I’m just doing this interview, with this lovely fellow, for the Observer. And he’s asked me a question to which I don’t have the answer. I’m going to put you on loudspeaker…” “What’s the question?” asks Pops. “Well, I’m going to fucking tell you now…” replies his son. No hesitation here either. It’s Combo. “Combo I liked for a lot of different reasons,” Pops explains. “It was the door-opener, wasn’t it?” It was the kind of role his stepdad had suggested his son hold out for, and the one he thought he’d blown before filming even began because he’d not yet told Meadows he was mixed-race (his biological dad and Pops are black) – Combo being an English nationalist and a racist. Meadows’s reaction: even better. Andy Jones says he has to skip out – Boiling Point is premiering at the London film festival in a couple of hours and he needs to buy a suit. But there’s time for a quick tour of the set. If Jones &amp; Sons found itself short-staffed, on Magic Friday, say, does Graham now have the chops to help out? “Listen, I’d give it a go,” he says. “I’d get stuck in.” Boiling Point is in cinemas from 29 Dec. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgWhy doesn’t my husband wake himself up with his snoring? It is so loud I can hear it downstairs through the ceiling (he does a lot of shift work so we often sleep at different times). Sometimes I record him to show him how loud it is. It baffles me that snorers don’t wake themselves up. I would love to know why. Lucy Matthews Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Chronic snoring – loud and consistent – can be a sign of sleep apnoea, which should be taken seriously, as it can cause stress on the cardiovascular system. Effective treatment is available. I repeat: please take it seriously. YelloSnoCone Regular snorer here: mea culpa. The truth is that sometimes our snoring does wake us up. In a recent incident, every time I fell asleep, I could swear I was being woken by possums fighting in the tree outside my bedroom. After three or four times, I eventually twigged that it was, in fact, my snoring, which happened to be at a pitch that quite closely matched our frequent marsupial visitors. Brian Hill I showed this to my heavy snorer wife who says: “I do though.” Reader: she does not. Matthew Prior I am a lifetime loud snorer and do wake myself up. If I use a decongestant spray or snore strips, I sleep a lot better; otherwise I’m continually waking throughout the night. I sleep alone nowadays, the only person who will share a room with me is my daughter, who seems to be oblivious. Leonne Griggs A snore will, in fact, wake the snorer up. Fortunately, the arousal lasts for about two seconds and does not have the potency to interrupt a sleep effectively. That is why, a snorer’s blissful sleep does not come to an end despite the disturbance experienced. Judah Sharon B A question dear to my heart. Why doesn’t my wife wake herself up with her snoring? It is so loud I can hear it next door in the spare bedroom. Sometimes I record her to show her how loud it is. She wears earplugs … so, clearly that’s the reason. galvinonthewing And if you have sleep apnoea, it’s quite likely you have moments where you will completely stop breathing. This in turn forces you to wake up and gulp in some air. You might wake up many times during the night, thus experiencing a bad night’s sleep, and feeling fatigued the next day. My partner’s snoring woke them up like this many times during the night, and made their life in a wheelchair much more dangerous (including a spell of falling asleep while crossing the street). Get your snoring checked out by a sleep expert, those Cpap devices they prescribe are a lifesaver, and much quieter than sawing wood. ChemtrailSniffa One possibility is that heavy snorers are also very heavy sleepers. The worst person I ever knew for snoring also once napped through someone running a chainsaw right next to their window. Of course, many of us suspect that snorers were sent here to torment the rest of us, and their evil plan wouldn’t work if they woke up, so perhaps it’s part of the wicked design … Thomas1178 I’m an occasional snorer, and will get a kick from my wife if I’m going through a loud patch. I often get kicked when I don’t think I’m even asleep. My mind will still be processing the day, and I would say I’m conscious and generally aware of what is going on around me. But I’m clearly not hearing my snoring! Gregedo While I was lying awake listening to my wife snore, she would wake herself, thump me and tell me to stop snoring. Tedami7 It’s really weird, isn’t it? You would think that evolution would have stamped it out. If snoring doesn’t signal someone who is so out of it that they would make easy prey, then I don’t know what would. Sporpo Towards the start of spring, hedgehogs begin to snore very loudly (at least they did in my Nottinghamshire garden). We often wondered why badgers or foxes failed to locate the animal and make a snack of it (we had both in the garden at intervals). However, when visiting one of the Baltic states, we went into a 14th-century pharmacy. There we found dried and charred hedgehog offered as a cure (for respiratory problems, as I eventually discovered via Google). So, on the one hand, badgers and foxes take no heed, but human predators do (at least, they did in the 14th century). Bufospinosus Seems to me that the real question for the letter-writer should be: “Why am I sleepwalking through life where I don’t urge my partner, with snoring that severe, to seek a sleep-study for what is often a life-threatening and always a life-impactful condition?” DrFaustroll My sister is a horrendous snorer. We shared a bedroom throughout our childhood and adolescence, meaning that I had many disturbed nights, although I learned to live with it. She snores because of a jaw defect, which would require having her jaw broken to correct. Unsurprisingly, she decided against that, meaning that the snoring continued unabated. She often woke herself snoring, but had no recollection of this the next day. I might have voted for the broken jaw, but she met her partner and moved out. Now he has to deal with it and I get a peaceful night’s sleep! Medea1982 A divorced psychologist writes: the explanation is really quite simple. My own extensive research into this subject over a number of years, nobly using myself as guinea pig, concluded that contrary to popular belief the perceived sonic phenomenon of snoring has in fact no material existence, and thus cannot be heard by or disturb the accused sleeper. It is, rather, a projected hysterical aural hallucination. The condition is typically experienced by a habitually insomniac partner who shares the subject’s bed, and thus serves as a convenient excuse for violently kicking him awake at intervals throughout the night out of sheer jealousy. ThereisnoOwlAfter a noticeable uptick in the quality of cold opens of late, Saturday Night Live is back to whiffing them. Tonight’s episode gets off to a poor start with Cruz Street, a conservative version of Sesame Street hosted by the “Texas senator and the last one invited to Thanksgiving”, Ted Cruz (Aidy Bryant). Cruz’s talks to a gun-toting Marjorie Taylor Greene (Cecily Strong) and “resident medical expert” Joe Rogan (Pete Davidson), while also railing against vaccination mandates, CRT (Critical Race Theory, or, “Caucasian Rights Trampled”) and President Joe Biden’s social safety net bill. A totally scattershot opener – Chloe Fineman shows up as Britney Spears towards the end to deliver a single line – it picks at some real low hanging fruit and still comes up empty. Bryant’s interpretation of Cruz as a legitimately crazy rightwinger like Taylor Greene, as opposed to the naked opportunist that he so clearly is, continues to miss the mark, while Davidson’s Rogan bears zero resemblance to the podcasting clown. The Harder They Fall star Jonathan Majors takes hosting duties for the first time. The former military brat and Yale alumnus runs down his experience as a struggling actor while working at Red Lobster (“Both Nicki Minaj and Chris Rock got their start there – I don’t know what they’re putting in those cheddar baked biscuits, but it’s working!”) and shares some words of wisdom from his late grandfather. The monologue is long on time and light on laughs, which doesn’t bode well for the rest of episode. In The History Channel show Forgotten Monarchs, a bored queen ( Fineman) entertains a number of suitors, including Kyle Mooney’s friend-zoned loser, Andrew Dismukes’ well-hung stable boy, and Majors’s handsome prince – who’s actually just a conniving family man pretending to be a rich royal in order to cheat on his wife. There’s some funny stuff here – Strong does an enjoyably silly cockney accent – but on the whole it all feels too baggy and disjointed. A new Please Don’t Destroy sketch sees Davidson pitch a music video to John, Ben and Martin. They’re super excited until they realize the song is called Three Sad Virgins and is meant to personally humiliate them. Things get even worse for the trio when musical guest Taylor Swift gets in on the act, singing about how “John looks like a sad Ron Weasley … Martin has the charm and sex appeal of a scarecrow … John has a big ass bowling ball head …” Probably the best PDD segment yet, it’s also the funniest Davidson has been all season (he should play a cruel bully often). Swift’s performance is just icing on top of the cake. An advertising awards show hosted by Jake from State Farm (Majors) and Flo from Progressive (Fineman), celebrates the “most egregious ads of the year”, which make audiences “buy, cry and shout ‘How dare you?’” The sketch is more interested in merely referencing recognizable commercial characters, such as the Limu Emu (although credit to the effects team for their puppet work here) and defunct streaming services like Quiby and Tubi than actually sending up politically and emotionally manipulative advertising practices. Next, Majors and Thompson play the unwilling, easily spooked hosts of the Syfy channel talk show Weird Kid Tales. They interview several pairs of parents and their creepy offspring, including a boy and girl who see ghosts and one child who remembers his past life as a slain soldier. Majors and Thompson show off some good comic chemistry and the little kids all give solid performances. A commercial for Man Park promises “a dog park for guys in relationships”. The emotionally stunted man-boys bond over their inane love of Marvel, sports, Rick &amp; Morty, Bo Burnham, IPA and Vin Diesel, while giving their long-suffering girlfriends a much-needed break. This is followed by Swift performing the new, expanded version of her single All Too Well, backdropped by the accompanying short film that she wrote and directed. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost gets a huge round of applause from the Swifties in the audience by noting “I think the lesson we all learned this week is: never breakup with Swift or she will sing about you for 10 minutes on national television. At least return the scarf.” He then invites on new cast member Sarah Sherman give some personal feedback about her time on the show thus far. The kooky Sherman wonders why SNL has to be done live and air so late, while also twisting Jost’s casual reactions into salacious headlines, such as “Local Pervert Colin Jost Claims He’s Seen Most People’s Nipples” and “Local Wet Blanket Colin Jost Is Keeping Track of the Amount of Jews at SNL”. This is Sherman’s first real showcase so far, and she makes the most of it, bringing a zany new energy to the proceedings (although her manic quirkiness is likely to rub some viewers the wrong way). One also wonders if this wasn’t perhaps a test run for a possible Update hosting gig at some point in the future. The next guest spot goes to fellow newcomer Aristotle Athari, who plays Laughintosh 3000 an AI-driven robot programmed to generate stand-up comedy. His jokes include impressions of Instagram (“Look at my body, look at my face, look at my vacation, look at my body”) and his ex-girlfriend, a GPS app that liked to give directions during sex (“Go left, go left. Slower, slower, slower. Calculating. Destination was not reached.”). It’s an admirably high concept performance, but one unfortunately dragged down by some awkward pauses (only some of which are intentional) and a couple of flubbed lines. Next, a couple bring their young daughter to a Broadway revue staring sassy duo Brick and Blythe (Bowen Yang and Strong) and their special guest Tennyson (Majors), only to discover that the show is wildly inappropriate for kids, with the entire performance built around a tune called Everyone Today is Using Drugs. Yang, Strong and Majors give their all for the big musical number, but the one-note joke falls flat, especially with the studio audience, who remain uncomfortably silent throughout. This is followed by another one-note musical sketch, in which Majors, Thompson, Chris Redd and Ego Nwodim play rap ‘90’s rap group Bone Thugs N’ Harmony, who open a store that only sells dog bones. As utterly pointless and laugh-free as it is ridiculously dated, this may be the low point of the still-young season. Then Majors and Nwodim return to close out the show with another interminable, utterly forgettable sketch, playing a pair of married pastors who use their Sunday service to announce that they’re opening up their marriage to certain members of the congregation. Coming off strong run, the show definitely stumbled this week, especially during the back half of the program. But this episode was also clearly meant to be a showcase for Swift, and in that regard it succeeded. Things peaked with her centerpiece performance, with everything that followed – with the exception of Sherman’s turn on Weekend Update – coming off like an afterthought.At the age of eight, Wilbur Smith was given his grandfather’s Remington rifle, which had 122 notches on the butt. He shot his first lion when he was 14. Such a boy seemed destined to become a hunter, but it was on paper that Smith realised his dreams of adventure – and millions shared them through his 49 novels over half a century. In recent years Smith, who has died aged 88, would say proudly: “I don’t write literature, I write stories,” and added that he always saw himself as the hero in his books and always fell in love with his female characters. His African settings and blood-and-thunder approach to plotting proved a winning formula. Each of his thrillers, translated into 30 languages, sold in their millions, with his total sales more than 140m. From the instant international success of his first published novel, When the Lion Feeds, in 1964, it was clear that Smith had tapped into the golden seam of masculine adventure writing that flowed through John Buchan back to H Rider Haggard. Initially, the reviews were ecstatic – “the world’s leading adventure writer”, “a natural storyteller” – but while his output and sales figures continued unabated, the critics’ enthusiasm waned and his latter work became dismissed as “dads’ books”. Some lukewarm film adaptations did not help. Hollywood versions of The Dark of the Sun (1965), filmed as The Mercenaries, starring Rod Taylor, Gold Mine (1970), filmed as Gold, with Roger Moore, and Shout at the Devil (1968) failed to set the screen on fire and prompted Smith to write a novel that “couldn’t be filmed”. This turned out to be The Sunbird (1972), which combined present-day African adventure with chunks of ancient history and some dodgy archaeology. It became one of his best-loved titles and, 20 years later, inspired him to write a series of mystical novels set in Ancient Egypt. Smith’s many historical settings – from 17th-century Madagascar to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 – earned him the accolade of “best historical novelist” from Stephen King. Whatever the period, there was one constant factor in all his books. “I only write about Africa,” Smith was fond of saying, and when asked by an Australian fan if he would ever set a book in Australia, he replied that he might, but only after living there for 50 years. Wilbur was born to Elfreda (nee Lawrence) and Herbert Smith on their 25,000-acre cattle ranch in Broken Hill, Northern Rhodesia (now Kabwe, Zambia). While his mother encouraged young Wilbur to embrace books, his father most definitely did not. “Most of my early reading was done in the outhouse,” he said. He was, though, influenced by the stories told by his grandfather, Courtney James Smith, who had commanded a machine-gun team in the Zulu war, and used Courtney as the family name in his most successful series of African historical sagas. Smith was sent to the Cordwalles prep school and then Michaelhouse “academy for young gentlemen”, both in Natal (KwaZulu-Natal) , South Africa, where he excelled only in English. Writing for the school newspaper gave him a taste for journalism but his father told him: “Don’t be a bloody fool, you’ll starve to death,” and insisted he got “a proper job”. As a result, Wilbur studied commerce at Rhodes University in Grahamstown (Makhanda), from which he graduated in 1954 and then qualified as a chartered accountant. His stable career choice was not matched in his private life: he had married, fathered two children and been divorced by the age of 24. In 1960 he sold a short story to the magazine Argosy for £70, twice his monthly salary. His first attempt at a novel, entitled The Gods First Make Mad, was rejected, and Smith later said he had destroyed the only manuscript so that it could not be published after his death. He dispensed with “philosophy and politics” for his next effort, When the Lion Feeds, and immediately struck gold. When the book was published, he later told an interviewer, “I worked for the income tax department and as it stands now I’m still working for the damned thing”. The novels began to appear at regular intervals, but while sales soared, Smith’s private life was stormy. He married and divorced a second time, then in 1971 he married Danielle Thomas, from his home town of Broken Hill, later to become a novelist in her own right. Smith dedicated all his books to her until her death from brain cancer in 1999. In 2000 he met a Tajik law student, Mokhiniso Rakhimova, in a London bookshop. After a whirlwind romance they married and Smith began dedicating his books to her as “the Queen of my heart”. In recent years media interest in Smith focused on his relationship with Rakhimova, known as Niso, and his life as a property-owning tax exile with homes in London, South Africa, Switzerland and Malta, more than his books, which from 2015 were made in collaboration with a team of co-writers. In 2018 he published a memoir, On Leopard Rock, “a rollicking yarn of slaughtered wildlife” in which he lamented today’s lack of “real men” such as his grandfather. Smith himself said he was proud to have fathered three children without ever changing a nappy, possibly a misplaced pride considering his eventual estrangement from them. Smith had a son and daughter, Shaun and Christian, with his first wife, Anne Rennie, and a son, Lawrence, with his second wife, Jewell Slabbart. He also adopted Danielle’s son, Dieter. • Wilbur Addison Smith, author, born 9 January 1933; died 13 November 2021Righto, that’s us done over here. But join Rob Smyth now for more Women’s Football Weekend fun. Talking to his players, Marc Skinner looks aggravated and well he might. That game was there for his team, but a passive second half cost them. As such, United stay fifth in the table, a point behind Brighton in fourth and two behind Spurs in third; Everton move above Reading into ninth. The home side will be ok with that, given they went behind and struggled to do much about it. United, on the other hand, will be raging with their inability to build on a fantastic opening goal and the equaliser they gifted. 90+3 min Here come United again – they’ve been better these last few minutes – and Galton does well, back to goal, to turn a pass into Blundell’s path. But MacIver is awake, collecting her cross comfortably, and that looks like being that. 90+1 min Sue Smith gives Dali player of the match, which I guess is fair enough – she’s been crucial in dragging Everton back into the game. I’d probably have gone for Toone, who’s been the best player on the pitch over the 90, but as I said, she was better in the first half than the second. 90 min There’ll be three added minutes. 90 min The corner misses everyone. 90 min Toone has played well today, even if she’s had a quiet second half, and with the game in the balance she cleverly wriggles space just outside the box, leathering another terrific shot that has MacIver flying across goal to shove behind. 89 min Ye’ve gottae score! Another good cross from Dali puts United under, and when Magill retrieves the ball, sending an even better one into the box, Duggan watches it all the way onto her laces, only to caress a weak shot straight at Earps. 88 min Dali has looked far more dangerous since pulling wide and she teases Blundell down the line, rolling studs over the ball. But Blundell keeps eyes on it, eventually bringing it away. 87 mi Bludell drives forward and infield from left-back – she’s been a threat when she goes forward – but she can’t decide whether to find Hanson, and is eventually crowded out. 86 min Duggan finds Dali down the right and she slings over another decent ball, but this time Thorisdottir takes no chances, clearing her lines immediately. 84 min But here come United with their first attack for a bit, Toone doing really well to manufacture space down the right before standing up a cross aimed at Zelem in the middle. She gets up well, but can’t get a meaningful header on the ball, which winds up going behind. 83 min But in the meantime, it’s Everton with the initiative, Dali thrashing high from 20 yards. 82 min United have struggled to get Russo on the ball this half – I’d like to see her given the 10 minutes through the middle, because she looks more likely than Galton and Hanson to make something happen. 82 min Another change for Everton, Emslie, who was good in the first half but has been quiet since the break, replaced by Bennison. 81 min That goal has changed everything – suddenly, Everton are playing with confidence and cohesion, though that might allow United to counter on them. 80 min Dali finds Duggan down the right and Earps does well to come and claim her cross confidently, given what just happened. 78 min Earps thought she had both hands on the ball and she did, but it wasn’t under control and I’d say Magill’s touch came as she clasped. I’d not be favouring defender and keeper in that situation, both of whom got what they deserved. Eeeesh, this is a disaster for United! Thorisdottir gets her body between Magill and Earps as Earps chases a speculative long throw. But perhaps bothered by injury, Earps is slow and indecisive, getting hands to the ball but not solidly, so as she does that, Magill reaches around Thorisdottir to poke through her legs! The defender should’ve helped her keeper and cleared, I guess, which is to say this was an almighty ricket from both of them. 76 min Earps looks to have hurt herself so the physio comes on to treat her but she’ll be fine. 74 min Look what we’ve for you when we’re done here! Join Rob Smyth for all the buildup. 73 min The more time elapses, the more nervous United will get. They conceded late last week, and won’t be sure whether to hang onto what they have or look for more. 72 min Hanson does, though, look lively, even if she then shows too much of the ball to Turner, looking to sneak around her outside only to be easily robbed. 71 min Turner advances and finds Duggan down the left, but Hanson is wise to the ruse, stealing possession and driving forward, only to waste a decent situation with a shot dragged straight at MacIver. 70 min Excellent from Galton, harrying and hounding George, winning the ball ... only for the ref to appraise a foul. 69 min Ah, here come the Everton changes, Clinton and Magill replacing Graham and Gauvin. 68 min Nice from Galton, dashing infield and finding Russo, who moves it one more to Toone ... who lashes wide of the near post. 67 min On the other hand, those are good, proactive changes from Skinner: United are still on top, but something a little different will ask different questions of Everton and might help them find the clincher. 67 min I’m surprised Vesseur hasn’t made a change yet because his team remain second-best. 66 min Double change for United, Staniforth replacing Boe Risa and Hanson coming on for Thomas. 64 min Maier finds herself on the right wing and following a tussle with Zelem, the United captain is penalised – she needs to be careful. Meantime, Dali will send in a cross from just outside the box, right-hand side, but George can only head it high. 62 min This is better from Everton, finding Duggan at the far post, who pulls away then aims just inside what is now the near. But Batile deflects the shot behind and United get the corner away. 61 min United see the free-kick away but for maybe the first time in the game, Everton pen them in and Dali crosses well from the right, Thorisdottir extending a knee to send the ball behind. 60 min Now it’s Sevecke’s turn to stride forward and be encouraged to eat the grass, Zelem pulling her back then making sure with the trip. She too is booked. 59 min When Dali dallies on the ball, Blundell robs her, skating over halfway, so Sevecke introduces her to the grass and is booked. 58 min Christiansen’s been really quiet today, and when Dali finds her her attempted pass out to Graham, down the right, has too much on it. That is so careless. 56 min Lovely from United, Toone finding Galton, who takes a lovely touch away from George. They can’t make anything of it, but sustain the attack, Batile scavenging to mug Turner, by the by-line, then clipping to Thomas, who turns her close-range shot over the bar. I’m not sure how she got it so high from so near and that ought to have been 2-0. 54 min United allow a rare counter, Dali finding Turner, who crosses directly into Earps’ midriff. That’s such a waste. 53 min Toone moves so cleverly with the ball, a touch taking her into space and allowing her to waves by Dali and Graham. She then feeds Thomas, who tries to fade a cross at Russo, but MacIver collects. 52 min So far, the second half looks a lot like the first, United the more purposeful team but Everton staying in the game. And here they come again, Blundell finding Galton down the right, whose cross flies behind. 50 min Better from Everton, Graham sending Dali away down the the left, and I actually think her cross is deflected behind by Blundell, but the ref awards a goalkick. 49 min Russo picks up a loose ball and finds Batile, then takes it back and picks out Zelem, who tries a clever pass in behind that no one else reads. 47 min United attack down the right with Russo, and eventually the ball ends up with Batile, who crosses for Blundell at the far post ...where Maier does brilliantly to insert a head and send the ball behind. The flag then goes up for offside, but she didn’t know that, so the intervention was just as brave as it looked. 46 min No changes for either side, but Everton need to make some in terms of style – the gaps between their midfield and defence, and midfield and attack, are too big. 46 min We go again... Back come our teams... Also going on: Half-time reading: this is really interesting and important. United have been much the better side, but haven’t created much, so there’s a route back into the game for Everton. Thing is, the more they look to throw players forward, the more they open themselves up the counter. 45 min There’ll be one added minute. 44 min Emslie has looked the player most likely to haul Everton back into this, but they’re relying on individual moments, whereas United look a nicely-grooved team. 43 min And here comes Emslie again, picking the ball up in a central position, driving forward, then clattering a rasper that screeches over Earps’ dive ... but clips the top of the bar! What a strike that was! 42 min Emslie’s had a decent half and she nashes down the left then slings over a cross that Gauvin attacks, but her flick is straight at Earps. 40 min Aaaarrrrggggghhhhhh! Graham does superbly, bustling by Blundell down the right and she’s got Gauvin in the middle! Her square-pass does the trick too, but Gauvin can only impart a small touch – a more emphatic connection and that’s 1-1. She looks extremely displeased with herself, and rightly so – ye’ve gottae score and all that. 38 min Zelem goes short to Thomas as Everton switch off, and when the return arrives she looks for Thorisdottir at the back post. But Maier is marking, so heads clear and the home side build again. 37 min Batile advances again, winning a corner down the right... 35 min United have got Everton’s measure here, Zelem and Boe Risa tidying up every time they look under pressure in central areas. And as I type that, there’s Galton wandering infield to foul Graham, who looked to have found space. 33 min And Zelem sends a decent ball to the near post, Thomas running across Gauvin at the near post to flick hard, and at the far, Mannion, her back to goal, tries to help it behind her into the far side-netting. But an infelicitous body-position means the ball strays just wide, and though Mannion is annoyed with herself, that was a good effort. 32 min So far, Duggan has only had five touches, the fewest of all 22 players. Conversely, Russo has had most and looks the best on the pitch, winning a corner off Turner as I type that, her cross blocked behind. 30 min Batile plays a one-two off Russo, running onto the return and clipping a cross at Thomas, who contorts to head, but can only send the ball wide. 29 min Everton have had more of the ball the last few minutes, but United still look the likelier scorers – ultimately, they’ve got the better attacking players. And here they are again, Zelem prompting outside the box before Galton’s cross runs behind. 28 min Maier advances down the right and crosses low, but Mannion is there and actually does pretty well to let the ball run - I’d not have fancied having to clear that one. 27 min If United win today, they’ll only be five points off the top, following yesterday’s north London derby. Spurs will be sick to have conceded a late equaliser – as United were when they scored one last week – but their improvement has been significant. 25 min It’s more of an even game now, but Everton are still struggling to threaten – though, as I write that, Turner curves a lush ball around Batile and Emslie, who looks the home side’s most likely source of something good, races onto it. Her cross isn’t bad either, except there’s no one gambling, running across the near post, allowing Earps to gather under nae pressure. 23 min Sevecke looks for Duggan, but Mannion is up too, crowding her out. 23 min Everton just can’t get anything going, but when Thorisdottir goes in the back of Gauvin, they’ll hump one into the box... 21 min ...but seeking Russo, peeling away at the far post, she puts too much on her cross. 19 min Marc Skinner and his staff look to have done a pretty decent job in inculcating the way they want United to play. They press in unison and move the ball about nicely, making good angles for each other. Anyway, a frustrated Christiansen leaves one on Galton and Zelem will curl the free-kick into the box... 18 min United are making it really difficult for Everton to play out, Dali and Turner arguing as they’re shut down again. But then Emslie targets Gauvin with a high ball, nipping inside Batile to create the space, but Earps rushes out to punch. 17 min Everton have been better these last few minutes, but as the goal showed, United are a serious threat on the counter. And as I type that, Russo brings the ball away again, pumping a cross towards the back post which MacIver collects well. 15 min And here they come now! Dali snaps a terrific pass in behind – Thorisdottir should cut it out really, but Emslie runs onto it and she’s in! The angle, though, is not in her favour, so as Earps advances, she tries a chip which floats just over the bar and onto the roof. 13 min United are searching for a second here, and rightly so – Everton won’t be this tepid for the full 90. 11 min United deserved that. They’ve started the game playing with confidence and tempo, forcing Everton to chase. United counter quickly, one tremendous pass from Blundell sending Russo away. She makes great ground then finds Thomas, who dips inside George then tees up Toone who, from the edge of the box, opens her body to punch-swerve a gorgeous finish inside the post, halfway up. 10 min Better from Everton, Emslie running at Batile then easing infield and flipping a terrific cross aimed for Duggan, but Mannion is up to clear. 8 min A bit of possession for Everton, but United have their measure at the moment, easily taking it back and moving it quickly through midfield. Toone looks to be in control of that area – she finds space so well. 7 min And here’s Thomas down the right, skipping around Turner and crossing low but to no one, then when United regain possession, Boe Risa drags a low shot just wide form outside the box. 6 min I’m a little surprised it’s Russo on the flank – she’s playing so well at the moment, I’d not want to change her, but would want her involved as often as possible. 5 min Everton look to play out from the back, but United press – words that look strange written down – so George heaves down the line. Duggan wins the flick-on, but there’s no one running in behind, and United clear up easily enough. 4 min United prompt again down the right, Batile finding Russo ... who’s gone too early, straying offside. 3 min But here come United again, Thomas – who’s playing through the middle today, with Russo on the right – crossing low, but no one is there to finish. This is a good start from United. 2 min United quickly win a free-kick down the right when Thomas is fouled, but Zelem drills the free-kick at the nearest defender. 1 min Pre-match, they played Grand Old Team, the Everton anthem. I wonder why they’ve not replaced “Everton boys” in the lyrics with something more appropriate. 1 min Away we go! The teams take a knee. All black lives matter. The teams have laid wreaths and the last post is now being played, after which there’ll be a minute’s silence. It’s nice and sunny in Liverpool, which is more than can be said for north London. It looks a lovely day for football. Here come the teams, Z Cars blasting out over the PA. I missed this in the week, but apparently the return fixture will be at Old Trafford, which is great to hear. United took a decent contingent to Spurs last weekend, and Manchester’s appetite for football means that crowds should steadily increase. United, though, have been poor at the back this season, conceding 10 times in six league games. They’ve got plenty of attacking threat – Russo, in particular, is a player – and I fancy them to find a way today. I’m also interested to see how Toni Duggan gets on today. I totally get why Everton re-signed her, but can’t help but wonder if the game has passed her by a little. Obviously she can still play, but I’d be trepidatious about relying on her to score as many goals as Everton are probably hoping she’ll get. In the studio, Stephen Warnock says he wants to see players running in behind, not just coming short for the ball, and Karen Carney identifies Emslie as the player Everton need to create for them. I’m also looking forward to seeing how Gauvin does making her first league start of the season – hopefully she’s fully fit. Anyhow, Vesseur tells Sky that he’s looking for his best team and formation, but won’t know until after the game whether he’s made the right call. Marc Skinner, meanwhile, says he’s brought in Thomas as she has a really good forward’s instinct in the box - he’s got wonderful creators, but wants someone to finish off the chances they create. He also likes Boe Risa’s midfield passing, and plans to build an attractive, sustainable, winning team who represent the fans and the city of Manchester. There should be a really good level of desperation about this game because neither side can afford a defeat. There should be plenty of needle too. As for United, Ladd and Hanson drop out – the former is, I think, injured as she’s not on the bench – with Boa Rise and Thomas coming in, the latter making her first start of the season. As you’d expect, Vasseur makes changes as he gets to know his squad. At the back, Bjorn is replaced by Maier; in midfield, Graham comes in for Galli, while Bennison also drops out; and up front, Anvegard loses her place to Gauvin, while Emslie also plays. Everton (4-3-3): MacIver; Sevecke, Maier, George, Turner; Christiansen, Dali, Graham; Gauvin, Duggan, Emslie. Subs: Brosnan, Magill, Finnigan, Clinton, Bennison, Pattinson. Man United (4-2-3-1): Earps; Batile, Mannion, Thorisdottir, Blundell; Zelem, Boe Risa; Thomas, Toone, Galton; Russo. Subs: Baggaley, Fuso, Hanson, Smith, Jones, Stanniforth. Hello and welcome to Women’s Football Weekend! It’s been a tricky start to the season for United, who made such huge strides during the last under the brilliant Casey Stoney. Sadly for all concerned, though, the club did not give her or her team the support they and the women’s game in general deserve, so rather than pushing for the title, which looked possible a year ago, they’re fighting to convince themselves a Champions League spot is within their ambit. And if all that wasn’t enough, this time last week they looked to have held out for a crucial away win at third-placed Spurs, only to concede a 95th-minute equaliser, the kind of week-ruiner that can be hard to shake off. We shall see. Everton, meanwhile, fancied themselves a top-three finish after adding Toni Duggan to a squad that already boasted a decent array of attacking talent. But they’ve made a miserable start to that bid, enduring bad beatings from Manchester City – twice – Chelsea and Arsenal, so changed manager, replacing Willie Kirk with Jean-Luc Vasseur. But the start he made was an inauspicious one and weekend’s home defeat to Brighton will have stung badly, meaning they, like United, are desperate for a result this afternoon. Kick-off: 12.30pm GMTWith appropriate level of apology to the good people of Norway, a Saturday evening scoreless draw with Latvia raised smiles in Scotland. As the Tartan Army glance towards March and World Cup play-offs – three teams from 12 will advance to Qatar – it is hardly being disrespectful to suggest the prospect of Grant Hanley squaring up to Erling Haaland is far from appealing. With the World Cup as a prize, Denmark’s Christian Eriksen dismantled the Republic of Ireland in 2017. Haaland would surely place similar stock in an appearance on international football’s greatest stage. Instead, barring a Turkey stumble in Montenegro on Tuesday, Scotland will be spared one of the most feared forwards in Europe. The Norway scenario is significant because it is the latest example of football’s great unmeasurable in relation to Scotland. Things seem to be falling perfectly for Steve Clarke. Scotland’s manager will rightly raise an eyebrow at any sense of good fortune consistently favouring his team – Clarke’s performance has in itself been fantastic – but it is no affront to point out that the best in this particular business carry a level of luck. Progression to Euro 2020 was via a penalty shootout. The key Scottish moment in this World Cup campaign was a 94th-minute Scott McTominay winner against Israel. Lyndon Dykes nudged the Scots past the Faroe Islands with just four minutes to spare. The point here is not that Scotland should thank the football gods that they are heading to a play-off. Indeed, they are seven points clear of third-place Israel in Group F with one game to spare. Rather, there should be legitimate celebration of this achievement when Denmark visit Hampden Park on Monday. Scotland spent so many years as an international irrelevance, whereby breaks never fell their way and supporters grew disillusioned in their thousands, that they must embrace these heady days while they last. Just four years ago a Scotland manager in the shape of Gordon Strachan was reduced to blaming genetics as yet another qualifying bid crashed and burned. Try telling that to 5ft 7in Billy Gilmour in 2021. The present incumbent has long since earned the right to speak and behave as he pleases. Clarke broke the mould by taking Scotland to a major finals for the first time since 1998. Professional responsibility means it would be folly for the 58-year-old to publicly disregard the Denmark clash. Yet it has been more than a little dispiriting to listen to sudden Scottish focus on whether a seeding, and home advantage, can be gleaned by virtue of at least a point from their closing group fixture. Hampden should stage a party, an appreciation of this team’s sterling efforts in finishing higher than their pot status, rather than provide an environment whereby people are stuck in front of phone screens, calculating play-off permutations. There is already a prevailing sense that not claiming a seeding spot would somehow represent disappointment, which is preposterous given where Scotland have emerged from. If not seeded – and this is a moveable feast – as things stand, Scotland could travel to face Wales, Poland, Croatia, Sweden, Switzerland or Serbia. Turkey, Finland and Macedonia join the Scots in the unseeded bracket for now, with Austria and the Czech Republic making up the numbers through the Nations League. Of course, the case can readily be made that Clarke would rather avoid a trip to any of the initial sextet but the task would hardly be insurmountable. In many respects, the set-up of Clarke’s team suits one-off away ties. In Glasgow, pressure and expectation fall on Scotland. The key attribute of this Scotland squad is its experience amid youthfulness. John McGinn has amassed 41 caps at the age of 27; Callum McGregor has 40 at 28, McTominay 28 at 24; Kieran Tierney and Andy Robertson, 24 and 27 respectively, have played 29 and 54 times for their country. Gilmour has become a first pick at 20, with Nathan Patterson on the verge of the same standing at the same age. The best international teams grow with a solid core. Clarke’s key Denmark dilemma relates to his batch of players who would incur a suspension for the play-off semi-final if booked. McTominay, who is among them, will definitely not feature after failure to recover from a throat infection. A clearly unfair rule states the two caution limit must carry forward, even from groups including more matches than others. Nonetheless, Scotland are not the only team with this issue. There is also no reason that Denmark will be especially feisty opposition. The colour, the noise, the vibrancy should come from the stands. For a watching generation, these are the very best of times.Now it’s a straight fight for survival. The Glasgow Climate Pact, for all its restrained and diplomatic language, looks like a suicide pact. After so many squandered years of denial, distraction and delay, it’s too late for incremental change. A fair chance of preventing more than 1.5C of heating means cutting greenhouse gas emissions by about 7% every year: faster than they fell in 2020, at the height of the pandemic. What we needed at the Cop26 climate conference was a decision to burn no more fossil fuels after 2030. Instead, powerful governments sought a compromise between our prospects of survival and the interests of the fossil fuel industry. But there was no room for compromise. Without massive and immediate change, we face the possibility of cascading environmental collapse, as Earth systems pass critical thresholds and flip into new and hostile states. So does this mean we might as well give up? It does not. For just as the complex natural systems on which our lives depend can flip suddenly from one state to another, so can the systems that humans have created. Our social and economic structures share characteristics with the Earth systems on which we depend. They have self-reinforcing properties – that stabilise them within a particular range of stress, but destabilise them when external pressure becomes too great. Like natural systems, if they are driven past their tipping points, they can flip with astonishing speed. Our last, best hope is to use those dynamics to our advantage, triggering what scientists call “cascading regime shifts”. A fascinating paper published in January in the journal Climate Policy showed how we could harness the power of “domino dynamics”: non-linear change, proliferating from one part of the system to another. It points out that “cause and effect need not be proportionate”, a small disturbance, in the right place, can trigger a massive response from a system and flip it into a new state. This is how the global financial crisis of 2008-09 happened: a relatively minor shock (mortgage defaults in the US) was transmitted and amplified through the entire system, almost bringing it down. We could use this property to detonate positive change. Sudden shifts in energy systems have happened before. The paper points out that the transition in the US from horse-drawn carriages to cars running on fossil fuels took just over a decade. The diffusion of new technologies tends to be self-accelerating, as greater efficiencies, economies of scale and industrial synergies reinforce each other. The authors’ hope is that, when the penetration of clean machines approaches a critical threshold, and the infrastructure required to deploy them becomes dominant, positive feedbacks will rapidly drive fossil fuels to extinction. For example, as the performance of batteries, power components and charging points improves and their costs fall, the price of electric cars drops and their desirability soars. At this point (in other words, right now), small interventions by government could trigger cascading change. This has already happened in Norway, where a change in taxes made electric vehicles cheaper than fossil-fuel cars. This flipped the system almost overnight: now more than 50% of the nation’s new car sales are electric, and petrol models are heading for extinction. As electric cars become more popular, and more polluting vehicles become socially unacceptable, it becomes less risky for governments to impose the policies that will complete the transition. This then helps to scale the new technologies, causing their price to fall further, until they outcompete petrol cars without the need for tax or subsidy, locking in the transition. Driven by this new economic reality, the shift then cascades from one nation to another. The battery technologies pioneered in the transport sector can also spread into other energy systems, helping to catalyse regime shifts in, for example, the electricity grid. The plummeting prices of solar electricity and offshore wind – already cheaper than hydrocarbons in many countries – are making fossil fuel plants look like a filthy extravagance. This reduces the political costs of accelerating their closure through tax or other measures. Once the plants are demolished, the transition is locked in. Of course, we should never underestimate the power of incumbency, and the lobbying efforts that an antiquated industry will use to keep itself in business. The global infrastructure of fossil fuel extraction, processing and sales is worth somewhere between $25tn (£19tn) and $0, depending on which way the political wind is blowing. The fossil fuel companies will do everything in their power to preserve their investments. They have tied President Joe Biden’s climate plans in knots. It would be no surprise if they were talking urgently with Donald Trump’s team about how to help lever him back into office. And if they can thwart action for long enough, the eventual victory of low-carbon technologies might scarcely be relevant, as Earth’s systems could already have been pushed past their critical thresholds, beyond which much of the planet could become uninhabitable. But let’s assume for a moment that we can shove the dead weight of these legacy industries aside, and consign fossil fuels to history. Will that really have solved our existential crisis? One aspect of it, perhaps. Yet I’m dismayed by the narrowness of the focus on carbon, in the Glasgow pact and elsewhere, to the exclusion of our other assaults on the living world. Electric cars are a classic example of the problem. It’s true that within a few years, as the advocates argue, the entire stinking infrastructure of petrol and diesel could be overthrown. But what is locally clean is globally filthy. The mining of the materials required for this massive deployment of batteries and electronics is already destroying communities, ripping down forests, polluting rivers, trashing fragile deserts and, in some cases, forcing people into near-slavery. Our “clean, green” transport revolution is being built with the help of blood cobalt, blood lithium and blood copper. Though the emissions of both carbon dioxide and local pollutants will undoubtedly fall, we are still left with a stupid, dysfunctional transport system that clogs the streets with one-tonne metal boxes in which single people travel. New roads will still carve up rainforests and other threatened places, catalysing new waves of destruction. A genuinely green transport system would involve system change of a different kind. It would start by reducing the need to travel – as the mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, is doing with her 15-minute city policy, which seeks to ensure that people’s needs can be met within a 15-minute walk from homes. It would encourage walking and cycling by all who are able to do so, helping to address our health crisis as well as our environmental crisis. For longer journeys, it would prioritise public transport. Private electric vehicles would be used to address only the residue of the problem: providing transport for those who could not travel by other means. But simply flipping the system from fossil to electric cars preserves everything that’s wrong with the way we now travel, except the power source. Then there’s the question of where the money goes. The fruits of the new, “clean” economy will, as before, be concentrated in the hands of a few: those who control the production of cars and the charging infrastructure; and the construction companies still building the great web of roads required to accommodate them. The beneficiaries will want to spend this money, as they do today, on private jets, yachts, extra homes and other planet-trashing extravagances. It is not hard to envisage a low-carbon economy in which everything else falls apart. The end of fossil fuels will not, by itself, prevent the extinction crisis, the deforestation crisis, the soils crisis, the freshwater crisis, the consumption crisis, the waste crisis; the crisis of smashing and grabbing, accumulating and discarding that will destroy our prospects and much of the rest of life on Earth. So we also need to use the properties of complex systems to trigger another shift: political change. There’s an aspect of human nature that is simultaneously terrible and hopeful: most people side with the status quo, whatever it may be. A critical threshold is reached when a certain proportion of the population change their views. Other people sense that the wind has changed, and tack around to catch it. There are plenty of tipping points in recent history: the remarkably swift reduction in smoking; the rapid shift, in nations such as the UK and Ireland, away from homophobia; the #MeToo movement, which, in a matter of weeks, greatly reduced the social tolerance of sexual abuse and everyday sexism. But where does the tipping point lie? Researchers whose work was published in Science in 2018 discovered that a critical threshold was passed when the size of a committed minority reached roughly 25% of the population. At this point, social conventions suddenly flip. Between 72% and 100% of the people in the experiments swung round, destroying apparently stable social norms. As the paper notes, a large body of work suggests that “the power of small groups comes not from their authority or wealth, but from their commitment to the cause”. Another paper explored the possibility that the Fridays for Future climate protests could trigger this kind of domino dynamics. It showed how, in 2019, Greta Thunberg’s school strike snowballed into a movement that led to unprecedented electoral results for Green parties in several European nations. Survey data revealed a sharp change of attitudes, as people began to prioritise the environmental crisis. Fridays for Future came close, the researchers suggest, to pushing the European political system into a “critical state”. It was interrupted by the pandemic, and the tipping has not yet happened. But witnessing the power, the organisation and the fury of the movements gathered in Glasgow, I suspect the momentum is building again. Social convention, which has for so long worked against us, can if flipped become our greatest source of power, normalising what now seems radical and weird. If we can simultaneously trigger a cascading regime shift in both technology and politics, we might stand a chance. It sounds like a wild hope. But we have no choice. Our survival depends on raising the scale of civil disobedience until we build the greatest mass movement in history, mobilising the 25% who can flip the system. We do not consent to the destruction of life on Earth. • George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThe head of the British armed forces has said the military will be working with Kenyan authorities to bring those accused of killing a young woman in the east African country to trial. The body of Agnes Wanjiru, 21, was found in 2012 after she reportedly went out partying with British soldiers at the Lions Court hotel in the central town of Nanyuki, where the UK army has a permanent garrison. The Sunday Times reported last month that a British soldier had confessed to killing Wanjiru and showed comrades where he had dumped her body in a septic tank behind the hotel. The report prompted Kenyan police to reopen the case, amid fresh calls for an investigation to secure justice for Wanjiru. Wanjiru’s family have instructed the law firm Leigh Day to challenge the Ministry of Defence over what it says is a failure to investigate her alleged murder. On Sunday, Gen Sir Nick Carter, the chief of the defence staff, the most senior uniformed military adviser to the prime minister, told Sky News: “The allegations are truly shocking and it is absolutely vital that we get to the bottom of them as quickly as possible and that those who are guilty – if they are guilty of those allegations – are brought to trial. “We are going to cooperate very closely with the Kenyan authorities to make sure that is resolved as quickly as it possibly can be.” Asked about “entitled” male behaviour in the armed forces, Carter added: “The bottom line is that you cannot have the sort of culture that leads to this sort of behaviour and these sort of allegations. “It is fundamentally disgraceful and in no way can the armed forces be happy if that occurs. It will be a deterrent to all sorts of things that we espouse and we must get to the bottom of it.” Wanjiru was last seen one evening in March 2012 with a British soldier from the military base, and her body was found about two months later. Rose Wanyua, Wanjiru’s eldest sister, told the Guardian: “It’s painful, very painful. Shiru did not deserve to die the way she did. We will never forget her.” Wanyua disputes the assumption that her sister met the soldiers while looking for clients as a sex worker. “A friend told my sister that there was some ‘quick money’ to be made that evening if only Wanjiru joined her in entertaining the Johnnies in town. She was a hair stylist who used to make my daughters’ hair, never the prostitute as many would like the world to believe,” she said. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, told parliament’s in-house magazine, The House, that people had turned a blind eye to the culture of British soldiers using sex workers. “We should be asking ourselves what our soldiers are doing to respect women? Let’s start with that,” he said. “Have we done too much turning a blind eye over the last 30 years about prostitution?” Asked if people had turned a blind eye, he replied: “We have done, certainly in countries in poverty, where the British are there on a whole range of issues.” Wallace said of the Wanjiru case: “It’s a deeply concerning murder and story and there is no one in the MoD standing in the way of [an investigation]. There’s no cover-up, there’s no blockade.” The UK high commissioner to Kenya, Jane Marriott, last month expressed “outrage and concern” over Wanjiru’s death and promised high-level support for a Kenyan investigation into her murder.It may be laden with whimsical details and witticisms, but the opening chapter of Helen Oyeyemi’s Peaces feels grounded given her penchant for disorienting fables. Any predictability vanishes, however, when narrator Otto, his partner Xavier and their pet mongoose Árpád Montague XXX arrive at a dozy Kent railway station and board a sleeper train named the Lucky Day. Instantly, they find themselves in “an upside-down sort of place”, figuratively and also literally: in one carriage, the seats and tables are fixed to the ceiling. Others contain a library, a greenhouse, an art gallery (all the canvases are white, revealing different images for each viewer). From here on in, this smart, inventive narrative moves with antic momentum, darting between past and present, and from storyline to storyline. On one level, Peaces is a love story: hypnotist Otto and ghost-writer Xavier, both 38, are on their “non-honeymoon honeymoon”, the tickets a gift from Xavier’s wealthy aunt. As flashbacks reveal, they’ve both been through heartache to find each other, but questions of trust and intimacy still remain. But it’s also a mystery, because somewhere on this locomotive, destination unknown, is its owner, reclusive theremin player Ava Kapoor, who’s due a hefty inheritance if she can only prove her sanity. Ava is glimpsed by the lovers early on, holding a sign that says “Hello” – or is it “Help”? One of the joys of Oyeyemi’s work is its quicksilver ability to resist straightforward interpretation. The train was once used to smuggle tea, for instance, but good luck to any critic seeking to peg this as an allegory about empire. Similarly, while answers to its puzzles generally materialise, they’re almost beside the point in a text that responds to every question with a story, followed by more questions. While the title alludes to an Emily Dickinson poem, it’s impossible not to think of it in a different spelling. Ultimately, the book’s “pieces” come together more in the way of glass beads in a kaleidoscope – transiently, but forming dazzling patterns with each turn. • Peaces by Helen Oyeyemi is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe Los Angeles-based singer, producer and illustrator Aries currently has 461,000 subscribers to his YouTube channel, where he makes musical how-to videos and recreates the beats behind popular songs in two minutes, such as Drake’s God’s Plan and Kendrick Lamar’s DNA. The 23-year-old clearly has a skill set when it comes to producing, and yet there’s a chasm between ability and execution. While he blends rock with fragments of hip-hop in the way emo-rappers such as the late Juice WRLD or Trippie Redd have done, his attempts lack the texture and detail present in their work. Believe in Me, Who Believes in You has brief moments of promise. Riding features a pleasant guitar riff, but what does “too smart, December you’re sweatin’ And all the nuances you’re forced to accept” even mean? There are lyrics on songs such as Ditto that seem to be trying to achieve nothing more than rhyme. There are elements of introspective vulnerability here and there, but any relatable insights are drowned out by melodies and vocal arrangements so repetitive they feel as if they’re plagiarising each other.November has become synonymous with men growing extra facial hair for charity and Ireland beating the All Blacks. After 110 barren years they have managed three wins in the fixture, starting in Chicago in 2016. That they have all been out of competition is a point not lost in this constituency. “If this is the peak, it’s no good for anybody,” Ireland’s captain, Johnny Sexton, said. “There is definitely room for improvement individually and you can see some of the stuff in the first half in terms of taking our chances. We could have scored a few tries in the first half. We need to keep our feet on the ground and keep improving. This is just the start and we need to keep building. The thing about beating New Zealand – it gives a lift to the country but you don’t get a trophy for it.” Neither do you get passage to a World Cup semi-final, uncharted territory for Ireland, and already the target for the coach Andy Farrell at France 2023. Given Ireland’s ability to excel in the gap between World Cups there is already an exercise under way here in self-restraint. Not that it was evident when Joey Carbery, Sexton’s replacement late in the game, slotted his second penalty with a minute left to make the game safe. Between the football match against Portugal last Thursday and the New Zealand game there were more than 100,000 punters in the Aviva in 48 hours. It sounded like both crowds combined when Carbery hit the target. It was front- and back-page news with the Sunday Independent calling it “Just Glorious”, and the Sunday Times telling us: “You better believe it”. Worryingly, The Irish Daily Mail declared it “A New Dawn”. Experience of World Cups would suggest six months out from the tournament is the optimum time for the break of day. For Farrell, the prospect of eight wins in a row now presents itself in the shape of Argentina on Sunday. A few key changes in his pack have transformed the power surge around the field. Shifting Andrew Porter from tighthead to loose – where he started out his career – has been a huge success. The athleticism of Rónan Kelleher and Tadhg Furlong now gives Ireland a world class front row. Iain Henderson’s return from injury makes a big difference, but it was man of the match Caelan Doris who stole the show against New Zealand. Doris has had his issues with concussion and needed to take a long break to get himself right. He was outstanding, with and without the ball, keeping the All Blacks under pressure for long periods. “I was really impressed by their high tempo game,” the New Zealand coach, Ian Foster, said. “It kept us chasing and at the end, when it really mattered, we didn’t have the composure to take it [the chances]. They played a pressure game similar to several of the games we’ve faced them in before, so congratulations to them.” Farrell will have to spread the love across the squad now and give game time to others in the 38-man group. If the World Cup is the ultimate goal then establishing depth is a priority and Sunday will shine some light on that. So will next summer. Ireland are due in New Zealand for a three-match Test series in June and July. It is described by one travel agent as “ideal preparation for Rugby World Cup 2023”. And of course it is – it might be better though to focus on getting out of there in one piece.For most of the years he explored his beloved Lakeland fells, Alfred Wainwright arrived by bus, carefully timing his descents so he never missed the last service back to Kendal. Thirty years after his death, more than 90% of the Lake District’s 19 million annual visitors arrive by car, seeking – perhaps ironically – the unspoiled views, clean air and stunning scenery Wainwright extolled in his Pictorial Guides. Now, in a move that might prompt a smile from the curmudgeonly AW beyond the grave, tourist cars could be banned from some of the most popular parts of the Lake and Peak Districts next summer as they struggle with surging demand from domestic visitors. National parks across the UK are grappling with congestion and their climate commitments. Unable to limit visitors via entrance charges, as their American counterparts do, they are looking for solutions to an increasingly unsustainable problem. “It feels like we are at peak car,” said Richard Leafe, chief executive of the Lake District national park (LDNP). “I want to see less reliance on it into the future. It cannot go on getting worse otherwise it really will become too much to handle in our national parks. We need to see a shift to more sustainable travel.” Last summer free shuttle buses were trialled along the Wasdale valley by Wastwater and from Cockermouth to Buttermere, a lake that has become increasingly popular because of TikTok and Instagram and which is getting “rammed with parking”, according to Leafe. The park is now “actively considering” closing the most popular valleys to cars during peak season, said Leafe. Access would be retained for residents, buses and bikes, as well as walkers. Likely candidates include Great Langdale, which includes Wainwright favourites Bowfell and the Crinkle Crags, and Wasdale. At the same time, the LDNP is infuriating residents by granting planning permission for ever bigger car parks in an attempt to stop “fly parking” in certain hotspots. Locals in Portinscale, near Keswick, are trying to stop a car park under consideration near Cat Bells, an easy peak where rangers discovered a mini rave after the first lockdown eased in 2020. Dr Julie Carter is among many objectors. “It’s not just the climate and congestion issues, it is also that the lichens are dying from emissions, and the otters are washed out by the tarmac, leading to increased runoff rates, and the bats are disturbed by the lights,” she said. In the Peak District, park bosses want to trial “hail-a-ride”, an on-demand bus service to encourage visitors to leave the car at home. “It’s Uber but on bus scale,” said Sarah Fowler, the park’s chief executive. “It’s not a scheduled bus service, but you hail it using an app, and it carries people from gateway sites in to the park.” She has also begun discussions with the local rail companies about putting on special bike carriages to encourage more people to cycle in the park. Fowler said she was interested to explore a proposal put forward by the Hope Valley Climate Action Group to close selected roads to cars, probably in the Ringinglow/Stanage area, freeing space for walkers and cyclists. Making the Peak District more accessible by public and active transport is a social justice issue, the group argues. “One-third of households in Sheffield do not have a car and Manchester has one of the lowest car ownership rates in the country,” they noted in a recent report. “Reimagining travel could open up the national park to more low-income households, new arrivals to the UK and people living with impairments,” they argue. Fowler said the car-free days were “a really interesting concept” she was keen to explore. In Scotland, a free shuttle bus service is being piloted next year in Loch Lomond &amp; The Trossachs national park, with park bosses considering hiking parking prices in future. Kenny Auld, head of visitor services, said: “If you want to park your car at the bottom of a hill, that could come at a premium. And that could help subsidise other transport modes which are more inclusive,” he said. But he stressed: “I think at the moment it’s very unfair for us to criticise any car drivers enjoying the national park because we don’t have a system that provides many choices. We’re working hard to quickly catch up and create a system that gives people choice and that’s inclusive, affordable and keeps people connected to the landscape.” In Wales, the most popular car park at the foot of Snowdon now costs £25 for eight to 12 hours as part of measures to deter motorists. A report last year into transport and parking in Snowdonia concluded that “the current over-reliance on cars to access key honeypot sites and the chronic parking problem at busy times of year is failing the national park’s core purposes.”The government has refused to confirm or deny reports that it will finally cancel plans for the HS2 link to Leeds this week, and instead fund a hodgepodge of disparate projects which favour Conservative constituencies and leave mysterious gaps in the rail network. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, is expected to announce the outcome of the long-delayed integrated rail plan on Thursday. The Sunday Times suggested he would commit to building HS2 from Birmingham to Manchester but not Leeds, which has earmarked a large part of the city centre to accommodate a new station. To soften the blow, Shapps is expected to announce two shorter high-speed routes, the paper said. One would run between Leeds and Sheffield and another from Birmingham to East Midlands Parkway, which is in the Conservative constituency of Rushcliffe, 10 miles south of Nottingham. There would apparently be a puzzling non high-speed gap of 50 miles between the two new lines. According to the Mail on Sunday, Leeds will receive its own tram system “in consolation” for not being connected to HS2. The director of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership thinktank, Henri Murison, said: “Without the benefits to areas such as Yorkshire and the north-east, HS2’s status as a project to drive the whole of the UK is undermined considerably. “Will this be a government that levels up, or levels down and walks away from the northern powerhouse they promised with city leaders across the north?” Behind the scenes in the northern mayoralties, there are also major jitters about Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), a new trans-Pennine railway line from Liverpool to Leeds via Bradford. Details about the line were conspicuously absent from Sunday’s newspaper leaks, though building it was one of Boris Johnson’s first pledges as prime minister. Three days into the job in 2019, he gave a speech at Manchester’s Science and Industry Museum, saying: “I want to be the prime minister who does with Northern Powerhouse Rail what we did for Crossrail in London.” He committed in February 2020 to bringing HS2 to the north of England, building “a rapid connection from the West Midlands to the northern powerhouse, to Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds”. Crossrail is a new £18.6bn east-west rail line in London. It is currently three years behind schedule and £3.8bn over budget, but seen as a key driver of economic growth in the capital. NPR is the brainchild of Transport for the North (TfN) , a statutory body set up to advise ministers on the region’s transport needs. It says NPR would reduce road usage by 58,000 car trips per day, and create 100,000 jobs in the urban north. TfN has been adamant the line should include a new through-station in Bradford, which was named last week as Britain’s worst-connected major city. The Mail on Sunday said other announcements expected this week included the £78m electrification of the line from Wigan to Bolton, which now has two Tory MPs, and a reinstatement of a passenger service from Sheffield to Stocksbridge, which in 2019 elected its first Tory MP since 1935. Murison said the government’s priority should be to build HS2 south from Leeds “as well as securing a new station in Bradford on the critical new line across the Pennines”. The Guardian asked TfN what the point of its existence was, if the government ignored its key recommendations. Its chief executive, Martin Tugwell, said it would be premature to comment before Thursday. “What does remain clear though, is our commitment to securing the best possible rail connectivity for the 15.2 million people of the North, and fundamental to that connectivity is the work we have done to date on Northern Powerhouse Rail as a co-client with government and the way it integrates with the rest of the rail network, including with HS2,” he said. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “Work is continuing on the integrated rail plan. We will publish it shortly and do not comment on speculation.”Border Force guards, who the government says will be asked to turn refugee boats in the Channel around, are considering applying for a judicial review to stop the tactic from being used. Officers from the PCS union have said they are prepared to launch a high court challenge to the lawfulness of Priti Patel’s plans. The home secretary has maintained that the tactic of intercepting and sending back boats to France would be within the law. Documents from the Home Office seen by the Guardian show that the government’s own lawyers have warned ministers that the tactic could lead to a legal challenge from a union or possible strike action. It emerged last week that counsel warned the home secretary that the odds of successfully defending a challenge are “less than 30%”. The number of asylum seekers crossing the English Channel hit a new daily record of 1,185 on Thursday. Three people were feared lost at sea after two kayaks were found adrift off the coast of Calais on Thursday. There has been a spate of recent deaths and disappearances of those people trying to reach the UK across the Channel. Kevin Mills, the PCS lead for Border Force, said: “We have examined the possibility of launching a judicial review. PCS is in consultation with its members and a number have raised direct concerns about the pushback tactic – the safety and if it is legal. “If someone dies, it won’t be Priti Patel taking the body out of the water. And to say that the officers concerned won’t be prosecuted does not help our members’ mental health,” he told the Guardian. A document circulated within the Home Office in September outlined government lawyers’ concerns that unions could launch a successful challenge if ministers go ahead with “pushback” plans. “We have commenced the required three weeks of formal consultation with the three relevant Home Office trade unions on the operational proposals,” the document said. “While consultation requires listening, responding and, where possible, reaching mutual agreement in basic terms we can ultimately proceed without trades union agreement,” the document said. The document warned that unions could take industrial action, apply for a judicial review or use the Employment Rights Act to challenge the tactic. “However, there are the potential risks of the trades unions taking strike action or action short of a strike following a ballot and they could also be the source of a legal challenge. They may apply for a judicial review and support individual claims – including under section 44 of Employment Rights Act,” it said. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “The union is right to challenge pushbacks as cruel, dangerous and in conflict with international law. Conservative prime ministers since Winston Churchill have welcomed people, regardless of how they have reached our shores, who through no fault of their own have had to flee for their lives.” Patel is under increasing pressure from Boris Johnson and Conservative MPs to cut the numbers making the crossing. The home secretary promised to make the route “unviable” in August 2020. The Guardian first heard of the plans to push back boats in the Channel from Conservative MPs who had meetings with Patel in early September following a surge of crossings. Days later, the Home Office announced that they aimed to turn around boats, despite warnings from the French authorities, unions and refugee charities that it could endanger lives. Home Office sources insisted that Border Force guards were being trained to employ the tactic in specific circumstances, but union officials warned that they could envisage few circumstances where it would be viable. Lucy Moreton, from the Immigration Services Union that also represents Border Force guards, said the plan would never work because France would not engage with it. “This announcement makes it more likely that some could jump into the sea when they are approached to ensure their boat is not turned back,” she said. At the Conservative party conference in October Patel said she would move forward on the plan to turn back boats after consulting the prime minister. “Boris [Johnson] and I have worked intensively with every institution with a responsibility to protect our borders. Border Force, the police, the National Crime Agency, maritime experts – and yes, the military – to deliver operational solutions, including new sea tactics, which we are working to implement to turn back the boats,” she said. Patel also appeared before the House of Lords in October, and insisted that the practice of sending boats back to France would be within the law. Asked by Baroness Shami Chakrabarti if she had received legal advice regarding the pushback of boats. Patel replied: “There is a legal basis for it.” The Home Office said it does not comment on leaks or legal advice. Dan O’Mahoney, the “clandestine Channel threat commander”, said: “Migrants making these dangerous crossings are putting their lives at risk and it is vital we do everything we can to prevent them and break the business model of the criminal gangs exploiting people. “As part of our response it is important we have a maritime deterrent in the Channel, and Border Force officers are authorised, trained and stand ready to use safe and legal options to stop these deadly crossings.”The Uncomfortable Truth About Racism John Barnes Headline, £20, pp320 The adjective in the title of John Barnes’s treatise is apt; this book certainly feels uncomfortable, but important, too. He argues, for example, that all the initiatives to prevent racial abuse in UK football stadiums don’t stop racism as a conscious or unconscious act. Rather, they just allow us not to hear it for two hours. If Barnes has solutions, they are bound up in societal change and education rather than acts such as taking the knee. Passionate, confrontational stuff. The Manningtree Witches AK Blakemore Granta, £12.99, pp304 (paperback) Blakemore has previously published two collections of poetry and it shows; the way in which she makes this award-winning tale of witch trials in 17th-century Essex sing with vivid and sensual language is remarkable. Her narrator, 19-year-old Rebecca West, becomes one of the accused and it’s her deft commentary on the patriarchy, balancing wit and anger, fear and suspicion, which makes this debut such a joy. With this historical novel full of relevance for our times, Blakemore makes it clear that the witch hunt isn’t a thing of the past. The City of Mist Carlos Ruiz Zafón Orion, £14.99, pp192 This short story collection is a posthumous parting gift from Ruiz Zafón to his millions of fans. The whole point of his oeuvre, so perfectly realised in his Cemetery of Forgotten Books series, is that he thickly layers gothic Barcelona detail on to tragic, romantic and mysterious narratives. Short excerpts aren’t, therefore, the most obvious entry point to his work. Still, with much-loved places and characters from that series making fleeting reappearances, it’s a fitting coda to his life and world. • To order The Uncomfortable Truth About Racism, The Manningtree Witches or The City of Mist go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyLabour has called for an investigation into whether Jacob Rees-Mogg broke the financial rules for MPs by failing to declare that he got £6m in cheap loans from one of his companies. The senior Tory minister and leader of the House of Commons, an ally of Boris Johnson, did not report to the official register that he received director’s loans from Saliston between 2018 and 2020. Rees-Mogg owns Saliston, even though he gave up his directorship in 2019. It has a stake in Somerset Capital Management, an investment company, the parent firm of Somerset Capital Management (Cayman) in the Cayman Islands. Accounts for Saliston show the £6m in loans – £2.94m in 2018, £2.3m the following year and £701,513 in 2019-2020 – attracted interest paid at the equivalent of about 0.8%, which is below market rates. The accounts list the loan as attracting interest rates of 2.5% and 3.5% in individual years, raising the prospect that he could have borrowed the money and repaid it over short periods of time. The MPs’ code of conduct does not specifically cover directors’ loans but it states: “Members shall fulfil conscientiously the requirements of the house in respect of the registration of interests in the register of members’ financial interests. They shall always be open and frank in drawing attention to any relevant interest in any proceeding of the house or its committees, and in any communications with ministers, members, public officials or public office holders.” Labour’s Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, said: “This would appear to be yet another egregious breach of the rules. A cabinet minister failing to declare millions of pounds of additional income is unacceptable. “The parliamentary commissioner for standards must investigate this. Jacob Rees-Mogg must come clean about all of his financial interests outside of parliament.” A spokesperson for Rees-Mogg said he stood by his statement that it had been properly declared, after the Mail on Sunday reported the story. Rees-Mogg said: “Saliston is 100% owned by me. This is declared clearly in the Commons register and to the Cabinet Office. “It has no activities that interact with government policy. The loans from 2018 were primarily taken out for the purchase and refurbishment of [my home] as temporary cashflow measures. All loans have either been repaid with interest in accordance with HMRC rules or paid as dividends and taxed accordingly. “I have no managerial responsibility for Somerset Capital Management. However, I know that the Cayman company purely provides a fund for non-UK investors but any and all money it makes returns to Somerset Capital Management in the UK where it pays full UK taxes.” Meanwhile, one of Rees-Mogg’s Conservative colleagues came under scrutiny over lobbying. The Sunday Times reported that a unit in the Department for Transport (DfT) set up by Grant Shapps, a private aviation enthusiast, had been lobbying against housebuilding on small runways. The DfT said the team was not a lobbying body and instead provided “support to general aviation on a range of matters affecting their operations”.It was a dramatic 11th-hour decision, portrayed as a devastating blow to the success of Cop26. After pressure exerted by India and China, the wording of the final deal was watered down to a pledge to “phase down” rather than “phase out” coal. Alok Sharma, the president of Cop26, was on the brink of tears as he explained what had happened and the last-minute alteration brought sharp words of rebuke from the US and other nations. While it was China that reportedly pushed hard for a softening of the language over coal in the final negotiations, it was India’s environment minister, Bhupender Yadav, who read out a new version of the Glasgow pact that used the watered-down commitment to a “phase down” of coal. Many speculated that it had fallen to India alone to announce the softening of the language over coal because it was seen as more palatable than an intervention by China. India was not the first to push for a “phase down” of coal at Cop26. The US and China had already used the “phase down” language in the bilateral climate agreement signed on 10 November. Among many climate experts, the consensus was that India was not the villain it was being portrayed as. Many said the criticism of India’s position highlights how the issues of climate injustice are still rife, with developing countries expected to meet the same commitments as wealthy developed countries, who have historically emitted the most and also have access to vast financial resources and alternatives such as natural gas. “India setting a net zero target and agreeing to phase down of coal is surely a step forward from where it was in terms of national policies and commitments before arriving at Cop this year,” said Sunil Dahiya, an analyst at the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air in India. This was the first time that any explicit commitment to phasing out any fossil fuel had been included in an international climate pact signed by India, which many said was still significant progress alongside India’s pledge to go net zero in 2070, announced on the opening day of Cop26 by the prime minister, Narendra Modi. Dahiya said it was more important for India to commit to a date when it would hit peak coal, rather than being pressured into pledges to end the use of coal on the same timeline as the west. “If India formulates a detailed plan for coal phase-down and aggressive renewable energy deployment, they will be on track to diminishing coal capacity and consumption,” he said. India has made huge strides in expanding renewables, but it still relies on coal for 70% of its energy and there is still no clear pathway for how the country can phase out coal entirely without the Indian people and economy paying a heavy price. Over the next 20 years, India’s energy demand is expected to grow faster than any other country as it grows, develops, industrialises and urbanises. Meanwhile, access to uninterrupted electricity is still a pipedream in many rural areas. Renewables are growing rapidly but currently only account for 18% of electricity generation. Solar, while cheaper than fossil fuels, is intermittent and battery storage remains expensive. Green hydrogen is still at least a decade away from being feasible for India. Ulka Kelkar, the director of climate at the World Resources Institute in India, said: “India’s intervention reflects its lack of choices – the country does not have significant oil and gas reserves and spends more than $100bn (£75bn) each year to import these, and nuclear power accounts for less than 2% of its electricity capacity.” Brandon Wu, the director of policy and campaigns at ActionAid, was highly critical of those who had vilified India for the phrasing of the agreement. Wu, like others, pointed out that the agreement had only targeted coal while avoiding mention of other fossil fuels such as natural gas and oil, which are used in abundance by the US and European countries. The US move away from coal was matched almost one to one by an uptake in the use of natural gas, which is a cheap domestically available resource in the country. While natural gas is less polluting than coal, it is still a fossil fuel and is highly problematic for the climate. Wu described India’s intervention as a “reasonable response” and added: “By focusing only on coal and not including oil and gas, this text would disproportionately impact certain developing countries like China and India. India said in negotiations that all fossil fuels must be phased down, in an equitable manner.” Rahul Tongia, a senior fellow at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress, said the concern for countries like India was that by committing to a phase out of coal, they would be expected to do it on the same timeline as countries in the west. “But if all countries are doing is shifting away from coal because they happen to have a supply of natural gas, that’s very asymmetrical and doesn’t help the environment enough,” he said. At Cop26, Tongia described coal as “low-hanging fruit” that was easy to seize on because of its filthy reputation, and that more graded and nuanced targets for all fossil fuels were necessary. “Whether it’s ‘phase out’ or ‘phase down’, both are virtue signalling,” he said. “I’m much more interested in short-term, boots-on-the-ground action.”Aides to Joe Biden took to the political talk shows on Sunday in a bid to talk up the US economic recovery despite confidence in the president continuing to plunge amid a crisis over inflation and supply chain problems. In alarming news for the White House, only 41% of voters approved of Biden in a Washington Post/ABC survey published on Sunday, continuing a steady downward trend in the president’s ratings. The new numbers, which come despite a victory lap over the passing of a $1.2tn infrastructure package and growing confidence over the prospects for a $1.75tn social spending bill, are a growing worry for Democrats with less than a year to the midterm elections. Only 39% approved of Biden’s handling of the economy, their confidence shaken by inflation surging to 30-year highs and the supply chain crisis threatening the availability of food and other essentials with the holiday season approaching. Janet Yellen, the treasury secretary, and Brian Deese, director of the National Economic Council, tried to reassure voters that Biden’s policies had the US on the right track, amid warnings of inflation remaining high well into next year. “We will still have an economic recovery that will be strong and support ongoing growth,” Yellen told CBS’s Face the Nation when asked about the likely dropping of paid family leave – forced by moderate Democratic senators such as Joe Manchin – from Biden’s Build Back Better domestic spending package. “We’re supportive, President Biden and I, of paid leave, and it’s something that we will try to legislate in the future,” Yellen said. “But there’s money in this package that will make it easier for people to work and care for family members at the same time.” Yellen blamed Covid-19 for the worst of the inflation and supply chain issues, and predicted that prices would likely “return to normal” in the second half of next year “if we’re successful with the pandemic”. “The pandemic has been calling the shots for the economy and for inflation,” she said. “If we want to get inflation down, continuing to make progress against the pandemic is the most important thing we can do. “We passed the American Rescue Plan and unemployment has declined from almost 15% to under 5% now. Americans feel confident about the job market. They’re seeing wage increases. It really reflects the support that we gave to Americans to keep up their spending and make it through the pandemic.” Yellen’s upbeat position was mirrored by Deese. On NBC’s Meet the Press, he attempted to downplay attempts in the summer to paint rising inflation as a “temporary” blip. “Because of the actions the president has taken, we’re now seeing an economic recovery that most people didn’t think was possible,” Deese said. “If you look at the strong wage gains plus the direct support that we’ve provided to families, checks in pockets and the child tax credit, the disposable income for a typical family is up about 2% even after you take into account inflation. “That doesn’t reduce the frustration any more when somebody’s going to the gas station and they see prices go up. But it does mean that we are well positioned to try to address these challenges going forward.” On CNN’s State of the Union, Deese said: “We actually know what we need to do here. We need to make a fully paid-for investment that will unlock more opportunities to get more people working in the economy.” Whether rosy messaging about inflation sways voters remains to be seen. Republicans such as the Florida senator Marco Rubio continue to bash Biden over the issue. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, wrote in the Guardian this week that a lack of regulation has allowed corporate giants to continue raising prices while recording record profits. “They have so much market power they can raise prices with impunity,” Reich wrote. “The underlying problem isn’t inflation per se, it’s lack of competition. Corporations are using the excuse of inflation to raise prices and make fatter profits. “Price inflation is a symptom: the increasing consolidation of the economy in a relative handful of big corporations. This structural problem is amenable to only one thing: the aggressive use of antitrust law.” Deese, on CNN, said Biden was open to exploring the issue. “There’s a real concern of price gouging or market manipulation that could harm consumers,” he said. “So we’ve asked the Federal Trade Commission to take a very close look at that.”Sydney’s labyrinthine public transport system combining trains, light rail, metro and buses run by a smattering of private and government operators has made transport asset ownership in New South Wales a complicated and evolving question. However, the NSW government’s latest attempt to restructure how public transport assets are funded – through the establishment of the Transport Asset Holding Entity (TAHE) – has been labelled “cooking the books on a grand scale”. A parliamentary inquiry has heard allegations that Treasury officials pressured transport figures and independent assessors who raised concerns about the financial and safety implications of the new body into reevaluating their findings. Now, the new NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has found himself defending his government’s plan to shift $40bn in public assets into an entity that has been called a “financial mirage” by a former NSW auditor general. What is the Transport Asset Holding Entity (TAHE)? In 2015, the NSW Coalition government, at the time led by premier Mike Baird, announced the creation of TAHE to manage the state’s transport assets “in a more commercial way”. Prior to TAHE, rail assets in NSW, such as trains, rail infrastructure and property, were owned by RailCorp – an agency of the NSW department of transport. While RailCorp initially operated services and maintained assets, in the years before the plan for TAHE was announced, structural changes meant that by 2015, RailCorp was essentially just the holder of rail assets in NSW. RailCorp made its assets available to train service operators, including publicly-owned operators within the department of transport such as Sydney Trains, as well as to freight and third-party operators. The NSW government paid RailCorp to manage its rail infrastructure expenses which were classified as recurrent grants in its annual state budgets. The idea behind TAHE was to transfer the state’s $40bn in rail assets out of departmental ownership and into a state-owned corporation – which is a commercial business still owned by the state government but established to provide critical services. Sydney Water, WaterNSW, and Essential Energy are other examples of state-owned corporations. With TAHE as the dedicated asset manager, NSW government funding for future and current rail assets would be classified as “equity injections” into the state-owned corporation, because it was planned that TAHE would ultimately provide a commercial return over time. Under the new model, TAHE would lease the rail assets, such as heavy rail rolling stock and property, back to the service operators, which would include state government and private operators. What’s the benefit of the new structure? By classifying funding for TAHE as “equity injections”, the money the state government spends on rail assets would not have a negative impact on the budget’s bottom line. The NSW government has been upfront about the budgetary benefits of this new structure. In its 2015-16 budget – spearheaded by then treasurer Gladys Berejiklian – the government said the establishment of TAHE would have “positive budget result impacts”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The establishment of the TAHE from 1 July 2015 improves the budget result by an estimated $1.8bn in 2015-16,” the budget papers stated, with similar annual budget benefits in the forward estimates. “Public transport assets will, in time, be managed on a portfolio basis, generating greater efficiencies and synergies.” But the establishment of TAHE has triggered accusations that the NSW state government’s intention was to artificially inflate the state budget, with former NSW auditor general Tony Harris labelling the model a “financial mirage” and an “accounting gimmick”. Why has TAHE been controversial? TAHE began operating as a state-owned corporation from 1 July 2020, and its early existence coincided with leadership changes and alleged disagreements between the Treasury and the NSW department of transport. A NSW parliamentary inquiry is currently examining the establishment of TAHE and whether it has a viable business plan, however, there were concerns raised in the years leading up to its conversion from RailCorp that preparations for the new entity had been delayed, as well as concerns for the safety of rail under the new model. A cabinet in confidence document from 2016, prepared by Treasury and Transport for NSW – an agency of the department of transport – warned of “safety risks if maintenance of metropolitan rail track is separated from operations”. They were concerned that the splitting of maintenance of rail assets from operations went against recommendations made by inquiries into fatal train accidents in the state in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The department of transport had commissioned accounting firm KPMG in May 2020 to set up an operating model for TAHE, but by the time it became operational as a state-owned corporation in July that year, the NSW auditor general, Margaret Crawford, noted that it lacked a finalised operating model and statement of corporate intent. In November 2020, KPMG released its report, with partner Brendan Lyon warning the budget would be $10bn worse off than Treasury had expected under the TAHE model once it started to charge fees for access to its rail assets. Lyon also found safety risks in letting TAHE begin operating as planned in July 2020. Days after KPMG’s finding, the transport department’s secretary, Rodd Staples, was dismissed without reason, six weeks after a positive performance review from Berejiklian. Staples was notified by email from the then secretary of the department of premier and cabinet, Tim Reardon. Through testimony and documents provided to the NSW parliamentary inquiry this month, it has emerged that frustrated Treasury officials pressured Lyon to change his report findings and that after he refused, Treasury told Staples the report had errors and needed to be amended. Lyon has accused public servants of “professional, ongoing attacks” from Treasury officials over his findings. Both the parliamentary inquiry and the auditor general are continuing to examine TAHE, with Crawford refusing to sign off on the state’s accounts due to concerns about its operations. Staples is set to appear before the parliamentary inquiry on Monday. ‘Cooking the books on a grand scale’ The NSW opposition leader, Chris Minns, last week characterised TAHE as “cooking the books but on a grand scale”. “It has been happening for the past seven years and it’s hidden a multitude of sins when it comes to budget management by the NSW government. They’ve been able to say hand on heart here is our budget surplus … [but] they’ve been running deficits for a number of years and they’re now deep in the red as a result of these challenges.” NSW Greens MP David Shoebridge, who chairs the parliamentary inquiry into TAHE, has voiced concerns about the timing of Staples’ dismissal and a possible clash of priorities between how the department of transport and Treasury view TAHE. “The coincidence of the timing would raise concerns for any fair-minded and independent observer,” Shoebridge said. Perrottet served as treasurer from the beginning of 2017 until October this year – during the years TAHE was being prepared as a state-owned corporation. The premier, when asked by Labor during question time last week why the government continued to pursue TAHE despite the concerns from transport and KPMG, suggested the entity was set up in line with the same standards that saw transport management asset entities established in Victoria and Queensland. Labor’s shadow treasurer, Daniel Mookhey, has disputed this comparison with entities in other states as a “furphy”, claiming that in Victoria, the state government was only charging private operators to use its railways, as opposed to the TAHE mode. “It’s the government charging the government and that’s what’s creating the budget impact,” Mookhey said.The Wallabies face the ignominy of losing all of their Tests on a spring tour of Europe for the first time in the professional era if they do not address the ill-discipline which contributed so heavily to their defeats to Scotland and England. After a caning from French referee Romain Poite in their 15-13 loss to Scotland at Murrayfield two weeks ago, Australia were penalised 18 to nine by South African referee Jaco Peyper in their 32-15 loss to England at Twickenham on Sunday morning. Compounding the problem was the fact the Wallabies played with 14 men for 20 minutes against England after winger Tom Wright (high tackle) and loose-head prop Angus Bell (tip tackle) were yellow-carded. Exhibit the same lack of control against Six Nations champions Wales in Cardiff on Sunday (Australian time), they will finish the tour wearing a triple crown backwards on an uneasy head. The Wallabies, despite fighting bravely and somehow remaining in the contest for most of the match, never really looked like winning. The lopsided penalty count informed almost every aspect of the game, with England dominating the attacking statistics. England kicked the ball 31 times to the Wallabies’ 23 and also enjoyed 60% possession as well as 62% of the territory. The English carried the ball 82 times to Australia’s 55 and maked 333 run metres to their 256. They made five clean breaks to three, beat 18 defenders to 14 and delivered nine offloads to three. In virtually every attacking area of the game, Dave Rennie’s side – outscored two tries to nil – came off second best, and it mostly stemmed from the penalty count. Rennie should invite an ex-international referee to training this week to observe the players and help correct any bad behaviour for, if such behaviour remains, they will almost certainly suffer the same fate against the Welsh. But it was not just penalties to blame; the inaccuracy of their play in general is a recurring problem. Apart from some broken field running, the Wallabies did not threaten the English defence and lacked cohesion in the backs. Comparing the two backlines, there was a stark contrast in terms of capabilities. While England had two playmakers – rookie five-eighth Marcus Smith and inside-centre Owen Farrell – the Wallabies had only one, No 10 James O’Connor, although they could have used fullback Kurtley Beale as a second ball distributor. England’s dual playmakers enabled them to shift the ball wide. This was evident in fullback Freddie Steward’s try in the sixth minute when Farrell and Smith combined to put him through a gap. When England wanted to get across the advantage line from the set pieces they brought giant winger Manu Tuilagi into the midfield to crash the ball up. The Wallabies should consider playing Beale at inside-centre to give them two playmakers or start rookie five-eighth Noah Lolesio and shift O’Connor to No 12, which is his preferred position. Without Samu Kerevi they do not have any Tuilagi-sized backs to get across the advantage line so should look at using a running forward in the mid-field, especially from the lineout, to play a similar role. With tight-head props Allan Alaalatoa and Taniela Tupou unavailable because of concussion, most observers expected England to monster the Wallabies scrum, but the Australians gained parity in the set piece against an English pack that had its own injury woes up front. The Wallabies may not be so fortunate against Wales, and would do well to start France-based second-rowers Rory Arnold and Will Skelton together to see what they can do as a locking combination rather than bring Skelton off the bench for Arnold. If halfback Nic White had not dislodged the ball from hooker Jamie George’s grasp as he was falling over the try line in Australian captain Michael Hooper’s tackle in the 34th minute, England would have led 23-9 at half-time, instead of 16-12, and the game would have been all but over. The most remarkable thing about the Wallabies’ performance was that they stayed in the game almost right up to the end by virtue of their courage and enthusiasm, especially in their line-speed in defence. That, and their huge effort chasing kicks from restarts. Of O’Connor’s four first-half penalty goals, two came directly or indirectly from pressure applied at the restart. O’Connor scored Australia’s last points with a penalty goal in the 41st minute. When Smith kicked a penalty goal in the 72nd minute to put England 10 points ahead, the game was all but out of reach, while a runaway try to replacement hooker Jamie Blamire on full-time increased the winning margin to 17 points – a more accurate reflection of the difference between the two sides. The Wallabies have one last chance to restore some pride against Wales, but they must improve their discipline or risk becoming the first Australian team to lose all Tests on a tour in Europe since dropping two internationals to France in 1976.It’s Bondi Hipster Christiaan Van Vuuren, but not as you know him. So what’s he doing sniffing around the political arena? When we first meet the actor and comedian in his debut docuseries Big Deal, which premiered on the ABC in October, the self-confessed political ignoramus is “watching America slowly falling apart” and wondering if the same fate could befall Australian democracy. Across two one-hour episodes directed by political satire writer Craig Reucassel (The Chaser’s War on Everything, The Hamster Decides), Van Vuuren has some uncomfortable revelations as he follows the money trail in Australian politics: scrutinising the conduct of the fossil fuel, gun and gambling lobbies, as well as the political parties that lap up their gargantuan donations. At a time when public trust in Australia’s political system is on the rocks, when there’s scant truth in political advertising, and when “transparency” around corporate donations is as opaque as ever, it’s cathartic watching a comedian brandishing oversized blank cheques as he tries to give our two major parties the tools to declare political donations. (Spoiler: it doesn’t work.) The show asks the question: is the secretive nature of the political donations system in Australia one of the worst in the western world? (Spoiler: it is. When Big Deal appeared on Channel 10’s Gogglebox not long after its launch, the TV nuts were aghast at the way wealth buys power and access in Australia and its likeness to the US system.) Van Vuuren made a name for himself in 2010 as The Fully Sick Rapper, filming YouTube videos from his Sydney hospital room where he was quarantined for six months with drug-resistant tuberculous. A decade on, he muses that the same (free) healthcare he received in Australia would have bankrupt him in the US, where private health insurance companies have a stranglehold on democracy. Suddenly for him, the personal is political. But the fact Van Vuuren is no political guru is part of what makes Big Deal so compelling. To the experts Van Vuuren interviews – including the Sydney Morning Herald’s Kate McClymont, senior political lecturer Lindy Edwards and Guardian Australia’s own Katharine Murphy and Ben Smee – the comedian’s incredulity may seem naive. But his exposé of how big donors exert influence on policy and election outcomes really does beg the question: how are we OK with this? As Van Vuuren cajoles current and former politicians to dish the dirt – including the former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, former rising ALP star Sam Dastyari, Labor MP Linda Burney and fiercely independent senator Jacqui Lambie – his investigations seem rooted in a desire to make the world better for his two children. At one point, we see his kids build Lego towers to represent donations by the fossil fuel industry to the two major political parties. Not only do the towers almost topple, but when his son’s Coalition tower overtakes his daughter’s Labor tower thanks to coalminer donations, she giggles and says, “I want Adani!” It’s endearing and frightful. For young people in Australia, it’s another cause to get behind to secure a fairer future. But Big Deal is not all doom for our democracy. Van Vuuren comes to the conclusion that people can often be more powerful than money. The success of the grassroots Voices for Indi campaign – which led to the election of two independent MPs (Cathy McGowan and Helen Haines) in a traditionally conservative rural electorate – is a case in hope. So too is the community in northern New South Wales who fought off coal seam gas exploration. Big Deal is a wakeup call to the Australia public. Asking for only two hours of your time, it doesn’t preach or pummel you with political facts as it exposes the “forces operating behind closed doors”. Ever the YouTube star, Van Vuuren even throws in a catchy song and dance to keep spirits high.Bright, bawdy and occasionally blood-splattered, the first season of Hulu/Stan’s The Great crashed on to screens last year with a defiant “huzzah!” as viewers met the young future Catherine the Great (Elle Fanning) fresh off the carriage from Germany. The sweetly idealistic noblewoman can’t wait to meet her new husband, Russian Emperor Peter III (Nicolas Hoult, having the time of his career), but soon finds her Prince Charming is a hedonistic man-child, and his court a colourful free-for-all of smashed champagne glasses, open marriages and regicidal intrigue. “I like the stakes of the era, the life and death stakes of the court world,” creator Tony McNamara says. “I also like that they’re dealing with stuff we’re still freakin’ dealing with … We’re still dealing with privilege, and how to give people equality, and all that kind of stuff. I’m interested in the parallels – and I’m also interested in the freedom I get.” McNamara had been working as a playwright and screenwriter in Australia – turning in scripts for television shows like The Secret Life of Us and Love My Way, and helming 2003’s Ben Lee-starring film The Rage In Placid Lake – when he first tackled Catherine’s life on stage, for the Sydney Theatre Company in 2008. He later rewrote it for the screen, which found its way to director Yorgos Lanthimos, who brought McNamara aboard 2018’s The Favourite: a critically acclaimed, Academy Award-nominated film that McNamara calls “career-transformative”. While Hulu had already greenlit The Great’s pilot when The Favourite hit cinemas, the latter’s ribald and modern take on the costume drama certainly primed audiences for Catherine and Peter’s arrival. “In my head I’m kind of making a contemporary show that feeds off an era in history,” he explains. “But really, for me, I’m always like, ‘What’s the contemporary version of what we’re telling at the moment?’ Oh it’s a woman in Chicago and she married the wrong man and how does she get out of it? Or, she’s now running the business and all her advisers are these old men who are fools.” The result is a show that often has more in common with Succession than The Tudors. With its first season culminating in Catherine’s coup d’etat against her husband, its second finds the power dynamic inverted: Catherine is now Empress, while Peter is left deposed and under house arrest. They’re also about to have a kid, while still working through the baggage left by their own parents (Gillian Anderson almost steals the season as Catherine’s mother, Joanna). McNamara injects this fraught state of affairs with all the charm and tension of a will-they-won’t-they, love-hate romantic comedy – both between Catherine and her husband-cum-prisoner, and a country that seems to have deep compatibility issues with its new ruler. “We saw Peter, in a way, as Russia – he’s a guy who’s sort of trying to change for her,” McNamara says of Hoult’s new arc. “In the same way that she’s trying to change this country that can’t quite change.” As the real Catherine discovered, squaring Enlightenment values with a system built on the exploitation of serfs is easier said than done. The weight of history, it seems, hates to see a girl boss winning. “She’s stuck in this place where she expects her idealism will be rewarded at some point, through sheer force of charisma and love for him, and on some level, the country,” McNamara says. “And that’s what this season’s about: it’s a much harder road to hoe than you think it will be.” His own road has continued its upward climb, reuniting with The Favourite’s Emma Stone to co-write the 101 Dalmatians prequel Cruella. How does remixing history compare to the sacred cash cows of Hollywood reboots? “It’s a different experience because it’s a big piece of Disney IP,” McNamara says.“But in a way the job was exactly the same; Cruella’s like a piece of cinema history, and it’s an important thing to a lot of people. [But] within the boundaries, they sort of let us be pretty freewheeling with it.” McNamara is already attached to a Cruella sequel along with Poor Things: another collaboration with Lanthimos and Stone, this time set in Victorian-era England with a few nods to Mary Shelley. Beyond that, there’s still plenty of conflict to mine in Catherine’s reign – whether it’s drawn from the history books, or dreamt up by McNamara. “When we made The Great, there was someone who questioned some of the big mistakes that I was making with history,” he says. “And I was like, ‘They have to be big’. People have to know we’re making mistakes on purpose, rather than ‘we’ve made a few changes’, [and] then it’s poor history professors tearing their hair out. At least with ours, the history professors can go: ‘They don’t know what they’re doing!’” • Season two of The Great premieres on 20 November, streaming on Stan in Australia and Hulu in the USLast month, eco-friendly cleaning product company Zero Co broke a record. In just 47 minutes, it raised $3m using equity crowdfunding – the fastest raise ever seen in Australia. Zero Co isn’t the only company who’s been using equity crowdfunding to raise capital. While equity crowdfunding has been open to proprietary companies in Australia since 2018, it’s boomed during the pandemic. You may have seen your favourite retreat, ethical beauty brand or plant-based food company spruiking it as a way to support their mission. The largest crowdfunding intermediary, Birchal, has raised over $70m for over 100 companies since their launch. So what, um, is it? “It’s asking people – many, many, many people – to invest small amounts of money by buying small amounts of shares in a company,” says associate professor at UNSW Marina Nehme, whose research focuses specifically on equity crowdfunding. “You know the Statue of Liberty? They built it through crowdfunding … So equity crowdfunding is the same concept, just done online.” Equity crowdfunding allows companies to sell shares in their business to the public, and package prices can be as low as $50. For companies, it’s a way to raise the capital required to get an idea off the ground or help grow a business and unlike a bank loan, it’s interest-free money that they don’t need to repay. It can also be a good marketing tool – a way to spread the word and create loyal customers, because people who are part owners in a business are incentivised to keep supporting it. For consumers, it’s a chance to invest early for an accessible price tag – and potentially make a profit somewhere down the line. Of course, as with all things investment, there are potential risks. So before you chip in your money, here’s what you need to consider. The good Before equity crowdfunding, investing in an early-stage start-up could cost tens of thousands of dollars, as well as requiring a lot of paperwork and a relatively high level of financial literacy. Equity crowdfunding makes early-stage investment relatively easy for anyone with an internet connection, for a more accessible price. Early-stage investments mean jumping on board when a company is small – which means you might enjoy a good financial return, if the business does well. It’s also a money-where-your-mouth-is way of getting behind the ideas you believe in. Many of the companies who use equity crowdfunding have a strong social mission – Zero Co, for instance, creates products that aim to solve the global single use plastic problem. “Of course, I think people are going into it hoping that it works out well and that they make money,” says Hamish Landreth, a financial consultant at Prosperity Wealth Advisers. “But the conversations I’m having [with clients], it’s not so much about, oh, I want to make X return on this investment. It’s, ‘I think this is a great idea that could change the world, I want to help this company succeed’.” There’s a novelty factor too. “Some of these businesses are doing quite interesting and cool things,” Landreth says. “Being a part owner in a brewery is not a bad thing to drop in conversation at a barbecue.” Landreth believes getting the chance to become a shareholder in a business you already like is “quite a compelling proposition, perhaps more so than something like being a tiny shareholder in a major bank”. Investors generally aren’t (or shouldn’t be) pouring their life savings into equity crowdfunding ventures. Under Australian legislation, the most an individual can invest per company, per year is $10,000, but typically people spend a lot less than this. With Zero Co, for instance, CEO Mike Smith says that their average parcel investment size was $1700. There are other safeguards in place as well. The platforms that facilitate equity crowdfunding must do some due diligence on the companies they allow in. Matt Vitale, the CEO of Birchal, says they run all companies through a “gatekeeper process” to ensure they are eligible to make a crowdfunding offer. That involves ensuring that “all the directors and senior managers are of good fame and character” and that any disclosable matters are included in the offer document they legally need to produce. After applying to invest, there’s also a five business day cooling-off period. Nehme says platforms like Birchal have an incentive to keep dubious operators off, “because if they are known as intermediaries who attract dodgy companies, they would lose investors”. All that being said, “it is a really risky asset class,” cautions Vitale. “That’s just par for the course with early-stage investment.” The bad And to that point: equity crowdfunding investors need to be aware that as new businesses, the ventures they are investing in have a high chance of failing. “Usually in the first five years a big chunk of them would fail, like at least half,” says Nehme. If a business does go under, any money you’ve put into an equity crowdfunding investment would be lost. That’s what happened with Shebah, a women-only rideshare business that raised $3m through equity crowdfunding in 2019 and this year went into voluntary administration. Vitale says there are “a couple of companies” who have used equity crowdfunding and gone under, but that “anecdotally, the failure rate hasn’t been as significant as people thought it might be”. Landreth says the regulatory restrictions around how much you can invest indicate it is viewed as a higher risk style of investment. “That’s there as a protection mechanism … so that people don’t get caught up in putting too much into these things.” Even if the business doesn’t fail, any money put into equity crowdfunding is unlikely to pay off in the short term. You will only get your money (plus any potential return) back after the company you invested in either sells to another corporation, or lists on a stock exchange. That might not happen for many years – if at all. As Nehme warns: “There is no get rich quick scheme in them.” Crucially, any shares you buy cannot be sold on. “You really will be trapped in these companies,” says Nehme. “If you’re buying those shares, you’re there for the long haul.” Landreth explains that “buying shares on the stock market is … what’s called a secondary market. There’s someone else there that’s always willing to buy the shares back off you … So you can sell pretty much at any time.” With equity crowdfunding, “you can’t do that”. Any shares you buy are also at risk of “the dilution effect”. If the company decides to sell more shares through another equity crowdfunding round a year or two down the line, your stake in the business will become smaller, and the value of your shares goes down. “But that’s the same as with [investing in] any company,” Nehme says. “It’s not unique.” Lastly, companies who use equity crowdfunding are also subject to less disclosure and reporting requirements than traditional shares. To raise money on the stock market, a business needs to have what’s called a prospectus, a type of information statement that can easily cost six figures to prepare. That amount of money is prohibitive for the small start-ups, so instead the Australian government requires them to create a much simpler disclosure document – the one reviewed by platforms like Birchal. These documents are less detailed, so offer less information for potential investors. In addition, these companies aren’t held to the mandatory ongoing reporting requirements of publicly listed companies. This lower transparency means “you don’t always know exactly how well the company’s going,” Landreth says. “That can add some additional risk.” The bottom line If you’re interested in equity crowdfunding, the most important thing is to go in with your eyes open. Nehme says investors “have to pay extra attention and do a little bit more research”, especially as any information in their disclosure document is going to be limited. Look into the financial health of the business, how long it’s been running for, what sort of profits it has been making and what they plan to use the money they raise using crowdfunding for, says Landreth. “It’s probably also worth asking the question of, why is the company doing this?” he adds. “Why aren’t they borrowing the money from a bank? What’s the benefit in crowdfunding? And that’s not from a sinister point of view. But is it just because it’s a higher risk investment and they can’t get capital elsewhere? Or is it a way for them to market their business at the same time?” Landreth cautions investors to only put in what they’re prepared to lose. Even if the investment works out, “you’re probably not going to be able to get that money back for potentially a number of years.” For Nehme, the most important thing is that consumers understand the risks involved. “My concern is, are investors really appreciating what they’re getting into?” “As long as they know this is a long-term investment and they understand the risk attached to it, then it’s fine because they are making an informed decision.”“If you don’t see a house as your own, you’re not going to be happy there,” says Marion Trench. The 59-year-old has been renting her townhouse in Bethania, halfway between Brisbane and the Gold Coast, for just under two years, and she loves it. It’s big enough that she can have her grandchildren over to visit. She has furnished it to her particular taste with special secondhand pieces bought at prices she can afford on Facebook Marketplace. She has even planted and grown her own garden. Trench hoped this would be her “forever home”. But now she’s afraid she’s about to be priced out. Trench is one of 32,000 renters benefiting from the National Affordability Rental Scheme (NRAS), a program developed and implemented by the federal Labor government under former prime minister Kevin Rudd in 2008. NRAS was designed to draw in the private sector to the provision of cheaper housing, by paying property owners a subsidy in exchange for them making new homes available at below-market rents for a decade. But the program was controversial, with critics saying it was too expensive – costing approximately $3.1bn over its lifetime – for the relatively small amount of affordable housing it made available. The Abbott government scrapped the scheme in 2014, grandfathering the homes already on it but not allowing new ones to join. That means that over the next three years, the vast majority of NRAS properties are going to lose their subsidy – and those renters benefiting from it are starting to feel stressed. Decline in affordable housing Trench hadn’t heard of NRAS before she found a landlord who offered it. She suffers from osteoarthritis in both hips, degeneration of her lower spine and diabetes. When she was just 36, she had a triple bypass. These issues have left her unable to work; she can’t sit or stand for too long without pain. Before moving into her current home, Trench hopped between the houses of friends and family, usually exchanging board for help around the house. She now pays $272 a week in rent – half the income she receives from the disability pension – which is at least $70 off the market rate for identical properties in the complex. For Trench, that difference is substantial. “I can manage. I pay my bills fortnightly so I don’t get in arrears, and I manage with food and I have my car,” she says. “But if I have really to go into the private sector to get what I have here now – I try not to stress because I’ve still got a couple of years but I know what’s coming. I am panicking.” The largest cluster of NRAS properties – about 30% – are in Queensland. About half of all properties nationally are owned and managed by private companies, and half by not-for-profit community housing groups. Data obtained by Guardian Australia reveals the decline in affordable housing as a proportion of the rental market across federal electorates, with some of the most acute clusters in the electorates of Curtin (WA), Hotham (Victoria) and Canberra. While community housing groups hope to retain lower rents without the subsidy, rents on privately owned properties are expected to snap back to market rate once the subsidies expire between now and 2026. And the loss of the subsidy for community housing groups means millions of dollars will no longer flow to the community housing sector. The Morrison government has no plans to restart NRAS, and consistently argues that social housing is the responsibility of the states. The upshot for renters, though, is that a whole section of the low-cost rental market is about to disappear entirely. Community housing advocates say many NRAS renters are likely to transfer across to social housing waitlists when their rent goes up. There were 155,100 households on a waiting list for public housing last year, and 10,900 households on the waiting list for Indigenous housing, according to government data. Leo Patterson Ross from the Tenants’ Union of New South Wales says more tenants are calling the organisation, asking about their rights when the rent goes up on their affordable housing. “When you’re a landlord and tenant coming together to make an agreement, the landlord is looking to make a profit, but the tenant is looking for a home. The theory that this is an equal contract was always a fantasy, and the tenancy acts never really address that,” he says. Patterson Ross would like to see the federal government reconsider direct capital grants to the states for housing and state tenancy laws overhauled to disallow no-grounds eviction and control rent hikes, both of which he says reduce funding efficacy by making tenancies less sustainable. Kate Colvin from housing advocacy group Everybody’s Home says that while NRAS has had its flaws, the program opened up much-needed space in part of the rental market that’s particularly squeezed. “In regional communities and some Australian cities there are really low vacancy rates, particularly in the really low-cost end of the market,” she says. “That makes it much more difficult for people on lower incomes. It also pushes up rents, meaning people miss out on housing, and some become homeless. Getting more affordable rentals into the market opens up choices for people who are struggling.” Colvin says it’s a problem that needs the fiscal firepower of the federal government to make a difference. But not everyone has a positive assessment of NRAS. A Grattan Institute report slammed it in 2019, arguing that the subsidy it paid property owners of about $11,000 a year – about $7,000 more than the average value of a 20% rental discount – was “essentially a windfall gain for developers and landlords”. The report estimated NRAS delivered $1bn to developers and private investors over its lifetime, making it “more valuable for investors than tenants”. For those renters who were lucky enough to get an NRAS property, though, the lower-than-market rents were a lifeline. ‘I’d probably end up in my car’ Ruth Johnson says NRAS had “a huge impact” on her life after she unexpectedly became a single parent a few months before her daughter was born. She moved into a Brisbane NRAS property in May 2020. Johnson, who works part-time in marketing while solo-parenting her toddler, says it would have been impossible for her to access appropriate housing without NRAS. “Being a sole parent has its challenges anyway, but in a pandemic it’s a massive challenge,” she says. The program has enabled her “to provide a better life for my daughter”. “I feel really grateful. I’ve always been very independent and able to make my way through what life throws at me. But becoming a solo parent unexpectedly, I needed support and NRAS was there to offer that support. The thought of being without it is quite frightening.” The NRAS scheme was already being phased out when both Johnson and Trench moved into their homes, but they didn’t know that at the time. Johnson was notified earlier this year that the subsidy will expire on her tenancy in May 2022. She hasn’t been told yet how much higher the rent will be after that, but she expects it to go up by $60-$100 a week. “That’s massive. For me, that means I may have to move out.” “I’ve made this place my own now, it’s my home,” says Trench. “I thought it was going to be my home for at least 10 years. Then I was told [the subsidy] was going to phase out in 2024. What am I going to do? I’m on a pension. Where am I going to live on my own? “So many people are saying, ‘you can share with someone your age’ but I don’t want to share with someone else my age. I’m OCD. … I’d probably end up in my car.” Trench is also worried about the logistics and costs of moving again, when her back injury means she cannot carry more than a washing basket, and her meagre income means paying for removalists is out of the question. She wants to request a long-term, reduced-rent lease from her landlord, but worries they may not agree. “Life wasn’t meant to be easy for everybody but sometimes I don’t think it was meant to be this hard,” says Trench. “There are other people that are worse off, but I’ve got to look after me. I’d just like to have my forever home, somewhere that I can afford. I don’t mind paying rent. Hopefully I’ve got another 15 years left in me – I’d like to think I don’t have to move again.”Taxpayers are paying at least $59m for major government advertising campaigns to run in the lead-up to the 2022 election. The campaigns span the topics of cybercrime and online safety, the jobtrainer program, domestic violence, recruiting a carer workforce and, most controversially, climate change, as the government seeks to explain its road to Damascus conversion on the net zero by 2050 target. According to AusTender contracts and evidence to Senate estimates, the Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources spent a total of $12.9m excluding GST on the Positive Energy campaign, which ran from September in the lead-up to the Glasgow Cop26 climate talks. That spending included $488,000 on market research, $10.7m on ad buys, $1.8m on creative work, $1m on public relations, $138,000 on a website and $190,000 on evaluation. The education department spent $6.7m on a campaign promoting the $2bn jobtrainer program, including a $5.17m contract for ad spots that span from October 2021 to June 2022, $1m on creative, and $543,000 on PR, communications and market research. The Department of Social Services spent $13.3m on its A Life Changing Life campaign, seeking to increase the disability support, aged care and veterans’ support workforce. The campaign runs from August 2021 to June 2022. DSS is also responsible for the Stop it at the Start campaign against domestic violence, including $4.3m for ad spots to run from November to February, the third tranche of ads in the campaign. The treasury has spent $1.55m on creative services in a contract running to June 2022 and $13.2m for ad spots in a contract ending in October 2021. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The treasury department said the former related to a campaign to inform Australians about the Your Super Your Future superannuation measures, and disclosed a further $1.9m of contracts for PR, market research and evaluation of that campaign. The Australian Tax Office has paid $203,500 for the “tax and super basics” advertising campaign, to run until June. The home affairs department is spending $3.4m on ad spots for its “beat cybercrime in your downtime” public information campaign, which encourages Australians to take control of their personal cyber security. It was launched in October and runs until June. Further contracts for PR, creative and evaluation add $600,000 to the cost of the campaign. The communications department has spent a total of $767,000 on three contracts for campaigns promoting online safety, while infrastructure has also spent $470,000 since August on advertising and market research. The shadow special minister of state, Don Farrell, said: “There’s a place for government funded advertising. But Scott Morrison has turned it into a publicly funded marketing exercise for himself and the Liberal party.” At Senate estimates in October, Labor senator Nita Green accused the government of spending $13m on climate advertising when, at the time, Australia “didn’t have a policy to take to Cop” because the Nationals were yet to agree to the net zero target. The Liberal senator Zed Seselja defended the campaign, arguing it “counters some of the lies” about Australia’s record, including promoting awareness of its “high take-up of solar … a great international story”. In the lead-up to the 2019 election, Morrison defended spending on government advertising campaigns as “entirely appropriate for Australians to understand what their government is doing”. Taxpayers will also fork out $187m for global media for Tourism Australia, as Australia seeks to lure tourists back after reopening its borders in November, and a further $2.25m for search engine optimisation in China. As 2021 was a census year, the Australian Bureau of Statistics also racked up $28m on advertising for the census.After watching her three-year-old son suffer a severe allergic reaction to eating peanut butter, Maria Said thought of peanuts in the same way she viewed rat poison. “After experiencing that, you don’t want to see the stuff anywhere near your child,” says the now CEO of the charity Allergy and Anaphylaxis Australia (A&amp;AA). “I wanted to see peanuts removed from the face of the earth.” For the last 25 years, schools and childcare centres have held a similar view; allergens like peanuts or eggs have been banned in entire facilities when a child attending has a known allergy. It was a policy designed to keep children safe, in response to rising rates of food allergies. Now, however, with more knowledge and experience with food allergy, views are changing. Last month, the National Allergy Strategy, a partnership of patient body A&amp;AA and the peak professional body, Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, released new best practice national guidelines for schools and childcare facilities. Instead of wholesale reliance on bans of certain foods, the new approach is allergy awareness: educating all staff on risk reduction strategies, how to recognise the symptoms of an allergic response and how to use an EpiPen or Anapen in the event of anaphylaxis. The blanket bans on foods that many Australian children and parents have become used to, says Said, have not served to make schools and childcare centres entirely safe for children with allergies. Mistakes can and do happen. Where food allergy is concerned, says Said, nothing can be more dangerous than giving people a false sense of security. New thinking Said says the proposal to end bans does not mean encouraging people to bring in nuts and other allergens to school. “Rather, we want people to consider what they are packing for their children’s lunches and for there never to be a presumption that a classroom is free of a particular food, because it’s not,” she says. The education sector is instead being encouraged to promote allergy awareness among both staff and students and to use risk reduction strategies such as using non-food rewards, reminding children not to share food, alerting parents about an upcoming activity involving food and ensuring that children wash hands after that activity. The theory is that training staff to minimise exposure with such strategies means that children with allergies should be safer, with less reactions. In the event there is such a reaction, improved understanding of allergies on the part of staff (and children) means that they will be able to recognise the signs of an anaphylactic reaction and be able to respond effectively. “It is the recognition of those signs which is so crucial,” says associate professor Kirsten Perrett of the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute. Wendy Freeman is a parent of three boys, two of whom suffer from multiple severe food allergies. When her younger son James was six he suffered an anaphylactic reaction accidentally sipping his brother’s milk which he’d assumed was soy milk. First, he came out in hives all over his mouth, then he started wheezing. Freeman administered him with his EpiPen telling her distressed son he would soon feel better. He didn’t. James needed more adrenaline than she could give him. It was only when the mobile intensive care ambulance arrived to administer more, that James’ condition began to improve. For Freeman, it was a wake-up call that, despite her efforts, even in her own household she could not keep her sons from the foods that could trigger them. It meant, she says, that allergy awareness would need to be a priority wherever her sons went. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In the school and childcare environments, Freeman found that how her child’s allergies were managed depended on the staff member. Some knew what to do but others didn’t. A ban on foods, she says, “doesn’t work as you can never be sure that one hasn’t snuck in. Grandma might have made the sandwich, unaware of that rule.” Consistency is what Freeman needed to feel reassured, especially when her children were young. Consistency in procedures is what the new national guidelines seek to address. Australia – allergy central Australia has the highest prevalence of food allergy in the world. Some 10% of Australian children develop a food allergy before they are one year old and one in 20 school-aged children are also affected. It is estimated that 10 people die from anaphylactic reactions each year in Australia, some of those relating to food allergy. The exact numbers are unknown as there is no data available. Fatality rates as a result of anaphylaxis have increased in Australia with the increase in prevalence of allergic disease. A proposed national register to collect data on fatalities is one of the recommendations of the A&amp;AA to a parliamentary inquiry on allergy and anaphylaxis in 2019. The report was tabled in June last year but there has been no government response as yet. Associate professor Kirsten Perrett is a paediatric allergist and immunologist at the Royal Children’s Hospital and group co-leader of the population allergy group at the MCRI. Allergies, she says, are a problem of epidemic proportions. Perrett explains that the rise in food allergy over the past 30 years has been occurring faster than what you would expect from just genetic change. Environment is the likely candidate for contributing to the rapid rise in the western world and is thought to be connected to the modern lifestyle. Studies have indicated a number of contributing factors referred to by researchers from the MCRI as the five D’s: diet, dry skin, vitamin D, dogs and dirt (hygiene). For instance, a lack of exposure to dirt in modern homes, and lack of absorption of vitamin D (other countries supplement their food chain), have been suggested to increase rates of allergies. Of all of these factors, diet is the only one that has, so far, been definitively linked to food allergy. The accepted practice used to be to defer introducing common allergens like peanuts and eggs until an infant was older than one year but research has shown that introducing such foods before that age can reduce food allergy. While research continues, those with multiple food allergies and their carers must manage their lives in minute detail, reading food labels and watching everything that goes into their mouths. Those involved in developing the new guidelines say there is community support for the change from unenforceable food bans to creating a more allergy-aware environment. But while they are recommended as best practice, adhering to the guidelines is not mandatory, and it is up to the individual school and childcare centres to adopt them. Currently, Victoria is the only state of Australia that has legislated measures to protect children at risk of anaphylaxis. A parent of a child with a food allergy must still ask the right questions to be sure of the procedures in place for their child’s protection. MCRI’s Perrett believes that children will ultimately be better protected under this new approach. She says the new guidelines will have an undeniable impact in both minimising allergic reactions and in managing them appropriately should they occur. “It will mean better care for children with food allergies and that will save lives,” she says.Governments must set a date for banning the sale of cigarettes through retailers including supermarkets, and find new ways of boosting revenue without relying on tobacco excise taxes, leading public health researchers say. It comes as research published in the Medical Journal of Australia (MJA) on Monday found 1,466 respondents (52.8%) to a Victorian Cancer Council survey agreed with phasing out the sale of cigarettes in retail outlets. “Sometimes the public is ahead of the policy,” associate prof Coral Gartner, an international expert in tobacco control policy with the University of Queensland, said. In a separate MJA piece also published on Monday, Gartner and her colleagues wrote it is time for governments to move beyond measures that focus on consumers such as plain-packaging laws and tobacco-harm warnings, and start focusing on supply. There is an urgent need for “ending the regulatory exceptionalism that has maintained the legal status of tobacco products as a consumer good”, the piece says. “Cigarettes do not meet modern consumer product safety standards,” Gartner and her colleagues wrote. “It is normal for governments to remove unsafe products such as contaminated food, asbestos, and lead paint from the market. The successful defence of Australia’s tobacco plain packaging laws against international trade disputes demonstrates that governments have the right to introduce tobacco control measures to protect the health of its citizens, even when these measures reduce commercial profits and have an impact on international trade.” Gartner, who is the director of the National Health and Medical Research Council Centre of Research Excellence on Achieving the Tobacco Endgame, told Guardian Australia while it may appear Australia is a world leader in tobacco control, due to plain packaging laws and graphic warning labels, other countries have gone further. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Netherlands has passed laws preventing supermarkets from selling cigarettes from 2024, New Zealand has proposed new measures that include significantly reducing the number of tobacco retail outlets and possibly removing nicotine from cigarettes, while California cities Beverly Hills and Manhattan Beach ended tobacco sales on 1 January this year. “We are expecting the New Zealand government to announce their smoke-free action plan in the next few weeks, and the policies that they have consulted on are really innovative and make Australia look like we are lagging behind,” Gartner said. “We need to start having the same conversations in Australia now because there are details that need to be considered. We don’t want to criminalise people, and are not talking about making tobacco an illicit product, and we don’t want people with addiction having difficulty quitting and finding an illicit supply. So we need to start doing research now and consulting on acceptable alternative options.” A spokesperson for the federal Department of Health told Guardian Australia that there was strong evidence that comprehensive public health strategies focusing on both the supply and demand of tobacco were most likely to achieve long-term health gains, prevent the uptake of smoking and reduce smoking prevalence. Responsibility for the retail sale of tobacco products was a matter for state territory governments, he said. “The government will continue to work with state and territory governments to explore a range of new evidence-based measures to further reduce smoking prevalence having regard to both supply reduction and demand reduction measures,” he said. In 2021, the Australian Council on Smoking and Health – a coalition of peak non- government health organisations – called for parties in the Western Australian state election to commit to ending tobacco sales by 2030. In 2012 the Tasmanian parliament discussed ending tobacco sales to anyone born after the year 2000, with a parliamentary committee finding no “significant legal impediment” to the proposal. Doctors in the UK have made similar appeals. Tobacco smoking is the leading cause of premature death and disability in Australia, estimated to have killed 1.28 million Australians between 1960 and 2020. Up to two-thirds of deaths in tobacco smokers are attributed to smoking, while long-term smokers die an average of 10 years earlier than non-smokers. The draft national preventive health strategy sets a goal of reducing smoking to below 5% by 2030, which Gartner said would not be achieved through industry self-regulation and voluntary approaches. An epidemiologist and tobacco researcher with the Australian National University, Prof Emily Banks, said she agreed tough action to reduce access to cigarettes was needed, but said retailers did not have to wait for government reform to stop selling cigarettes. “Supermarkets want to be seen as places that are promoting healthy products for people, like fresh fruit and vegetables, but they’re still selling these toxic products,” she said. “I think it is a really good time for those organisations to ask themselves: ‘Do we still want to do this?’.”Caring is harder than work. Let’s stop pretending otherwise. The hardest thing about work is organising how to do it around caring commitments. I’m lucky that my “portfolio career” of endlessly-juggled subcontracting means that I can file this article on the train on the way to deliver clean laundry to my mum in hospital. Hundreds of thousands of other Australians cannot. For all its exertions, mental and physical, work at least exists in the realm of the quantifiable. There is a repetition of tasks, a completion of duties, a schedule of hours. Human beings, however, are chaotic – and the unpredictable, contingent, constantly shifting chaos of care observes no rigid timetable, obeys no agreed agenda. “That’s not in my statement of duties” is not something a parent can announce to the universe when all their children come down with gastro infections in the middle of the night. “I’ve got a scheduling conflict, sorry” doesn’t really cut it when your dad collapses on the stairs and puts his head through the wall. Even in the service professions that have the most contact with messy humanity, the shift finally ends, the till is closed, the bar shuts. Mass gastroenteritis, heads through walls and every other permutation of the unpredictable and inconvenient are dispatched beyond the realm of immediate personal obligation. Yet in the nutty calculus of the modern industrial workplace, it is the containable, reschedulable world of work that makes itself inflexible to the humans required to make it run. Decades of union-busting, condition-stripping, low wages, “casualisation” and punitive industrial laws have combined with the brutal algorithms of digital shift allocation to disempower workers and remove management discretion to negotiate accommodations for their staff. “Workplace flexibility” is an industrial euphemism for shedding staff who have the temerity to exist beyond their job. It has freed employers from human responsibility towards workers – and made their workers prisoners to an impossible reconciliation of workplace and family demands. The reality of aggregating bad shifting and exploitative conditions means that if the simple maths of time and space doesn’t work out for someone with caring responsibilities, they, their skills and experience are forced out of workplaces. Some are forced out of the workforce altogether. The old neocon rhetoric that “anyone who wants a job can get a job” meets a swift contradiction in recent reports that there are now 200,000 Australians who certainly want to work but can’t find workplaces that can accommodate their care commitments. Strangely, they just can’t seem to deny their hospitalised mothers clean laundry, leave their dads out cold on the stairs or abandon their sick kids to a puddle of soiled sheets. It’s simultaneously the case that the hospitality sector is looking for 100,000 workers to meet demand in a reopening, post-lockdown economy. And the agricultural sector also claims it needs 22,000 workers to meet its own staffing shortfalls. One might look to the spare capacity of willing workers and then to these labour demands and think, you know, hang on, maybe there’s some kind of structural solution here. Maybe we could collect tax and disburse it through a variety of government-sponsored professionalised support for people’s caring commitments. We could relieve families of intersecting economic, industrial and domestic pressure, simultaneously create local jobs, as well as hugely boost local productivity. Just spitballing here, but we could call it “childcare” or “aged care” or “disability services” and it could be community-based, sometimes home-based and maybe even in the workplace. I mean, one might think that based on logic and evidence and the whole point of a government … but that’s not where Australian politics is at with the Liberals at the helm. Rather than invest in a collective solution, the “can-do capitalists” of Australian industry are not up for doing much beyond restarting the practice of importing vulnerable and exploitable temporary migrant workers and the government is going along with it. None of this with a pathway to citizenship for these people, mind you. That comes with the dangerous industrial risk of gaining the right to vote and un-electing governments who exploit you. Last week, the federal Labor opposition announced their policy to boost access to funded childcare and early childhood education. The statement made the politically rare analogy of comparing investment in childcare to that of infrastructure in road and rail. We may be unused to this language in the public policy debate about care provision, but it’s familiar enough in households that do the actual caring. Maintaining income and managing work is only half of the economic equation of care. The other half is bringing fresh laundry to an oncology ward and understanding that walking away from the people who need us the most is a cost we just will not bear.When Jade Seenarain and his wife Aideanna bought the plot for their home in Truganina in Melbourne’s west in 2015, the couple thought they were buying into a leafy, suburban dream. They planned to build their ideal home and thought their lives would look something like the highly idealised vision presented by the Elements estate developers. Their children, Amilia and Aryan, would walk to the “future” prep-to-year-9 Catholic school, marked in the advertising material as just a few blocks away. They would commute to work each day by walking to the “future Truganina train station”. And on their way home they would get groceries at the shopping centre, which was to be built at the entrance to the estate. But three years after moving into their four-bedroom, two-bathroom, double-driveway home, reality bears little resemblance to the life the Seenarains thought they would be living. “It’s a broken dream,” Jade Seenarain says. Since the couple moved in, plans for a local primary school have been derailed, and plots of land still lie empty while residents wait for shops, services and infrastructure. Urban planning experts say such problems are common across Melbourne’s outer suburbs. On some developments, they combine with unimaginative and environmentally unfriendly design to consign many residents to less social, more unhealthy and less environmentally sustainable lives. The experts argue that the amount of greenery cleared and covered in concrete for new estates has left them more susceptible to the effects of climate change, and that inadequate planning laws have allowed developers to dictate the lifestyles of a generation of future Melburnians. Radical changes to Victoria’s urban development strategy are now needed, they say, to prioritise the broader idea of affordable living, rather than just affordable housing. A spokesperson for ID_Land, the developer of Elements, told Guardian Australia that the suburb’s design was in line with relevant planning guidelines that influence development across the state, and that its blueprint was ultimately approved by the council and Victorian Planning Authority. “The urban design at Elements is informed by the Truganina Precinct Structure Plan (PSP) which was developed throughout 2011-2014 by the relevant government planning authority, the Victorian Planning Authority. This overlaying PSP informs where open space, schools, major roads, commercial property, etc are placed, in addition to density yields,” the spokesperson said. “Open space is placed in certain locations during the PSP urban design process so that all residents are within a walkable catchment to open space, which could either reside in or outside the Elements boundaries.” ‘It’s impossible to reduce our impact’ Seenarain is proud of his life. After moving to Australia from Mauritius 15 years ago and meeting his wife, together they made the decision to enter the property market with a home they planned to live in for decades. It was the appeal of an affordable new home, as well as the accessibility of services, that drew them to the Elements estate. Seenarain and his wife bought their plot of land for about $250,000, and spent just over $300,000 building their home. The house design had to be of a minimum size, and had to be approved by the developer as compatible with neighbouring dwellings. “It was part of our 20-year plan, to invest in a property [from] which we could walk to school and to the station, so we could commit to public transport,” Seenarain says. That’s why he was disappointed when in 2020 the Catholic Education Board, which had been set to run a primary school in Elements, pulled out, citing the presence of lead in the soil on the site. Subsequently, the developer ID_Land applied to have the land set aside for the school rezoned allowing it to build an additional 227 residential lots, on top of the 1,600 homes already planned. ID_Land said at the time it was still hopeful of finding an alternative educational operator for the school site. Residents, including the Seenarains, were furious. The council challenged the plan at the Victorian civil and administrative tribunal, but lost. After months of uncertainty and community anger, the Victorian government in June announced its intention to build a high school on the site. There are primary schools in nearby suburbs, but a lack of public transport means parents either have to drive children to and from school, or the children have to walk for about 40 minutes each way on a main road. ID_Land’s spokesperson said the company has remediated the site and was “incredibly disappointed by the withdrawal of the Catholic Education Office, after initially signing a contract of sale on the site”. “We are working hard to secure an alternative operator, and in April we began another national expression of interest campaign to take the site to market once more, and secure a provider,” the spokesperson said. “We have a track record of delivering schools at two other communities throughout Victoria. It remains our priority to secure an education facility for the site, in spite of the Catholic Education Office’s withdrawal.” It has also become apparent to many homeowners in Elements that the “future Truganina station” remains a proposal without a timeframe for completion or a firm commitment from the government, which owns the land and was responsible for including a possible station in the precinct plan. Seenarain said he felt the future train station was marketed as a lifestyle feature of living in Elements, and was a key influence in he and his wife’s decision to buy their home in 2015. The Elements website still advertises a “future train station” as it seeks to sell remaining lots, with homes for as little as $500,000. Bus services remain scant due to a lack of sufficient population to justify them, and the carpark at the next closest train station, Tarneit, becomes clogged by the beginning of the morning peak. “We want to reduce our impact on the environment, but it’s just impossible, we need our cars,” Seenarain says. When asked about its decision to include a “future train station” on the map it uses to advertise homes in Elements, ID_Land’s spokesperson said: “Transport links are provided by [Public Transport Victoria], ID_Land simply provides the necessary space/allocation/base infrastructure so the relevant government bodies can deliver public transport links, like bus routes. This allocation has been provided at Elements and it is now up to the government to deliver those transport links.” “The train station land was put aside as a requirement under the Precinct Structure Plan, which was set by the [Victorian Planning Authority] in conjunction with other local and state government departments. Since then, the state government has taken ownership of the land for the purpose of building a train station. ID_Land is not able to comment on current state public transport policies.” Tarneit station is about a 45-minute walk from the Seenarains’ house, but Jade can do it in about 20 minutes if he pushes past the end of footpaths and crosses a dry creek bed. “All of a sudden, you’re in mud,” he says, noting uncompleted pavements are common across Elements. Most days, he travels by car to the north-eastern suburb of Heidelberg, where he works as a business manager. His commute can take between 50 and 75 minutes. “We’re talking about daily inconveniences, daily disappointment,” he says. ID_Land said shops are coming and “the town centre will be delivered in 2022 … with [a] full-line supermarket offering – the centre is owned and will be managed by a private retail developer, not ID_Land”. Planning system ‘set up to fail’ The concerns raised by the Seenarains reflect a Melbourne-wide problem: an urgent need for more affordable, environmentally sustainable housing, and the state’s reliance on private residential developers to achieve it. The mayor of Wyndham City, Adele Hegedich, acknowledges the growing societal costs of car-centric suburbs in her council, which is home to 270,000 people and predicted to grow. She warns that while homes in the growth area are considered affordable, prices don’t necessarily take into account the mental and physical health impacts of “commuting two hours back and forth to work every day” or the costs “of having to own a car for every adult in the house because you have to drive to the shops or to exercise or to entertainment”. Michael Buxton, a Melbourne planning veteran and former professor at RMIT and Monash University, is scathing of state planning laws that have “handed over the future design of outer Melbourne to the development industry” and set up “vast swathes of Melbourne to fail”. Buxton points to a planning system introduced by the Kennett Liberal government in the mid-1990s, and largely unchanged by both sides of politics since, which he says “is not so much a regulatory system as … a development enabling system”. Development areas are loosely guided on a state level. Chunks of outer Melbourne are carved up and designated as growth corridors by the Victorian Planning Authority. The VPA then develops Precinct Structure Plans (PSPs), which broadly outline what streets will border new suburbs and which parts of the land will be for residential use, shops, natural features and schools. At this point, developers can form a specific plan, in accordance with the PSP and planning guidelines, with much more detail about the development. For example, developers can decide if they will build detached dwellings or town houses, and whether the shops they will build in the spaces earmarked for commercial use will be a mall or a retail strip. A developer’s plan then goes to an independent panel and, if approved, on to the state Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, and then to the relevant local council, which issues the legal permits to start construction. While the planning guidelines are designed to deliver quality of life for residents, Buxton believes most housing estates do not end up being built in line with these principles, as there is no mechanism to enforce them. As a result, Buxton says, planning ideals such as walkability and 20-minute suburbs – where residents can commute and get most services within 20 minutes of their homes – have been discarded in favour of profit. He says many estates lack diverse housing types, and specifically higher density unit complexes built around a central retail strip to deliver convenience and local employment. He points to a trend instead for “big box” shopping centres and large detached houses that take up most of the land on their plots. He also warns there are not enough connections between nearby estates, forcing residents into cars and orienting them towards the Melbourne CBD. “The development industry has a model that works for them. They put up the same standardised homes on increasingly smaller blocks of land, often years before the retail part of the suburb is built. When you look from the air, it’s mostly roofs and concrete.” Because uptake is slow and houses are often built before retail and other services, fledgling populations rarely warrant regular public transport services, and a reliance on cars is ingrained in the community, according to Buxton. “Most high volume builders are very conservative, they’ve made a lot of money out of a particular tradition of rolling out detached houses,” Buxton says. “It may be maximising their profits but it’s lazy, and they’re determining how a future Melbourne functions, it’s just an appalling failure of government to allow this to happen.” ‘It feels very bare’ Experts believe climate change will make life in Melbourne’s new residential estates much more difficult. Sarah Bekessy, a professor of sustainability and urban planning at RMIT, describes it as a “tragic situation”, where residential development has not taken climate change seriously. “This is creating short-term affordability, which looks good when you’re buying, but when you ultimately count the time and money spent commuting, the energy costs to heat and cool your home, and the lack of services around you, it’s bloody expensive.” Specifically, Bekessy says, Truganina and nearby suburbs built over native grasslands clash with nature in a way that will get worse as climate change intensifies. Elements is only one of a number of developments which are being built by different developers under the Truganina PSP approved by the Victorian government in 2014. “We’re at the absolute end of our grassland, there’s less than 1% left. They can’t offset it any more, there’s nothing left,” Bekessy says. She’s referring to the Victorian government’s 2010 deal to establish a 15,000ha western grassland reserve by 2020 to offset 3,278ha of grasslands cleared for new residential developments. Last year, an audit found the government had acquired just 10% of the land. “The status quo for developers is to clear all vegetation when they go into a site, sometimes removing soil to level it, and paving all over it,” Bekessy says. This makes the homes hotter in the summer, with virtually no tall canopy cover to block sunlight. A tendency towards dark roofs also contributes to higher temperatures. “There is so much more solar radiation being absorbed in these estates, which are in areas that are already hotter than suburbs closer to the water as they are away from the sea mist which has a significant cooling effect,” Bekessy says. “In Melbourne, nighttime temperatures can be lowered by eight degrees through conservation and an urban forest strategy. And it’s overnight temperatures that are strongly correlated with people dying from heat.” Steve Thorne, a former director of urban design within the Victorian government, has analysed the housing density in Elements, as part of research for Charter 29, a group he, Buxton and other design veterans founded to press for planning reform in Victoria. In a 20ha area at the entrance to Elements, he found a net density of 16.4 dwellings per hectare and zero usable public green space. In addition, he believed the houses are too big and take up too much of the plot in sacrifice of a backyard. The average size of each housing plot in Elements was 416 sq metres, with just 78 sq metres, or 18% of the plot, considered private open space – including the driveway. This compares with a net density of 29 dwellings per hectare in an area of inner north Melbourne, with an average plot size of 223 sq metres. Even in this mixed terrace housing and unit sample, dwelling on average had about 64 sq metres, or 29% of the plot, as private open space. Seenarain says he pays more to cool his home in summer compared with his previous homes in Reservoir and Fairfield, which were older. The levelling and paving over of grasslands, and the tiny backyards, leave the area more susceptible to flooding, as there are few porous ground surfaces to absorb heavy rainfall. In winter, Bekessy says, wind can be more pronounced in suburbs built on grasslands “because there’s no vegetation left to slow the wind down”. There can be added costs to heat these homes during winter given their greater exposure to the elements. Solar orientation is also a crucial design principle being overlooked in current residential developments, says Thorne. “The key is to be east-west facing, so in the summer, the sun is virtually overhead with very little coming directly in … And in the winter, the sun comes in at an angle, about 28 degrees in Melbourne, which is really low, and shines in through the windows and penetrates the house.” Many blocks in Elements, including the Seenarains’, face south. Thorne says correct solar orientation could largely achieve a sufficient energy efficiency rating for homes, but developers instead rely on features such as double glazing and insulation to achieve the six-star energy efficiency rating required in Victoria. “If you get the orientation wrong you have to do a million expensive things to achieve the efficiency score. They’re delivering more expensive housing, and they’re fighting against nature rather than working with it,” Thorne says. Bekessy believes the most compelling argument for overhauling urban planning practices is that it would make a sustainable lifestyle possible. “We know there are health and wellbeing benefits if you live in a street with more biodiversity. They have lower incidence of allergies and behavioural issues for children, there are cognitive improvements too. There’s also evidence that you’ll sleep better, and there’s lower incidence of mental illness and loneliness.” The solution? Bekessy believes key sustainability measures such as green roofs (topped with vegetation), more green spaces, taller tree cover and ratios of how much of a block a house takes up, should all be incorporated into the planning process. She also believes selling the idea of higher density will be crucial. “There’s an interesting planning philosophy that you should be able to yell at your kids from the balcony, and that this creates liveable streets and community, so about four storeys high. Sustainable midrise has to be the model,” Bekessy says. Buxton acknowledges the state government’s need for tens of thousands of new affordable houses to cater for a predicted surge in Melbourne’s population, but he believes the current laws and a fragmented approvals process are allowing developers to ignore crucial planning objectives that deliver the best environmental outcomes, as well as a cheaper, more social and healthy way of life for residents. He wants to see it made mandatory for developers to address critical design principles, such as a range of housing types and sizes, higher density, and planning in line with public transport that already exists or has a firm government construction commitment. Buxton also supports a streamlined approvals process that includes relevant transport, service and infrastructure authorities, so it is clearer whether submitted plans are in synch with existing commitments and neighbouring suburbs. “The government knows these planning principles, they could enforce these tomorrow and we’d get a completely better outcome,” he says. But can the existing estates be fixed? Buxton is pessimistic. “Once they’ve been developed, they’re almost impossible to retrofit. They’re there for life, we can’t tear up suburbs en masse.”Residents in Old Bexley and Sidcup are vacillating over whether to return the Conservatives to power in an upcoming byelection that will test their loyalty following the high-profile corruption allegations that have beset the party. Gillian Moore, 64, a poll clerk and retired bank receptionist, said the sleaze row and the government’s mishandling of the pandemic response had undermined her faith in the Conservatives. “I’ll probably vote Conservative because I don’t agree with a lot of the Labour manifesto. But I’m not impressed with the Conservatives at all. I really fancied Boris Johnson as prime minister but I think he’s a waste of space and I’m quite disappointed in him. I don’t think he inspires confidence. He makes promises he doesn’t keep,” she said. The south-east London constituency has been a Tory stronghold since it was formed in 1983 and has long been considered a safe seat: the popular incumbent, James Brokenshire, who died of cancer in October after 11 years as the constituency MP, won his largest-ever majority of 19,000 in the 2019 election. But on 2 December, residents will head to the polls to elect Brokenshire’s replacement in the wake of the Conservative party’s failed defence of Owen Paterson, the MP who broke lobbying rules, and amid questions surrounding Johnson’s personal conduct as a member of a parliament and claims of cash for peerages. Most residents the Guardian spoke to in the middle-class constituency of London commuters, where incomes are above average and unemployment is low, said they were disappointed in the Tories over the sleaze row and Johnson’s handling of the pandemic response. Those willing to speak mostly said that while they felt frustrated by the Conservatives, they would continue to vote for Johnson’s party because they felt that the others had little to offer them. However, some were considering voting against the Conservatives. Guy Plunkett, 86, a retired marine insurance broker, said that he had voted Conservative his whole life but was considering voting Labour because he felt the Tories “seem to fall down on promises”, especially about protecting the population from Covid. He added “the sleaze hasn’t helped”, and that although he agreed with the principle of amending parliamentary standards to enable suspended MPs to appeal, the government “chose the wrong time” to do so. Two residents who run a small business in Bexley village, who asked to remain anonymous, said they would not be voting for the first time due to their disillusionment in politics as a result of the government’s handling of the pandemic, particularly its support for small businesses, which they considered to be unfairly distributed, as well as the corruption allegations. “The sleaze factor is frightening. I want to know more about it. UK politics has never been like that,” said one of the owners. Although he said he had been an admirer of Brokenshire, the other business owner said: “I think Boris Johnson is the worst prime minister we’ve ever had.” The pair also felt that politics was dominated by wealthy people who “don’t know the real world” across all parties. One said: “It’s very difficult for multimillionaires to form opinions on what working-class people do.” She added: “So many people we talk to feel it’s not worth voting, people are very disenchanted with politics.” Ian McCauley, 46, a freelance writer, said he would vote Labour since he is a party member, joking that he was “probably one of two round here”. He did not expect Labour to benefit from the scandals, however, but observed: “It’ll be interesting to see what happens with Reform [formerly the Brexit party], they might take a bit of the Tory vote away because of the sleaze row.” McCauley added that he has observed growing numbers of people moving to the constituency from central London boroughs in search of cheaper housing, which he predicted may increase support for Labour. Among these is Jamie Morris, 31, an account manager who moved from a “very Labour” constituency in central London, who plans to get involved in canvassing for the byelection campaign. “The Tory government is everything that’s wrong with this country, and everything going on with sleaze, scandal and corruption – I could never get behind it,” he said. Candidates in the running include Louie French for the Conservatives, Daniel Francis for Labour, Simone Reynolds for the Liberal Democrats, Jonathan Rooks for the Green party, and Richard Tice for Reform. Francis, who is midway through his campaign, said sleaze and corruption had been regularly raised on the doorstep. “It’s cutting through to some residents. Not everyone brings it up, but some people are clearly coming back to Labour who didn’t vote for us in 2019, and other people want to send a protest message to government because of what’s happened over the past week.” He added that people had also been enraged by cuts to the council’s budget and declining public services in the area, despite rising council tax bills. “They’re beginning to link those two together – MPs have time to have a second job but don’t have time to resolve the funding issues that local governments have had and get service people on the ground.” While Johnson has long been a popular figure in the borough dating back to his tenure as London mayor, Francis, a longstanding councillor, said he was seeing residents turn against him. “I’ve heard more people moan about him over the past week than over the past few years. They see he’s in charge of the ship and yet the [sleaze row] isn’t being addressed.” • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 with reference to named candidates standing in Old Bexley and Sidcup byelection. There are 11 declared candidates in total.A senior Senate Republican refused four times on Sunday to condemn Donald Trump for defending supporters who chanted “Hang Mike Pence” during the deadly assault on the US Capitol on 6 January. Trump made the comments about his vice-president, who did not yield to pressure to overturn Joe Biden’s election victory, in an interview with ABC’s chief Washington correspondent, Jonathan Karl. John Barrasso of Wyoming, the third-ranking Republican in the Senate, appeared on ABC’s This Week. He was asked: “Can your party tolerate a leader who defends murderous chants against his own vice-president?” “Well,” said Barrasso. “Let me just say, the Republican party is incredibly united right now and … I think the more that the Democrats and the press becomes obsessed with President Trump, I think the better it is for the Republican party. President Trump brings lots of energy to the party, he’s an enduring force.” He also said the party was focused on elections and policy debate, not the past. His host, George Stephanopoulos, said: “So you have no problem with the president saying, ‘Hang Mike Pence’ is common sense?” “I was with Mike Pence in the Senate chamber during 6 January,” Barrasso said. “And what happened was they quickly got Vice-President Pence out of there, certainly a lot faster than they removed the senators. I believe he was safe the whole time. “I didn’t hear any of those chants. I don’t believe that he did either. And Vice-President Pence came back into the chamber that night and certified the election.” Stephanopoulous said: “We just played the chants. I’m asking you if you can tolerate the president saying ‘Hang Mike Pence’ is common sense.” “It’s not common sense,” Barrasso said, before pivoting to Trump’s lie that the election was subject to widespread voter fraud. “There are issues in every election,” he said. “I voted to certify the election. And what we’ve seen on this election, there are areas that needed to be looked into, like what we saw in Pennsylvania. We all want fair and free elections. That’s where we need to go for the future.” Stephanopoulos said: “But you’re not going to criticise President Trump for those views?” Barrasso said: “I don’t agree with President Trump on everything. I agree with him on the policies that have brought us the best economy in my lifetime. And I’m going to continue to support those policies.” Karl released more snippets of his interview with Trump. Asked if reports he told Pence “you can be a patriot or you can be a pussy” were accurate, Trump said: “I wouldn’t dispute that.” Trump also said he thought Pence could have sent electoral college results back to the House – the overwhelming majority of constitutional scholars say he could not – and said: “I don’t know that I can forgive him.” “He did the wrong thing,” Trump said. “Very nice, man. I like him a lot. I like his family so much, but … it was a tragic mistake.” Trump’s flirtation with another White House run has seen critics within the GOP subject to primary challenges, political ostracism and even death threats. Anthony Gonzalez of Ohio voted for Trump’s impeachment over the Capitol attack. Like Adam Kinzinger of Illinois, one of only two Republicans on the House select committee investigating 6 January, Gonzalez will retire next year. He told CNN’s State of the Union he feared Trump was formulating plans for a coup. “I think any objective observer would come to this conclusion: that he has evaluated what went wrong on 6 January. Why is it that he wasn’t able to steal the election? Who stood in his way? “Every single American institution is just run by people. And you need the right people to make the right decision in the most difficult times. He’s going systematically through the country and trying to remove those people and install people who are going to do exactly what he wants them to do, who believe the big lie, who will go along with anything he says. “I think it’s all pushing towards one of two outcomes. He either wins legitimately, which he may do, or if he if he loses again, he’ll just try to steal it but he’ll try to steal it with his people in those positions. And that’s then the most difficult challenge for our country. It’s the question, do the institutions hold again? Do they hold with a different set of people in place? I hope so, but you can’t guarantee it.” Gonzalez said he “despised” most Biden policies and would never vote Democratic. But he said: “The country can’t survive torching the constitution. You have to hold fast to the constitution … and the cold, hard truth is Donald Trump led us into a ditch on 6 January. “… I see fundamentally a person who shouldn’t be able to hold office again because of what he did around 6 January, but I also see somebody who’s an enormous political loser. I don’t know why anybody who wants to win elections would follow that … If he’s the nominee again in ’24 I will do everything I can to make sure he doesn’t win. “… 6 January was the line that can’t be crossed. 6 January was an unconstitutional attempt led by the president of the United States to overturn an American election and reinstall himself in power illegitimately. That’s fallen-nation territory, that’s third-world country territory. My family left Cuba to avoid that fate. I will not let it happen here.” Trump issued a statement on Sunday, repeating lies about election fraud and alluding to the indictment of his former strategist Steve Bannon for contempt of Congress, for ignoring a subpoena from the 6 January committee, and legal jeopardy faced by others including his former chief of staff, Mark Meadows. “American patriots are not going to allow this subversion of justice to continue,” Trump said, adding: “Our country is going to hell!”Fresh concerns have been raised over the future of mutual insurance firm LV= after it emerged that bidders could break it up after a takeover. The 178-year-old firm, originally known as Liverpool Victoria, is being sold to US private equity firm Bain Capital for £530m, in a controversial deal that would end its member-owned status if its members back the takeover in a December vote. However, fellow mutual insurer Royal London, which had a bid for the company rejected, has proposed a deal to Bain Capital that involves splitting parts of LV= with the US investment firm, according to proposals seen by the Mail on Sunday. Royal London reportedly suggested in an email to LV=’s chief executive, Mark Hartigan, that it could acquire some of LV=’s policies, leaving Bain to spin off the rest of the business into a separate entity. It also proposed entering an ‘“early three-way discussion” between Royal London, Bain and LV=, if it looked like LV= members would reject the Bain deal currently on the table. The prospect of Royal London re-entering the process comes after it was beaten to an agreed takeover by Bain Capital last December. Some LV= members had complained they were not informed about the details of Royal London’s bid, which could have retained its mutual status. Royal London said in a statement it had been in contact with LV= and “asked them to consider if their current proposal to members could be enhanced”. It added: “We are ready to explore any option that delivers a better member outcome, including options that would allow LV= members to become members of Royal London. The board of LV= has not taken up our offer to discuss other possible options but our door is open and we remain ready to engage.” The board of LV= has come in for criticism for approving the deal with Bain, which would involve each of LV=’s 1.2m members getting a £100 payout, an offer criticised by some as paltry. Politicians have also expressed concern about the loss of a large mutual company, and voiced worries about asset stripping. Gareth Thomas, Labour’s shadow minister for international trade and chair of the all-party parliamentary group on mutuals, said a carve-up of the company would risk the long-term value members currently enjoy. “It makes sense for all the bids to be fully public, and everything from who the new directors are going to be, to tender documents, to Royal London’s bid, to Bain’s bid, to be fully out there on the record so that members can make their own choices,” he said.The US military has confirmed for the first time a 2019 airstrike in Syria that killed up to 80 people, mostly women and children, but claimed the strike was justified as it killed Islamic State fighters who were attacking coalition forces. The confirmation from US Central Command followed a report by the New York Times in which former and current Pentagon officials alleged there had been a cover-up of a likely war crime. Central Command argued that because some women and children had taken up arms for IS, whether by indoctrination or choice, they “could not strictly be classified as civilians”. The strike was carried out on 18 March 2019 on the town of Baghuz on the Euphrates River, which forms the Syrian-Iraq border, where Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), with US air support, were besieging the last organised remnants of IS in Syria. The Times report said two bombs were dropped on a crowd of women and children, trying to escape the fighting on the banks of the Euphrates, who had been identified as civilians by a US drone operated from Qatar. It said the drone operators in Al-Udeid airbase were stunned when they saw the first 500lb bomb dropped by a US F-15E plane, and then a second, 2,000lb bomb dropped on the survivors. “Who dropped that?” one analyst asked on a chat system used by those monitoring the drone footage, according to the report. Within minutes, a legal officer flagged a possible war crime that required investigation, and ordered the drone footage and other evidence. The initial battle damage assessment put the death toll at 70. But no independent inquiry was ever carried out. The air force lawyer, Lt Col Dean Korsak, took the case to the Pentagon inspector general, but the subsequent report was stripped of any mention of the strike. Korsak subsequently sent details of the incident to the Senate armed services committee. “I’m putting myself at great risk of military retaliation for sending this,” Korsak wrote to the committee, in emails obtained by the Times. “Senior ranking US military officials intentionally and systematically circumvented the deliberate strike process.” Gene Tate, a civilian analyst in the inspector general’s office, who complained about the lack of action, was forced out of his job. The New York Times investigation found that the airstrike at Baghuz was called in by a shadowy US special forces unit known as Task Force 9, operating independently from the operations centre in Qatar, and which appears to have side-stepped the procedures put in place to minimise civilian casualties. US Central Command said the context for the airstrikes was a desperate last stand by IS, referred to by the alternative acronym, Isis. “The Isis pocket included thousands of fighters and family members including women and children,” said Capt Bill Urban, the Central Command spokesman. “The remaining fighters including some women and child combatants, along with many Isis family members, including some who were likely held against their will, decided to make a determined stand in an area that included buildings, tunnels and cliffs. Multiple entreaties to Isis to allow family members to depart the area were rebuffed, and thousands of family members remained in the area of the fighting.” Urban said that on the morning of 18 March, IS fighters launched a counterattack on SDF positions that lasted several hours, during which an SDF position was in danger of being overrun, and US special forces called in an airstrike. He said that they were unaware that a drone with a high-definition video footage was in the area and relied on a standard definition feed from another drone. According to the Central Command account, the drones over Baghuz had used all their Hellfire missiles, so the air support available came from F-15s, which dropped three bombs. The bombs killed at least 16 IS fighters, according to the US military assessment. It also confirmed four civilian deaths. “The investigations were unable to conclusively characterise the status of more than 60 other casualties that resulted from these strikes. The reason for this uncertainty is that multiple armed women and at least one armed child were observed in the video, and the exact mixture of armed and unarmed personnel could not be conclusively determined,” Urban said. “Likely, a majority of those killed were also combatants at the time of the strike, however, it is also highly likely that there were additional civilians killed by these two strikes,” he added. An investigation ordered by special forces commanders found the strike was justified as self-defence, and “proportional due to the unavailability of smaller ordinance at the time of the request”. As a consequence however, procedures were changed to require high definition video surveillance before such strikes are ordered, and that the “strike cell” on the ground should coordinate with any coalition aircraft. “We abhor the loss of innocent life and take all possible measures to prevent them,” Urban said.Officials have been working on a “Covid exit strategy” called Operation Rampdown, under which the government could wind down testing and people would no longer be forced to isolate if they are ill from April, leaked documents reveal. The documents, prepared by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), give ministers the option of dismantling the official government-backed testing system and tracing operations. The requirement for people to isolate for 10 days if they contract Covid could also be scrapped and those on low pay would no longer receive £500 to isolate. No 10 sources distanced ministers from the document on Sunday and denied the April target. “No ministers have asked for this or seen it,” one source said. “It’s far too early to be talking about any of this stuff when don’t know where we will be in terms of case numbers or state of the pandemic. “You can’t plan so far ahead with this disease. It’s very premature to be talking about that at this stage particularly ahead of winter.” The existence of the document was revealed by the Mail on Sunday, which said it was prepared as part of a six-week review of the government’s test-and-trace operations conducted by UKHSA officials. The new body is headed by the former deputy chief medical officer for England, Dr Jenny Harries. According to the report, the document said: “We will no longer be prioritising the previous objectives of breaking chains of transmission at all costs.” A government spokesperson said: “We have published the autumn and winter plan for managing the response to coronavirus, which remains a serious risk. “We keep our approach under review, and no decisions have been taken about next year.” The plan would involve the winding down of the Covid testing regime, which requires people to get a free test if they have any of the three main symptoms: cough, temperature and loss of smell or taste. Testing would instead be paid for and left to the private marketplace, despite concerns about some of the companies offering tests. The Competition and Markets Authority are investigating a number of them over misleading claims. The Sunday Times also reported that the data privacy watchdog was examining information about one company, CignPost, over fears that its terms and conditions could allow the sale of its customers’ genetic data to third parties. Cignpost denied it was keeping such data. It said: “Cignpost Diagnostics only uses customers’ DNA for Covid-19 testing. All PCR Covid-19 tests are based on DNA analysis. We only use DNA for the purposes of conducting the PCR test in line with Public Health England guidelines. All DNA samples and data are destroyed once the Covid-19 test process is complete and data has been shared with clients and PHE. “Our terms and conditions do not allow the use of customer DNA samples or data for any purpose other than Covid-19 testing. Any change in use of customer data would require new explicit consent. We apologise to our clients for any concern or confusion caused by today’s media coverage.” It comes as the government pins its hopes for avoiding further Covid restrictions this winter on enough people getting booster jabs. Latest figures showed 38,351 new cases and a further 157 deaths on Saturday. The virus is most prevalent among older children and teenagers. The NHS said on Sunday that more than a million 12- to 15-year-olds in England had been vaccinated, and that NHS teams would visit more than 800 schools next week to offer young people vaccinations before the onset of winter. Prof Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said this weekend that he thought it unlikely there would be a catastrophic winter wave similar to last year’s, which led to months of lockdown.When I saw photographs of Liverpool dockers by Colin Jones I was keen to include his work in the exhibition Myth of the North at The Lowry, Salford Quays, in 2007. From the moment I phoned him, he was immensely helpful. After I visited his darkroom in Barnes, south-west London, he made brand new prints especially for the show. He even brought them up to Salford himself. I remember how impressed he was by the Lowry galleries and how much he enjoyed seeing the changes in Manchester since he photographed the Who in the city in the 1960s, when it was still decidedly “grim up north”.We’ll have a match report shortly, but I’m going to head off to prepare for some hot men’s World Cup qualifying action this evening. Thanks for your company - bye! The player of the match is Erin Cuthbert “We weren’t at our best in the first half so we were delighted to be 2-0 up. We changed a couple of things and regrouped. Everything starts with a clean sheet - we know if we don’t concede that the attacking side will take care of itself. It’s great to win here, but we’ve got to keep putting the pressure of Arsenal.” Peep peep! Chelsea move to within a point of Arsenal after another comfortable win at the Academy Stadium. It was 3-0 in the FA Cup semi-final last month and 4-0 today. Then, as now, City were punished ruthlessly for their mistakes. They played well for most of the first half, despite Karima Taieb gifting Chelsea a goal in the second minute, but Sam Kerr’s strike on the stroke of half-time shattered their morale. Chelsea scored two more in the first ten minutes of the second half, and the rest of the match was a non-event. It’s a horrible time for City and particularly their manager Gareth Taylor. For Chelsea and Emma Hayes, it’s business as usual. 90+1 min England’s low cross towards Fleming is crucially intercepted by Stanway on the six-yard line. 90+1 min There will be five minutes of added time. 90 min The substitute Beckie wins a corner for City down the right. It’s curled in by Greenwood and headed away by Eriksson. 87 min Cuthbert is limping a bit but she’s going to continue. I think she was caught by the substitute Raso as they challenged for a 51-49 ball. 85 min There’s a break in play while Cuthbert receives treatment. 83 min Poor Ellen White chases another overhit long pass. I can’t remember her touching the ball. 82 min City will drop to eighth in the table after this defeat. Aston Villa, who won 1-0 at Birmingham earlier today, will move above them. 81 min Stanway shoots over from distance. 79 min Another change for City - Hayley Raso replaces the brilliant Lauren Hemp. 78 min Three changes for Chelsea. Zecira Musovic replaces Berger in goal, while Niamh Charles and Drew Spence come on for Kirby and Reiten. 77 min City bring on Vicky Losada for Caroline Weir. 77 min England misses an excellent chance to make it 5-0, scooping over from 15 yards after being teed up by Kirby. On reflection, maybe the ball was slightly behind her. 76 min Ann-Katrin Berger is down again, and this time it looks like she’ll need to come off. 74 min Greenwood is booked for a robust aerial challenge on Leupolz. 72 min Berger saves again from Hemp, this time more comfortably. It was another cracking run from Hemp, who remains thoroughly watchable even when her team is 4-0 down. 70 min Hemp surges into the area from the left, moves away from Cuthbert and clips a right-footed shot that is pushed round the near post by Berger. It was going wide anyway but Berger took no chances. 69 min Now a double change for City: Janine Beckie and Laura Coombs replace Filippa Angeldahl and Jess Park. 67 min Another Chelsea change: Beth England replaces Sam Kerr, who scored the crucial second goal just before half-time. 64 min It’s a reflection of Chelsea’s standards that they started the second half so ferociously, even though they were already 2-0 up. They knew they hadn’t played well in the first half, whatever the scoreline. 61 min The second half has turned into a training session for Chelsea. The City players, understandably, look desperate for the game to end. 58 min City have already lost 5-0 to Arsenal in the WSL this season. I’m not sure how Gareth Taylor comes back from this. Another one for Chelsea! A booming, inswinging corner from the left is headed in emphatically from close range by Eriksson, towering over both Greenwood and the keeper Taieb. 54 min: Taieb makes another good save, scrambling to her right to push Kerr’s deflected shot behind. City have been all over the place since half-time. 53 min The commentators think that might have been a cross by Kirby. It’s possible, though I suspect she meant it. She’s certainly good enough to conceive and execute a goal like that. That was far too easy for Chelsea. The corner was played short and worked from right to left and back again by Chelsea. Eventually Cuthbert played a short pass back to Kirby, 15 yards out, and she teased a curling shot into the far corner. Oh, City. 51 min Kerr wins a corner off Greenwood. 50 min Ingle has a long-range shot blocked. Chelsea have pressed more aggressively since half-time, which hints at a brollocking from Emma Hayes despite the score. 48 min: Good save by Taieb! City are almost punished for another mistake. Jill Scott’s loose square ball was nicked by Kerr, who waited for support and played in Fran Kirby. She floated a shot towards the far corner that was punched away by Taieb, diving to her right. 46 min Peep peep! City begin the second half. Chelsea have made a half-time change: Sophie Ingle is on for Ji. Half-time reading Another miserable half of football for City. They were the better team almost throughout; alas, the ‘almost’ refers to errors from Karima Benameur Taieb and Georgia Stanway - one hideous, one merely bad - that led to Chelsea’s goals. Jessie Fleming and Sam Kerr punished City ruthlessly. As things stand, City have taken only seven points from seven games. Gareth Taylor must feel like the 2021-22 season is cursed. 45+6 min It was an adroit finish from Kerr, because the ball bounced up slightly awkwardly. Stanway lost the ball in the centre circle and Chelsea flew forward on the break. Ji floated a lovely cross beyond the far post to Reiten, who twisted her neck to it head back towards Kerr in the six-yard box. She did the rest. A killer blow on the stroke of half-time! 45+4 min Similarly, I’m not sure whether Gareth Taylor will be pleased with City’s performance or alarmed that they are behind yet again. It’s been a strange half. 45+2 min I’m not sure whether Emma Hayes will be annoyed by Chelsea’s performance or happy that they are ahead despite playing so passively. 45 min Nothing comes of the corner. There will be ... six minutes of added time. 45 min Cuthbert, who is starting to struggle against Hemp, stretches to concede another corner. 42 min After four minutes of treatment, Berger is up on her feet and wants to continue. 40 min While both players receive treatment, the commentators discuss whether City should have had a penalty. Berger absolutely booted Hemp, thinking she was going to get the ball first. At the same time she unwittingly stopped Hemp’s shot, which probably saved her from conceding a penalty. City still have a case though, certainly in the modern game. 38 min: Fine save by Berger! Cuthbert’s backpass towards Berger is short. Hemp charges onto it and gets to the ball a split second before Berger, who blocks the shot and then collides very nastily with Hemp. 37 min Chelsea are doubling up on Hemp all the time, usually Cuthbert and Carter. So far it’s been a very effective tactic. 36 min Chelsea have been sloppy in possession, certainly by their standards, and the scoreline flatters them a bit. The game has been a tale of two keepers, really - Taieb’s error, Berger’s superb save from Weir. 34 min Greenwood’s corner is headed wide by Stanway, stooping in front of the near post. She had no chance of flicking that towards goal. 33 min Angeldahl wins another corner for City, who are having a good spell. 32 min Hemp’s fierce cross-shot is well held at her near post by Berger. 31 min: Chance for Greenwood! Walsh’s inswinging corner is met by Greenwood, six yards out, but her header is straight at Berger. It wasn’t the easiest header, as she was under a lot of pressure, but had it been in the corner she would probably have scored. 30 min Weir’s through pass towards Hemp is intercepted by Cuthbert, who concedes a corner. 28 min Berger is going to try to continue. 26 min The Chelsea keeper Berger has a problem with her right hamsatring, and I’m not sure she’ll be able to continue. Chelsea do at least have the excellent Zecira Musovic on the bench. 25 min Greenwood overhits a long pass that drifts behind for a goalkick. Not even Hemp was quick enough to keep that in play. For all City’s possession, Chelsea look pretty comfortable defensively. 23 min Fleming plays a dangerous through pass towards Kerr. Stokes makes a vital interception and then shows good pace to beat Kirby to the loose ball. 20 min City are still dominating possession, though Lauren Hemp hasn’t had as much of the ball as they would like. 18 min Chelsea appeal for a penalty when a long-range shot hits a City defender in the area. We haven’t seen a replay but the referee wasn’t interested. 15 min Angeldahl beats Ji with a lovely dummy and curls the ball out to Hemp on the left. Her cross bounces up awkwardly at the far post and is miscontrolled by Park, which allows Eriksson to clear. But that was a promising move from City. 13 min Chelsea seem happy playing on the break. I suspect that would have been their preferred tactic even it the score was 0-0. 9 min: Fine save from Berger! Walsh slides a marvellous first-time pass into the path of Weir, who gallops away from Bright and through on goal. She moves into the area and hits a low shot that Berger saves with her outstretched left leg. That’s superb goalkeeping; her positioning was perfect and she made herself as big as possible. 8 min City have actually started well, that one shocker aside, and have had most of the possession. 6 min City conceded after 58 seconds against Leicester last weekend and went on to win 4-1. But giving Chelsea a goal start is a different challenge entirely. 5 min Hemp brings the crowd to life with a spectacular, winding run into the area. Carter comes across and does well to usher her away from danger. 4 min That was a hideous goal to concede. You have to feel for Taieb, the stand-in keeper who is having such a difficult season. A horrible start for City! The goalkeeper Taieb, who had a miserable time against Chelsea in the FA Cup, has made an even bigger howler here. She played an errant pass towards Greenwood that was intercepted by Fleming on the edge of the area. She moved smoothly round Taieb to give Chelsea the lead after just 67 seconds. 1 min Peep peep! Chelsea, in dark blue, kick off from left to right. City are wearing their usual sky blue. Here come the players. There’s a good crowd at the Academy Stadium on this Remembrace Sunday. The two managers lay wreaths on the touchline, and the players gather round the centre circle for the Last Post. The early WSL game has finished Everton 1-1 Man Utd. Daniel Harris has more on that one. Gareth Taylor picks the same XI that won 4-1 at Leicester last weekend. Emma Hayes makes two changes from Chelsea’s 7-0 win over Servette in the Champions League: Ann-Katrin Berger and Ji So-yun replace Zecira Musovic and Drew Spence. Man City (possible 4-3-3) Taieb; Stanway, Scott, Greenwood, Stokes; Angeldahl, Walsh, Weir; Park, White, Hemp. Substitutes: Pilling, Beckie, Raso, Coombs, Losada, Mace, Kennedy. Chelsea (possible 3-4-3) Berger; Carter, Bright, Eriksson; Cuthbert, Leupolz, Ji, Reiten; Fleming, Kerr, Kirby. Substitutes: Musovic, Ingle, England, Mjelde, James, Charles, Spence, Andersson, Fox. Hello and welcome to live coverage of Manchester City v Chelsea at the Academy Stadium. When these teams met here in April it was a title decider, a pulsating 2-2 draw that kept the league in Chelsea’s hands. Today it’s not 1st v 2nd but 7th v 2nd. We all know the story of Manchester City’s wretched start to the season, and they start this game 12 points behind the leaders Arsenal. City surely can’t win the league after such a poor start, though they will stil fancy their chances of finishing third and qualifying for the Champions League. Chelsea are aiming for a third consecutive title, a feat no team has achieved since the WSL was set up in 2010. Victory today would move them to within a point of the leaders Arsenal, who were held yesterday by an improving Spurs. Chelsea won 3-0 on this ground in the FA Cup last month. But they have had enough tough games against City down the years to know that they remain dangerous opponents, no matter where they are in the league. Kick off 3pm.As fans prepare to mark the 20th anniversary of Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone, the first film adaptation of JK Rowling’s hit series, on Tuesday, rumours abound of a potential reunion, with reports that members of the main cast have been issued with invitations for a one-off show. As Potterheads fantasise about the gang getting together one last time, we take a look at where the cast members are now and the paths their careers have taken in the years since. Daniel Radcliffe (Harry Potter) Radcliffe became one of the world’s highest-paid actors for his titular role in the Potter films. He branched out into stage acting in 2007 and starred in a slew of movies – as Arthur Kipps in The Woman in Black, Allen Ginsberg in Kill Your Darlings and Tim Jenkin in Escape from Pretoria – but none have been anywhere near the scale of Potter. Emma Watson (Hermione Granger) With perhaps the most successful career post-Potter, Watson has gained recognition for her roles in blockbuster and indie films as well as her activism – which earned her a spot on Time Magazine’s 100 most influential people in the world in 2015. She played Sam in the critically acclaimed Perks of Being a Wallflower, Meg in coming-of-age drama Little Women, and Belle in Beauty and the Beast, which ranks among the highest-grossing films of all time. She was appointed UN women’s goodwill ambassador and helped launch HeForShe as well as Time’s Up UK in response to the #MeToo movement. Rupert Grint (Ron Weasley) Following Potter, Grint starred in a string of little-known indie projects, including Driving Lessons and Cherrybomb, but most were panned or ignored by critics. Despite a turn on stage in Jez Butterworth’s Mojo, his career has not flourished as well as expected. He opened a hotel in Hertford only for it to be shut down four years later. He’s previously revealed he had even considered quitting acting after the intensity of the Potter years. But things may be turning around after he scored a major role in M Night Shyamalan’s psychological thriller series, Servant, on Apple TV. Tom Felton (Draco Malfoy) Felton’s role as Harry Potter’s school nemesis gave him star appeal. Outside the franchise, he’s best known for his part in 2011’s Rise of the Planet of the Apes, though other appearances in indie films received limited consideration. He was in TV miniseries Labyrinth as well as period drama Belle, which was released to critical acclaim. A keen musician, Felton has released several EPs. Matthew Lewis (Neville Longbottom) His roles after Potter have not been extensive, but Lewis’s performance in Me Before You, as well as the Channel 5 remake of All Creatures Great and Small, were critically praised. He’s starred in a few other small-screen dramas including Ripper Street and Happy Valley, but nothing dominated column inches as much as his shirtless “glow up” on the cover of Attitude magazine. A sport lover, he currently hosts the Leeds United podcast “Doing a Leeds” with former footballer Jermaine Beckford. Bonnie Wright (Ginny Weasley) Wright appeared in a number of indie films that received mixed reviews. She made her stage debut in The Moment of Truth in 2013 and the following year participated in a celebrity spin-off of The Great British Bake Off, but it is her directorial work that has been most successful. After graduating from the University of Arts London with a degree in film-making, Wright directed coming-of-age drama Separate We Come, Separate We Go, which was released at Cannes to critical acclaim. Alfred Enoch (Dean Thomas) Enoch became well known for portraying one of a small number of black characters in Harry Potter. He later appeared on stage in a number of plays as well as an episode of hit BBC series Sherlock. But it was his role as Wes Gibbins in Shonda Rhime’s legal drama How to Get Away with Murder that made him a household name. Harry Melling (Dudley Dursley) His part in the Potter franchise was small yet notable. Since then, Melling has starred in the Coen brothers’ The Ballad of Buster Scruggs as well as on stage in productions including Mother Courage and her Children. Fans recognised him on screen in BBC series Merlin, and most recently, in Netflix’s hit show The Queen’s Gambit. Jamie Waylett and Josh Herdman (Vincent Crabbe and Gregory Goyle) Waylett has fallen foul of the law a couple of times, being charged with possession of cannabis and arrested for participation in the 2011 England riots – for which he was sentenced to two years in prison. Herdman has had a few acting roles, including in 2018’s Robin Hood, but today he’s mostly known for his career as an MMA fighter.It was less a procession than a runaway train, but either way there was no stopping Australia as they raced to their first T20 World Cup title. They had promised to attack this game with bravery and aggression and their assault on a target of 173 certainly left New Zealand punch drunk, Mitch Marsh leading what amounted to a gleeful pile-on on a previously outstanding group of bowlers as his team raced to the finish line with seven balls to spare. From the toss to the moment Glenn Maxwell struck the winning runs Australia seemed in control, and after the 2015 and 2019 50-over World Cups the Kiwis add another runners-up medal to an unwanted and expanding collection. Kane Williamson said in the aftermath that “it’s always nice to get to the last dance” but it seems to be his side’s fate to still be in the ballroom at the 11th hour before turning into pumpkins when the clock strikes 12. It took a brilliant innings from the Kiwi captain to lift his side to something approaching a par score but Australia made it look trivial through a barrage of brutal and often brilliant batsmanship. The Black Caps might have been optimistic of defending their score of 172 but they needed quick wickets; when they got one, Trent Boult dismissing Aaron Finch in the third over, Marsh simply strolled in and in the space of three deliveries – six, four, four – took a hammer to their fragile confidence. New Zealand looked a beaten side long before the finish. Ish Sodhi has had an outstanding tournament, but it concluded with an over containing three wides, two boundaries and 16 runs, and at the end of it he looked broken. The Kiwis’ other spinner, Mitch Santner, bowled three overs of increasing pointlessness. It was not the way anyone had wanted this to end. In many ways it was all perfectly predictable. Though it was more one-sided than anyone had expected, the final very much followed tournament type: for the 10th time in 10 evening games in Dubai the team that won the toss chose to bat second and chased their target down. But such was Australia’s overall superiority it is hard to argue that luck played much of a part. New Zealand’s attempt to control Australia’s scoring started well enough, Boult’s excellent opening over bringing just a single run, but from then on it was pedal to metal cricket. David Warner was always the man New Zealand most feared, not just for his strength and aggression but because he is particularly strong against spin and the Black Caps would need Santner and Sodhi to get through some overs at some stage. But Warner survived into the middle overs, New Zealand had no choice to bowl them anyway, and it was at that stage that things fell apart. In the first three overs after the powerplay Australia scored 34, and when Williamson gave Jimmy Neesham the ball to end the spell of spin each batter helped themselves to a six. With his side now in dire trouble Boult returned in the 13th and burst one through the arc of Warner’s swing to take out middle stump, roaring to remind his teammates that the game was still alive. Not for long: Sodhi bowled the next, and we know what happened then. Having been put in to bat – Finch won his sixth toss in seven World Cup games, and a probability-defying 14th in 17 this year – New Zealand started their innings well. After three overs they had scored 23 runs and seemed on their way, but at that point things took a turn for the inexplicably pedestrian, and the last 17 balls of the powerplay went for just five runs. At the end of the sixth over New Zealand were 32 for one and in trouble. The only thing Martin Guptill, who scored 15 off his first 14 balls before losing his timing and intent, was giving his side was problems. By the time he heaved Adam Zampa to deep midwicket the Kiwis’ disappointment must have been cut with a little relief. Meanwhile, Williamson was flourishing after a slow start. He scored one run off his first seven, 21 off his first 21, and then he lifted his 22nd high towards Josh Hazlewood at fine leg who had time to set himself, lift his hands, and let the ball straight through them. He turned just in time to see it roll into the rope, and with that New Zealand’s captain was away. It was the only thing Hazlewood did all evening that was less than impeccable. His four overs cost just 16 runs and brought three wickets, including that of Williamson, though by then the 31-year-old had applied the defibrillators to his side’s innings. He was particularly electric when facing Mitchell Starc, against whom, and thanks in part to that drop, he scored 39 off 12 deliveries. To put that in some kind of context, Starc had not conceded 39 runs in total in any of his previous 10 T20s. In all Williamson hit 64 off his final 27 balls before falling midway through the 18th over, attempting to lift the ball over long-off and failing. New Zealand had spent the second half of their innings recovering from the mess they made of the first, but though scoring 115 from the last 10 overs was impressive Australia wasted little time in making it clear that it was not going to be enough.Criminal charges are possible for more associates of Donald Trump refusing to cooperate with the House committee investigating the 6 January Capitol attack, a senior Democrat warned on Sunday, two days after the indictment of former White House adviser Steve Bannon. Adam Schiff, chair of the House intelligence committee and a member of the panel investigating the deadly Capitol riot, said some witnesses could be offered immunity in exchange for testimony in order to advance the inquiry. He told NBC’s Meet the Press he believed “without a doubt” that the justice department decision to charge Bannon with contempt of Congress would “shake loose” defiant Trump associates. That could include the former chief of staff Mark Meadows, who did not show up for a deposition before the select committee on Friday, shortly before Bannon’s indictment was announced. “Now that witnesses see that if they don’t cooperate, if they don’t fulfill their lawful duty when subpoenaed, that they too may be prosecuted, it will have a very strong focusing effect on their decision making,” Schiff said. “Even before the justice department acted, it influenced other witnesses who were not going to be Steve Bannon. “When ultimately witnesses decide, as Meadows has, that they’re not even going to bother showing up, that they have that much contempt for the law, then it pretty much forces our hand and we’ll move quickly.” Schiff would not be drawn on whether that meant the committee would issue a criminal contempt referral for Meadows, who, unlike Bannon, was a government employee on 6 January. But he said the panel would decide quickly, and that it wanted to make sure “we have the strongest possible case to present to the justice department, and for the justice department to present to a grand jury”. Meadows’ lawyer has said his client will not appear before the committee unless compelled to do so by a judge. Schiff conceded that certain witnesses, whom he did not identify, could receive limited immunity instead of criminal referral in exchange for their cooperation, the decisions to be made on a case by case basis. “With certain specific witnesses, we ought to consider it,” he said. “But as that kind of immunity makes it very difficult to prosecute not just them, but sometimes others, we need to think about it very carefully.” Schiff said he saw the developments “as an early test of whether our democracy was recovering” from the turmoil of the Trump administration. “Basically … the Republican party, at the top levels, that is Donald Trump and those around him, seem to feel that they’re above the law and free to thwart it. And there’s something admirable about thumbing your nose at the institutions of our government. “Bannon did what he did because for four years that’s what worked. They could hold Republican party conventions on the White House grounds. They could fire inspectors general, they could retaliate against whistleblowers. It was essentially a lawless presidency and they were proud of it. That ought to concern every American. We need a reestablishment of the rule of law in this country and I’m glad to see that that’s happening.” Bannon’s indictment, and the threat of charges for Meadows, marked a significant escalation in the House committee’s efforts to get to the bottom of the 6 January riot and Trump’s attempt to overturn defeat by Joe Biden. Trump himself is locked in legal battle with the committee over the release of White House documents related to the day of the insurrection, when his supporters ransacked the Capitol. On Thursday, a federal appeals court in Washington DC handed Trump a temporary victory by blocking the release by the National Archives of hundreds of pages of communication logs, memos and other materials ordered by a lower court days before. The appeals court will listen to arguments later this month on Trump’s claim the documents are protected by executive privilege before making a final decision. Schiff said he believed efforts to delay the inquiry in the courts would not succeed. “The courts themselves have recognised that Donald Trump essentially played our institutions for four years and played rope-a-dope in the courts,” he said. “[They] moved with such expedition to reject Trump’s claims in the district court a week or so ago, now the court of appeals is saying they’re going to have a hearing by the end of the month. Courts don’t generally move that fast and I think it’s a recognition that Donald Trump has relied on justice delayed meaning justice denied. So we and the courts are moving quickly.”A toothless Manchester City suffered a humiliating 4-0 defeat to the champions Chelsea to ramp up the pressure on their manager, Gareth Taylor. A goal a minute in from Jessie Fleming was added to by Sam Kerr, Fran Kirby and Magda Eriksson as they picked City apart at the Academy Stadium. City sit eighth in the WSL table, seven points off the third Champions League spot, and have just seven points from seven games. If there were hopes that this could be the moment to relaunch City’s season then they were very quickly squashed. It took just 67 seconds for Chelsea to take the lead and it was gifted to them. City’s third-choice goalkeeper Karima Taieb passed to Alex Greenwood but it was woefully short and Fleming nipped in, rounded the hapless Taieb and stroked the ball into the net. It was a bruising start but Chelsea’s targeting of Taieb was not unexpected. She has played all of City’s 13 games this season but has struggled to get anywhere near the standards set by the injured Ellie Roebuck and Karen Bardsley. With this latest howler, and after two big errors in City’s defeat to Chelsea in the FA Cup semi-final, the 16-year-old Grace Pilling must surely be in line to start ahead of her. Despite that, City had a good spell of play in the first half, with midfielders Caroline Weir and Keira Walsh and the ever-energetic Lauren Hemp helping the home team to edge the midfield battle. Wise to the threat of Hemp, Chelsea manager Emma Hayes had her own dogged and nippy forward Erin Cuthbert virtually man-marking the winger. In stark contrast to the error from her opposite number, Chelsea goalkeeper Ann-Katrin Berger did well to stretch out a leg and push aside a shot from Weir after Walsh had played her in through the middle. Berger was on hand again and collided heavily with Hemp as she blocked her shot with both players requiring lengthy treatment. In the resulting five minutes of added time before the break Chelsea struck again. A Ji So-yun cross from the left was nodded down by a falling Guro Reiten at the back post and Kerr poked in. Despite City being winless in eight WSL games against Chelsea, Hayes’ side had never won away from home against them in the league with five defeats on their travels. In the second half Chelsea ramped up the pressure on City’s beleaguered and makeshift back line with two goals in four minutes, both from corners. First, mirroring a manoeuvre used in the Cup semi-final, a short corner to Cuthbert was worked from right to left and back again for the Scot to place into the path of Kirby who sent a curling shot into the far corner. Then, Melanie Leupolz’s inswinging corner was headed in powerfully by the Chelsea captain Eriksson with Taieb seemingly pulling away from an attempt to punch it clear. Kirby has now scored 17 WSL goals and provided 12 assists in 2021 and is the only player in the history of the league to both score and assist more than 10 goals in a single calendar year. As City’s losses accumulate so does the pressure on Taylor. A staggeringly large injury list means there are some allowances to be made for their early form, but there has still been significant strength in the starting XI each week that makes their points tally and position surprising leading to fingers being pointed at the man organising that talent.As well as playing drums on stage and on all 16 of the Moody Blues’ studio albums, Graeme Edge, who has died aged 80 of cancer, was also the band’s in-house poet. When his bandmates considered his attempts at lyric-writing too verbose, they decided to use them as spoken-word pieces instead. Edge’s somewhat portentous poems – initially recited by the singer and keyboardist Mike Pinder – first appeared on Days of Future Passed (1967). Of his seemingly lugubrious piece Late Lament on that album, Edge, who also enjoyed a reputation as the group’s bon vivant, insisted that it was intended to be joyous and uplifting. “It’s a young boy discovering that he loves somebody for the first time, and he just wants to shout it out from the hills – and shout it out again!” he told Rolling Stone in 2018. Edge’s contributions would become integral to the Moody Blues’ grandiose sound pictures, as they racked up a streak of bestsellers stretching into the 1980s. In Search of the Lost Chord (1968) opens with Edge reciting his own piece, Departure, and it reached the UK Top 5 and the US Top 30. Their first British chart-topping album was On the Threshold of a Dream (1969), a feat they replicated with A Question of Balance (1970) and Every Good Boy Deserves Favour (1971). Meanwhile they were enjoying booming sales, even if their art-rock began to fall out of favour with critics, and they topped the US album charts with Seventh Sojourn (1972) and Long Distance Voyager (1981). The first album on the group’s own Threshold Records label had been To Our Children’s Children’s Children (1969), and their very first was on Decca – The Magnificent Moodies (1965), a mixture of R&amp;B cover versions and original compositions, notable for the inclusion of Go Now. This was originally recorded by the American soul singer Bessie Banks, and the Moodies’ version topped the UK singles chart in January 1965. However, it was with their second album, Days of Future Passed, that the group established the musical approach that would define them. This combined rock music with orchestral interludes played by the London Festival Orchestra, Decca having initially proposed that the group record a version of Dvořák’s New World Symphony to show off its “Deramic Sound” stereophonic technology. However, the album’s producer, Tony Clarke, decided to use the group’s original songs instead. With its conceptual storyline about the passing phases of life, it became a milestone in the history of progressive rock. As the Yes and King Crimson drummer Bill Bruford observed: “Once one band had an orchestra, everyone wanted one.” The single Nights in White Satin (a UK Top 20 hit in 1967, but a much bigger UK and US hit in 1972) became their most definitive song. Edge was born in Rocester, Staffordshire, into a musical family. His father, grandfather and great-grandfather had all been music-hall singers, while his mother was a classically trained pianist. His family moved to Birmingham when he was six months old. He trained as a draughtsman, but the arrival of rock’n’roll had a huge impact on him. His first job was as manager of the Blue Rhythm Band in Birmingham, with whom he gained his first performing experience when he sat in temporarily on drums. He was inspired to buy his own set. His first stab at pop stardom was with Gerry Levene and the Avengers, who enjoyed success playing in pubs; the band also included Roy Wood, later of the Move and Electric Light Orchestra. The Avengers appeared on the Thank Your Lucky Stars TV show, but after they disintegrated in April 1964 Edge teamed up with the guitarist Denny Laine and the bass player Clint Warwick to form the R&amp;B Preachers. This unit also fell apart, whereupon Edge, Laine and Warwick joined forces with the singer and flautist Ray Thomas and Pinder as singer-keyboardist under the name of the M &amp; B 5, which subsequently became the Moody Blues. By the time they recorded Days of Future Passed, Laine and Warwick had been replaced by Justin Hayward and John Lodge. In the mid-70s the band, jaded from too much touring, took an extended break. Edge realised that he was suffering from a loss of perspective. “I thought I was God. Then I realised I was just the drummer in a rock’n’roll band,” he reflected. He decompressed by sailing around the world on his yacht Delia, living in Corfu for a time, and forming the Graeme Edge Band with the brothers Paul and Adrian Gurvitz. They released two albums, Kick Off Your Muddy Boots (1975) – which featured a guest appearance by Ginger Baker – and Paradise Ballroom (1977), the latter inspired by some of the rhythms he had heard in the Caribbean. He rejoined the Moody Blues to record Octave (1978), the start of a further spell of commercial success. Edge’s last composition for the group was Nothing Changes, from Strange Times (1999). They released their final album, December, in 2003, and Edge was behind the drumkit when they played at Glastonbury in 2015. He suffered a stroke the following year. In 2018 the band were inducted into the Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame. He is survived by his partner, Rilla Fleming; his daughter, Samantha, with his first wife, Carol; and son, Matthew, with his second wife, Sue. His third marriage was to Amanda, with whom he lived in Florida. • Graeme Charles Edge, musician and poet, born 30 March 1941; died 11 November 2021Elon Musk waded into yet another Twitter controversy on Sunday, the Tesla owner and world’s richest person responding to a tweet about taxes from Senator Bernie Sanders by writing: “I keep forgetting that you’re still alive.” Sanders, 80, wrote: “We must demand that the extremely wealthy pay their fair share. Period.” Musk, 50, is also the owner of SpaceX and has a personal worth estimated at around $271bn, making him by some counts the richest person ever. He also tweeted: “Want me to sell more stock, Bernie? Just say the word …” Sanders did not immediately respond. Melissa Byrne, a progressive activist and former Sanders staffer, tweeted: “Folks, quit buying Tesla. Don’t reward abusive men.” This week, Musk sold nearly $7bn of shares in Tesla, more than $5bn after asking Twitter followers to vote on whether he should do so, and more than $1bn on Friday. Jason Benowitz, senior portfolio manager at Roosevelt Investment Group in New York, told Reuters: “We expect the share sales will continue, as Musk holds millions of options worth billions of dollars that would otherwise expire worthless, and he has also prearranged share sales.” Tesla’s share price fell after Musk’s Twitter followers said he should sell stock. But the shares remain hugely valuable. Musk staged the Twitter poll to make a point about a “billionaires tax” proposed by Democrats in Congress, saying: “Note, I do not take a cash salary or bonus from anywhere. I only have stock, thus the only way for me to pay taxes personally is to sell stock.” Proponents of the billionaires tax say they want to target “unrealised capital gains”, meaning increases in the value of stocks owned by ultra-rich Americans who currently pay very little in tax. Sanders is a democratic socialist independent from Vermont who caucuses with Democrats in the Senate. He rose to global prominence with strong runs for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016 and 2020, losing out to Hillary Clinton and then Joe Biden. As chair of the Senate budget committee and a champion of fairness in taxation, Sanders is pushing for Biden’s Build Back Better package of spending on health and social care and climate crisis mitigation to make it out of Congress and into law. Build Back Better would be funded by tax increases on corporations and the very wealthy. The billionaires tax is not part of the package but its chief proponent, Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, condemned Musk’s Twitter stunt last week. Saying he wanted to “ensure billionaires pay tax every year, just like working Americans”, Wyden added: “Whether or not the world’s wealthiest man pays any taxes at all shouldn’t depend on the results of a Twitter poll.” Musk has a history of controversial – and sometimes costly – behaviour on social media. In October, he responded to Wyden’s tax proposals with a tweet. “Eventually they run out of other people’s money and then they come for you.”Picking up my Saturday Guardian, I was instantly drawn with great excitement to the article on Europe’s most stunning cathedrals (The towers and the glory: Simon Jenkins’ favourite cathedrals in Europe, 13 November). Where would the fifth biggest cathedral in the world feature? Alas, Simon Jenkins sadly omitted the always stunning Liverpool Cathedral. Neil Watkins Liverpool • Simon Jenkins describes 11 great European cathedrals as “easily reachable”. May I suggest that we revisit and appreciate our more local cathedrals and, while we’re at it, seek out other buildings to bring us comfort and solace. Toby Wood Peterborough • A second year without a village show and still picking raspberries larger than many of the August berries (Letters, 4 November). Are there other frustrated horticultural showoffs willing to enter a contest of the heaviest combined weight of six raspberries picked in November? My entry weighs in at 30g. Sue Vaughan Little Melton, Norfolk • I have two Christmas puddings, with use-by dates of 22 August 2014 and 30 April 2017 (Letters, 11 November). Quite mature, but I am sure many readers have older ones. Margaret Vandecasteele Wick, Caithness • As a newly ordained curate, in receipt of a stipend, it was made clear to me that I was not being paid to do a job: I was being paid so that I didn’t have to do another job (Letters, 11 November). MPs with ears to hear, let them hear! Rt Revd John Saxbee Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was so glad to see the interview by Kadish Morris with New York artist and stutterer JJJJJerome Ellis (‘So much pain comes from not feeling fully human’, 10 November). As Morris says, “Ellis was made for speaking.” The pain of this talented artist is real – speech disorders are largely ignored. Parliamentarians here in the UK acknowledged this during a debate in July 2018 on speech, language and communication support for children, when it was stated that “not enough progress has been made” for the “Cinderella sector” involving 1.4 million children. Rebecca Pow MP said: “If communication was given the priority it deserves, the 1 million-plus children in England who are suffering with communication problems could be helped.” My son has verbal dyspraxia and I was astonished that the government does not know how many children have this condition in the UK. I submitted a FOI request earlier this year, and officials struggled to answer my questions about the state of support given to families, admitting: “The DfE does not hold figures on the number of children diagnosed with verbal dyspraxia.” JJJJJerome Ellis is an inspiration for families who struggle, fighting to get the best support for their son or daughter with speaking difficulties, faced with indifference by political leaders. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.If rugby union were a sport that gave out marks for merit the judges would be holding up 10s for Heather Cowell, the former Great Britain junior tumbling gymnast turned rugby wing who ran in two first-half tries on a glittering international debut as the relentless Red Roses rolled over their latest opponents in a seven-try victory. In the space of 14 days England have twice filleted New Zealand and now carved up Canada, the teams ranked No2 and No3 in the world, scoring 150 points, 22 tries and extending their winning streak to 17 matches over 28 months. With the USA seemingly next for the chopping block on Sunday and the Red Roses cemented at world No 1 less than a year from the delayed World Cup, perhaps the only question is: who can challenge England? The answer may have to wait until March and the Six Nations final round when England will face France, a team who added their own intrigue to the World Cup subplot by beating New Zealand 38-13 on Saturday. Certainly the Maple Leafs asked England useful questions, at least in the first half, but eventually had no reply as England steamrollered to victory in front of a boisterous 6,310 crowd at The Stoop. Aside from Cowell’s eye-catching debut, the ever-smiling prop Sarah Bern also dazzled with two tries in a player-of-the-match performance that was explosive in attack and ferocious in defence. She put her dominant display down to a pre-match meal of jam on toast. There were lessons for England along the way. Attacking play was sometimes rushed, the phases occasionally scrappy and the penalty count too high, Canada bringing a physicality that will be useful food for thought for Simon Middleton and his team. “That was a tough game,” said the head coach. “We had to weather a bit of a storm and work out how to break them down in the first half, and in the second half we were outstanding.” Sarah Hunter, returning to captain the side at flanker, echoed the sentiment. “It’s about how you respond to going behind. The great thing was we didn’t get flustered. We stayed composed and got back in the game.” Cowell, the 25-year-old Harlequins wing playing at home, scored her and England’s first try four minutes into her international debut, touching down in the corner with her first touch of the match. “I just try to play the best rugby I can and if tries come that’s great,” she said modestly afterwards. “I like the competition for places and I want to earn the shirt.” Middleton had said he expected a challenge from Canada and so it proved. After 21 minutes against the Black Ferns last week England were 21-0 up. But here they found themselves behind for the first time this autumn. Lagi Tuima couldn’t take a pass and Paige Farries, the Worcester wing, gleefully scooped up the ball to run in from 45 metres. The conversion left England 7-5 down. Game on. England responded seven minutes later, setting it up with two of their trademarks: an immaculate lineout followed by a driving maul, teeing up the phases and allowing Bern to crash over for her first try. Zoe Harrison converted and soon after added three more points with a penalty. Canada weren’t finished though, wing Sabrina Poulin dancing and weaving as England’s defence was caught napping to cross in the corner in a moment of individual brilliance. But England hit back, Cowell ending the half as she started it, scoring a try in the corner after another signature-dish driving maul had opened up space to exploit. Two minutes into the second half Bern also had her second try, punching her way through tackles and, soon after, the scrum-half Claudia MacDonald went herself from a maul 20m out for England’s fifth try as Canada’s defensive dam burst. Harrison added another penalty before replacement Alex Matthews dodged between tackles to run in under the posts for England’s sixth try of the day. There was still time for a seventh and MacDonald’s second as she went over in the corner, Harrison converting to bring up England’s half-century.Nathalie Loiseau (Scrapping the protocol would be a betrayal of the people of Northern Ireland, 10 November) says that Brexiters in London refuse to see that the protocol is crucial to peace and prosperity. I’m afraid the reality may be a lot darker. In their headlong ideological rush to “get Brexit done”, our leaders shafted Northern Ireland, which had voted to remain in Europe. They were forced to accept the protocol in order to get Brexit over the line and now belatedly realise that, far from being anathema to most in Northern Ireland, it is actually providing tangible benefits. Hence why a majority of the population and the Northern Irish chamber of commerce are supportive of it. More significantly, it has resulted in a large increase in trade across the border with the Republic, increasing the long-term likelihood of a united Ireland. Brexiters have finally woken up to this and I suspect this is the real reason they want the protocol scrapped. With their usual disdain, they would be prepared to allow violence and instability to return in order to achieve their aims. Austin Connor Frithelstock, Devon • Boris Johnson’s party, despite having “Unionist” in its full name, doesn’t stand in Northern Ireland elections. His party has a massive Commons majority and little need for DUP MPs’ support. He knows that there was a clear Remain majority in the province. He knows that essentially tearing up the Northern Ireland protocol he signed risks a return to a hard border and violent conflict. It must be concluded therefore that Johnson’s only gain from needlessly stoking conflict in Northern Ireland is that he believes that attacking Brussels at every opportunity is critical to retaining “red wall” Tory votes. Sacrificing the hard-won peace in this corner of the UK is a small price to pay to keep himself in power. Stephen Psallidas Newcastle upon Tyne • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Aussies go up for their medals, pursued by garlands of praise from Harsha Bhogle. The last man in is Aaron Finch, who then gives his interview. “This is huge,” he says, before giving some quickfire lines on his star players. Warner? “Outstanding. Can’t believe people wrote him off a couple of weeks ago. Almost like poking the bear.” Zampa? “Player of the tournament. Got big wickets, yeah, super player.” Marsh? “Put so much pressure on New Zealand, the way he came out and played.” The trophy is handed over, the tickertape goes off, the fireworks join in, and the Aussies do a mass man-hug which turns into a mass pogo. They are the champions. They peaked at the right time. Thanks for your company and correspondence, and we’ll be back for the Ashes, in less than a month’s time, on 8 December. Kane Williamson is giving an interview. Affable as ever, he says Australia are “a fantastic team” who have had “a brilliant campaign”. It was “nice to get a competitive total and build some partnerships... the guys showed a lot of heart.” ... is David Warner, who finishes second among the leading run-makers, behind only Babar Azam. Asked if he was pumped today, he says: “I’m always pumped”. Just as Jimmy Neesham quietly took his revenge on England in the semi, so did Warner on Williamson in the final. It was Williamson who replaced him as captain of Sunrisers Hyderabad in the middle of the IPL season, and who then dropped him from the XI. Warner, all smiles now, doesn’t mention this, but it’s quite a sub-plot. Time for the presentations, which begin with the umpires. The only Englishman in the match, Richard Kettleborough, strides forward to collect his medal. The player of the match is, inevitably, Mitch Marsh, for his 77 not out off 50 balls. “I don’t really have words,” he says. “I’ve just loved playing my role for this team.” Asked about hitting his first ball for six, he says: “Not a lot of thinking went into that. I just wanted to have a presence.” He’s so understated, he could be a Kiwi. Mike Atherton points out that England’s all-format players are still in Dubai, and, for reasons of quarantine, they’re booked on the same flight out as the Aussies. Ouch. There was once a bestseller called The Book of Heroic Failures. If it was still around, Kane Williamson would go straight into it. He made only seven off his first 13 balls on a pitch so dry that the ball wasn’t coming onto the bat and even Martin Guptill, a master-blaster, was reduced to mediocrity. From that point on, Williamson was a man possessed. Off his next 35 balls, he made 78. He abandoned his natural orthodoxy and gave us some wonderful improv. And it still wasn’t enough. Now it’s the turn of Justin Langer, Australia’s coach. He says Mitch Marsh was one of the missing pieces in the jigsaw, Hazlewood has been sublime, and Zampa is “a little hippie”. For some reason, Langer doesn’t mention that between they have saved his job. If you feel like reading the story of the whole game, here’s a snap match report, with Simon Burnton’s piece to follow. The interviewees are coming two by two. Zampa appears with Glenn Maxwell. “Been in bubbles for nearly two years now,” Zampa says, acknowledging the role played by the backroom staff. Josh Hazlewood teams up with Steve Smith, who salutes Marsh and Warner – “really proud of those boys”. Now there’s another double act giving an interview, Pat Cummins (who was good) and Mitch Starc (who was hopeless). They’re generous in their praise for Adam Zampa. “He’s been our best bowler by far with a white ball,” says Cummins, or possibly Starc – the cameras have gone off to show us other members of the winning squad, cavorting around, demonstrating their love. Wade and Stoinis are giving an interview, in their capacity as the stars of the semi-final who were barely needed tonight. “We actually love each other,” says Marcus Stoinis. “It’s beautiful.” They were awful against England, but they pulled themselves together. They won every toss after that, and became masters of the chase – never letting the target get too big, as Warner found his form again after what could have been a career-ending IPL. Steve Smith wasn’t even needed today: Mitch Marsh did his job for him. Fireworks are going off, the Aussie players are staging a pitch invasion, and Mitch Marsh is in tears, sinking to his knees. His innings was so good, it was almost as good as Kane Williamson’s. 19th over: Australia 173-2 (Marsh 77, Maxwell 28) Another mis-hit, another near miss: Southee’s slower ball is pulled straight by Marsh, and Neesham can’t quite reach it with his dive from long-off. A single, and now Australia can do it with one big hit. Two small blonde girls in yellow shorts hold ‘6’ signs hopefully. Maxwell fancies it but can only heave a single to deep midwicket. A single to Marsh too, so Maxwell can finish it with a four– and does! With a reverse flap! 18th over: Australia 162-2 (Marsh 71, Maxwell 23) Boult finishes with 2-18 and his head held high. Milne returns, and there’s yet another near-miss as Maxwell flat-bats a cut about 18 inches short of the man at mid-off. Just three singles off the over, but the Aussies can afford it: they need 11 off the last 12 balls. “Afternoon Tim,” says Kim Thonger. “This seems to be turning into an episode of Squid Game. When do the coffin bearers walk out to the middle?” 17th over: Australia 159-2 (Marsh 69, Maxwell 22) Boult comes back too, but now even he goes for four as Marsh finds the gap, yet again, at midwicket. The partnership reaches 50 off 26 balls. Maxwell bumps into Boult, who just smiles. Last ball of his spell, Boult persuades Marsh to offer a return catch – which he drops. Oh dear. Halfway through the over, Marsh sent for a new bat, as if unaware that the only way to make this finale exciting would be for him to have no bat. “Assuming NZ lose this,” says Peter Salmon, “is there anywhere I can put good money on a newspaper feature before the next World Cup in any format, with a close-up pic of Kane Williamson, and the headline No More Mr Nice Guy?” 16th over: Australia 149-2 (Marsh 61, Maxwell 21) Southee returns as Williamson accepts that there’s no point keeping his best bowlers up his sleeve now. And Maxwell gets an inside edge for four more! Even the luck is with the Aussies. Then, with judgment rather than luck, he plays a lovely late pull for six. Poor old Williamson: he’s going to finish on the losing side after playing one of the all-time great innings. Australia need only 24 from 24 balls. And these two have added 42 from 22. 15th over: Australia 136-2 (Marsh 61, Maxwell 10) Williamson has one over of Boult up his sleeve (3-0-8-2), but he wants to keep it there, so he summons Milne. And he almost takes a wicket too, but Mitchell, at deep backward square, can’t quite get his fingers under a flat-bat pull. Even Maxwell comes to the party, with a pull for four and a top-edge over the keeper for four more. Eleven off the over: Australia need 37 off 30 balls. Their chances of a win are around 93 per cent. 14th over: Australia 125-2 (Marsh 60, Maxwell 1) New Zealand have to get rid of Marsh too. Williamson, perhaps fatally, turns back to Sodhi. Marsh lofts him for six, to reach an outstanding 50 off 31 balls – the fastest fifty in a T20 World Cup final. Some players are vulnerable just after waving their bat, but Marsh belts a two and a four, and persuades Sodhi to go wide of off – too wide. That’s a nine-ball over, costing 16, and it has put Australia back in control. They need 48 off six overs. 13th over: Australia 109-2 (Marsh 46, Maxwell 1) Here’s Glenn Maxwell. who’s not in form. He goes dot, dot, single, and the over goes for only three: well bowled Boult. Warner was undone by going for the big shot, a right old mow, when he didn’t really need to. Australia need 64 off seven overs, so the rate goes back above nine. Scrap that! In desperation Williamson summons his main man, Trent Boult, and he delivers with a length ball that crashes into the off bail. 12th over: Australia 106-1 (Warner 53, Marsh 45) A third over for Santner. Marsh slogs him into the deep – and Phillips, who is an electric fielder, can only take it on the half-volley. A rare bad ball from Santner brings a full from Marsh that is just vicious. Nine off the over, which is par now. Australia need 67 from eight overs. They’ve helped themselves to 57 off the last five. Early finish, anyone? 11th over: Australia 97-1 (Warner 52, Marsh 38) “Now time for a Neesham miracle,” says Michelle Garland. And Kane Williamson agrees – but there’s just one problem, the Aussies. Just like Milne, Neesham gets hit for six first ball by Mitch Marsh – a comfortable pull, backward of square. Warner sees that six and raises it a chip for six more, to reach 50 off only 34 balls. This is all too easy. Australia are ahead of the rate for the first time: they need 76 off nine overs. 10th over: Australia 82-1 (Warner 45, Marsh 30) Williamson is sticking to his guns, when you might feel, to quote Woody from Toy Story, that this was the perfect time to panic. Santner again beats Marsh outside off with a ball so slow that if it hadn’t been on the spot, he could have run after it, caught it and tried again. At the halfway stage, Australia are well on top: 25 ahead of where NZ were at this stage. Speaking strictly from the neutral point of view, can we please have a collapse? 9th over: Australia 77-1 (Warner 42, Marsh 28) Sodhi continues, so Warner takes his helmet off and bats bare-headed. And hats off to him, as he flat-bats a four to long-on, then reverse-sweeps for two, pulls for four and straight-drives for six After a sedate start by his standards, he’s now going as fast as Marsh. The partnership has raced to 62 off 39 balls, and Australia are on fire. 8th over: Australia 60-1 (Warner 26, Marsh 27) Williamson goes for spin at both ends and brings on Mitchell Santner. Marsh says thank you very much and slog-sweeps for six – a clear case of Mitch’s inhumanity to Mitch. Santner strikes back, beating the bat with some actual turn. Marsh’s 27 have come off only 15 balls, which feels like a match-winning strike rate. Australia need 113 off 12 overs. 7th over: Australia 50-1 (Warner 24, Marsh 19) Time for spin, with Ish Sodhi’s leg-breaks. Warner works him around for ones and twos. In mid-over, the win predictor pops up: NZ 50 per cent, Australia 50 per cent. Personally, I make it 49-49 with a 2 per cent chance of a Super Over. 6th over: Australia 43-1 (Warner 19, Marsh 18) After that shellacking from Marsh, Adam Milne fights back, mixing dots with leg byes and keeping Warner honest with a snorter of a bouncer. NZ win that over, but the Aussies win the battle of the powerplays, with 43-1 to NZ’s 32-1. An interesting point from Khawar Ali. “As New Zealand are not as bad a fielding side as Pakistan were in the semi-final, NZ stand better chance to win this game.” 5th over: Australia 40-1 (Warner 18, Marsh 17) Warner, facing Southee, gets away with a bottom edge, into the pad and away for a single. Simon Doull makes a good point: against Marsh, the Kiwis will want to try some spin, but then they run the risk of Warner going postal. And Warner can play seam too – he spots Southee’s slower ball and swings it for six. Australia need 133 from 15 overs. 4th over: Australia 30-1 (Warner 10, Marsh 15) On comes Adam Milne, with a new batter to bowl at – and his first ball goes for six! Superb from Mitch Marsh, flicking off his toes into the stand. Next ball, he plays a delicate dab to steer a short one for four through the vacant slips. Then a pull for four more. Carnage! Milne recovers to an extent, with two dots to Warner. This innings has only been going for about 15 minutes, and already we’ve had some classic ebb and flow. 3rd over: Australia 15-1 (Warner 10, Marsh 0) Finch had just played a good shot, a straight thump for four, but that was the only one he middled. After taking the wicket, Boult keeps Warner quiet. Australia need 158 off 17 overs. First blood to Boult! He spots Finch going for another dance, digs it in and gets his reward as a mis-hit pull is beautifully caught by Mitchell, racing to his left at deep square. 2nd over: Australia 11-0 (Warner 10, Finch 1) At the other end it’s Tim Southee, who’s gone for less than a run a ball throughout this World Cup. Warner’s first attempt to attack him falls flat as a cross-court forehand finds mid-on, but then there’s some width outside off and Warner goes over the offside ring for four. And again! Finch gets away with an inside edge, and that’s ten off the over. 1st over: Australia 1-0 (Warner 1, Finch 0) The new ball is in the hands of Trent Boult, the most successful seamer in this tournament. Can he find swing where Starc didn’t? He can. He goes dot, dot, nick as David Warner wafts at an outswinger, and then he screams for an LBW as Finch goes dancing down the track. It’s straight enough, but Finch was a long way down, so Williamson doesn’t review. Good over, though. Sam Curran, who may be cricket’s youngest-ever commentator, says he’d rather be in New Zealand’s shoes than Australia’s. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. 20th over: New Zealand 172-4 (Neesham 13, Seifert 8) Hazlewood is bowled out, so Finch has to bring back Starc. First ball, Seifert flicks a yorker for four (fine leg up). Starc stays full, goes wide of off, and manages a dot that must feel like a wicket. Seifert guides another wide yorker for a single. Neesham swings and misses, for once. Two dots! Starc is so amazed by his good fortune that he ends up on the ground, calling for new boots. A legside wide, which the batters run, perhaps unwisely. A straight yorker, flicked for a single by Seifert. The lastball is driven for two by Neesham. By Starc’s standards today, that’s not a bad over – ten off it. NZ rattled up 115 off the last ten overs. Kane Williamson has made a game of it, almost single-handed – and literally so for a couple of his big shots. Back in a few mins. 19th over: New Zealand 162-4 (Neesham 11, Seifert 2) It’s Cummins to Neesham, who stands and delivers – a straight six, struck with a cross bat, like a pull. That’s the first boundary off Cummins. The Aussies think they’ve got Neesham run out, celebrating with fist-bumps, but they’re misinformed – not something you see very often. “This has to be one of the great captain’s innings in T20 cricket,” says Colum Fordham, “and the highest in a T20 World Cup final, eclipsing Sangakarra’s 64 in the 2014 final.” very true. “Williamson’s range of shots is spectacular and relied more on skill and improvisation than sheer power. What a player! PS Could you send a shout-out to my Howzat group chat with a colourful mix of England and India cricket fans?” Who do you think I am, Alan Partridge? 18th over: New Zealand 149-4 (Neesham 1, Seifert 0) That’s a superb over from Hazlewood: five runs, two wickets. And now there are two new batters at the crease, one of them rusty – but the other is Neesham. Cameo time! One brings two! And it’s the big one – Williamson, perhaps deceived by a cutter, chips to long-off, where Steve Smith fumbles but clings on. Thus ends one of the best captain’s innings you will ever see. Hazlewood returns and makes some amends for that dropped catch. Phillips tries to go big but can only give a simple catch to deep midwicket. That’s a soft end to a buccaneering partnership. 17th over: New Zealand 144-2 (Williamson 81, Phillips 18) Finch, not laughing any more, sends for Cummins, who has been immaculate so far – two overs for six. He starts with a wide but then restores order, again, with a string of singles. Eight off the over: Finch would settle for that. Starc, by the way, has brought up his half-century, with figures of 3-0-50-0. Memo to England: attack him early on in the Ashes. 16th over: New Zealand 136-2 (Williamson 77, Phillips 15) Finch brings back Starc, who’s been by far the most expensive of his pacemen. He finds the edge of Williamson’s bat, twice, but both nicks go for four! One along the ground, one over short third man. And then Williamson shuffles across his stumps and slog-sweeps for six!! Starc manages a consolation dot, but only by going wide of off. Wide again, and Williamson lofts a square drive for four more! Followed by a late squirt, quite deliberate, for four more!!! That’s 22 off the over, and I’m running out of exclamation marks. 15th over: New Zealand 114-2 (Williamson 55, Phillips 15) Time for someone else to come to the party, and Glenn Phillips gets the memo. He hits Zampa’s first ball for a straight six, and his fifth for an inside-out lofted four. Twelve off the over, and this partnership is 38 off 23 balls: just what the neutral ordered. Twitter has ground to a halt on my screen, so if you’ve sent a tweet, apologies – and perhaps you can email it if it’s still relevant? 14th over: New Zealand 102-2 (Williamson 54, Phillips 4) Cummins returns, with Phillips to bowl at, and restores order: dot, dot, single. Even Williamson can only manage a two, though it’s a very crafty one – looking to pull, he finds the ball too offside-ish, so he switches to a tennis player’s lob over mid-off. He’s been the best thing about this game by miles. 13th over: New Zealand 97-2 (Williamson 51, Phillips 3) Maxwell is back for his third over. He thinks he’s got Williamson LBW, but Marais Erasmus rightly reckoned it had pitched outside leg (though he wrongly missed a bottom edge). Williamson goes one-handed again, over midwicket, and that’s six! And six more, just to show that he can do it with two hands too. That’s his fifty, off 32 balls – the fastest in a T20 World Cup final. And he got off to a sluggish start. Sixteen off the over: game on? 12th over: New Zealand 81-2 (Williamson 39, Phillips 1) It’s not Neesham, but it may be the next-best thing: Glenn Phillips, who specialises in sixes. But he can’t get one off Zampa, who hasn’t even conceded a four off his three overs (1-14). This game badly needs some more of that genius from Williamson. Guptill follows suit, goes big – and gets caught at deep midwicket! 11th over: New Zealand 76-1 (Guptill 28, Williamson 35) Back comes Starc, and Williamson is dropped at long leg by Hazlewood! This is extraordinary. Williamson, off balance, played a one-handed pull. It went straight to Hazlewood, head high. And he not only dropped it, he let it dribble away for four. Williamson, sensing the moment, helps himself to a glorious off-drive for four. Starc, rattled, bowls a high full toss and Wiiliamson even manages to pull that for four. Genius. The resulting free hit brings a squaredrive for two, well saved by Stoinis on the rope, but he seems to be injured. That’s 19 off the over: the tide turns! “I’d say NZ need about 160 minimum,” says John Ryan, “what do you think Tim? Looks like that might already be beyond them, and maybe the final, because they are being way too conservative...” My uneducated guess is that 150 might do on this pitch, which is dry and a bit sticky. NZ’s seamers are as good as Australia’s, but the danger is that David Warner will just blast off from ball one and make the target look awfully small. 10th over: New Zealand 57-1 (Guptill 27, Williamson 18) Zampa has a simple strategy: bowl flat, bowl straight. His length is immaculate and the batters can only get singles – six of them. Halfway through the NZ innings, the Aussies are laughing all the way to the cup. Williamson may need to send Jimmy Neesham up the order. 9th over: New Zealand 51-1 (Guptill 24, Williamson 15) Finch is having a laugh now. He brings on Mitch Marsh, his sixth bowler, so this is the third over by a part-timer already. Williamson realises he needs to do something and heads down the track to loft a cover-drive for four, then waits for a short one and pulls it for four more. He charges again and gets one in the grille, but he seems fine. He’s brought up the fifty and blown some life into this contest. 8th over: New Zealand 40-1 (Guptill 22, Williamson 6) And now it’s spin at both ends as Adam Zampa comes on with his deceptively lethal leg-breaks. Three singles, three more dots, to make 26 so far. And that’s with Guptill, one of the world’s leading dashers, out there. It’s all going horribly right for Australia. 7th over: New Zealand 37-1 (Guptill 20, Williamson 5) Aaron Finch thinks he’ll sneak in another over of Maxwell, his weakest bowler. Five singles off it, which may well satisfy both sides. The commentators think 160 might be a good total here, but NZ are already struggling to get that. 6th over: New Zealand 32-1 (Guptill 17, Williamson 3) Hazlewood is still on, and why wouldn’t he be? Bowling to the orthodox Williamson, he goes dot, dot, dot, dot, dot. Even Williamson feels the pressure, so the last ball is chipped into the deep at midwicket. It lands safely, but it’s another victory for the Aussies. The powerplay ends with NZ about 15 runs below par. 5th over: New Zealand 30-1 (Guptill 17, Williamson 1) Pat Cummins replaces Maxwell, and the dots keep on coming: four of them. Kane Williamson works one to leg to get off the mark, but the Aussies are on top. “I confess,” says Colum Fordham, “to having grudging admiration for the way New Zealand and Australia overcame England and Pakistan. But let’s face it. All right-thinking people plus wanted to see a Pakistan-England final so why not a third place play-off? They do it in football.” Yes, but it’s meaningless, isn’t it? 4th over: New Zealand 28-1 (Guptill 16, Williamson 0) So Hazlewood lands the first blow, and it’s a big one. Of his 12 balls, only three have brought any runs. The breakthrough! After tying Mitchell down with a couple of dots, Hazlewood slips in the slower ball, gets the nick and hands Wade a chance for instant redemption. 3rd over: New Zealand 23-0 (Guptill 11, Mitchell 11) Aaron Finch tries some spin, from Glenn Maxwell. Mitchell, still on fire from the semi, hits his first ball for a straight six. Mid-off and mid-on stay up. A single to Mitchell, and then Guptill is dropped by Matthew Wade behind the wicket – a bottom edge, not easy but into the left glove and out again. 2nd over: New Zealand 13-0 (Guptill 10, Mitchell 3) Josh Hazlewood, harder to get away than Starc, opens with line’n’length: four dots to Guptill, who is vastly experienced but has never faced Hazlewood before in a T20 international. Then there’s a bouncer, and Guptill is tucked up but manages to shovel it round to fine leg for four. Australia win that over, but they’d like a wicket. 1st over: New Zealand 9-0 (Guptill 6, Mitchell 3) It’s Mitch Starc to start things off. He goes well wide of off, finds no swing, and gets away with a near-wide. Second ball, boom! Martin Guptill cuts for four, finding a narrow gap between the men at backward point. He repeats the shot and gets a single. No swing from the first four balls. Then a straight one to greet Daryl Mitchell, who became a star on Wednesday, hitting 26 off his last seven balls. Another straight one, and Mitchell clips a hard-run three; then a nick from Guptill, quite safe, for a single. NZ showing great intent. The players and support staff take the knee. The crowd respond with applause. The players enter, walking down an avenue of giant sparklers. But not as giant as Kyle Jamieson, who takes his place in the NZ line-up as one of their reserves and dwarfs everyone else. The pitch is said to be dry, which could help the team batting first. Maybe it’s not win the toss, win the game after all. “Good afternoon Tim,” says Simon McMahon, “I hope you and all fellow OBOers are well.” We are, thanks. “Really looking forward to this, should be v. exciting. Been a hugely enjoyable tournament; the only thing missing has been a Super Over. Y’know, just saying…” Ha. If they manage a tie, New Zealand will have done heroically. Good to hear that you’ve found the tournament so enjoyable: there is a school of thought that it hasn’t quite caught fire. “What’s the procedure,” asks Andrew Benton, “if it all ends all square in runs and wickets at the end of the second innings? Unlikely, but possible perhaps? And why isn’t there a third place play-off?” If it’s a tie (on runs, never mind the wickets), we get a Super Over. And if that is tied too – apparently it can happen – then we get another one, and another, and another ... which is a much better tie-breaker than a boundary count-back. There isn’t a third-place pay-off because it would be pointless. The Aussies are unchanged. NZ make one change as Devon Conway misses out – after breaking a bone in his hand when punching his bat in annoyance at getting out in the semi-final – and Tim Seifert returns to keep wicket. Both teams, curiously, have gone through the whole tournament using only 12 players. Ashton Agar is unlucky to miss out, given his excellent record against NZ in this format. New Zealand 1 Martin Guptill, 2 Daryl Mitchell, 3 Kane Williamson (capt), 4 Tim Seifert (wkt), 5 Glenn Phillips, 6 Jimmy Neesham, 7 Mitchell Santner, 8 Adam Milne, 9 Tim Southee, 10 Ish Sodhi, 11 Trent Boult. Australia 1 David Warner, 2 Aaron Finch (capt), 3 Mitchell Marsh, 4 Steve Smith, 5 Glenn Maxwell, 6 Marcus Stoinis, 7 Matthew Wade (wkt), 8 Pat Cummins, 9 Mitch Starc, 10 Josh Hazlewood, 11 Adam Zampa. And choose to bowl first. They are now the favourites. Afternoon everyone and welcome to what should be a great occasion. It’s a World Cup final! On a Sunday afternoon! With no Premier League football to get in its way! On the other hand ... the final doesn’t feature cricket’s best-supported nation (India), or the most electric entertainers (Pakistan), or the biggest hitters (England). It does feature the two sides that came second in their groups. And both are from the Antipodes, so when the World Cup is won, most of their supporters will be fast asleep: play starts at 1am in Sydney and Melbourne, 3am in Auckland and Christchurch. If cricket scheduling cared about common sense, the match would surely have moved to this morning. Still, it’s tastier than it may look. We are guaranteed a new name on the trophy. New Zealand, so many people’s second-favourite team, have reached their first T20 World Cup final. They used to be cricket’s answer to Tim Henman, forever destined to go down in the semis, but now, after Jimmy Neesham knocked out England with a plate of revenge eaten cold, they have a good chance of becoming world champions in the shortest form of international cricket as well as the longest. The bookmakers have NZ down as the underdogs today; the rankings make them the favourites, as they’re fourth in the world, two places above their noisy neighbours. Australia have reached this final before, against England in 2010, but they’ve never won it, which doesn’t seem very like them – hence, perhaps, the bookies’ rookie error. They have needed luck to get this far: all five of their wins in the tournament have come after winning the toss and choosing to field. The one time they lost the toss, against England, they were reduced to rubble. NZ, by contrast, have secured three of their five wins the hard way, after losing the toss. But still the Aussies have made it through, after playing extremely well to topple the previously invincible Pakistan. They have the tournament’s leading wicket-taker in Adam Zampa, the man with the killer mullet – though Ashton Agar, their reserve spinner, has done better against NZ in T20s. They have a Test-match pace attack in Starc, Hazlewood and Cummins (none of whom has ever played a T20 against NZ). And NZ can match them, toe-ball for toe-ball, with Southee, Boult and Milne. They have five specialist bowlers to Australia’s four, which means they don’t bat as deep. Historically, Australia are NZ’s bogeymen, with 14 wins to four in white-ball tournaments involving five or more teams. But over the past ten years, as NZ have inched their way to the top of the world, it’s been 2-2. All told, the Aussies have about a 45-per-cent chance of lifting the trophy today – which will shoot up to 66.67 if Aaron Finch wins the toss. Do pop back at 1.35pm UK time to find out what that fateful coin has to say.The roar of promise from the Cop26 climate summit has closed to a whimper because of political pressures from heavily polluting countries (It could have been worse, but our leaders failed us at Cop26. That’s the truth of it, 13 November). The watering down of a phrase from agreeing to “phase-out” coal use to “phase down” will have damaging consequences. For a number of countries, especially islands like Tuvalu, the watering-down of climate change controls will lead to a rise in water levels and eventually the flooding of these islands. It’s time to listen to young people, especially Greta Thunberg, as older adults no longer have anything useful to say. Dennis Fitzgerald Melbourne, Australia • Delegates at Cop26 have been criticised for talking and not doing. They are politicians and diplomats, this is what they do: policy and diplomacy, process and targets. We have to forgive them for that. What they can do as individuals however, and what we can all do, is more. Or rather, less. Fewer flights, fewer car journeys, less stuff. We could all just decide never to take a plane again, to use our car less, to buy less useless short-term stuff. Maybe plant and grow a little more: a tree, a flower, a bit of fruit and veg. We are human. That is all. We just have to live well and with kindness, and then we die. That’s all. Everything else – all that stuff – is destroying us. Andrew Colley Little Bradley, Suffolk • In the early estimates of the effect of climate change, it was suggested that over 200 million people would be displaced from their homes by a warming of between 1.5C and 2C. This now seems to be baked into our future, so what plans have we got? If you think of the political upheaval that even the relatively tiny migrations have caused over the last few years, how come this was not even a proper subject of debate at Cop26? Will we all just try to pull up the drawbridge and retreat into national protectionism – leaving those 200 million destitute men, women and children to fend for themselves? Who would want to design such a cruel future? Two hundred million is the equivalent of 20 super-cities – let’s identify where they will be most viable in areas close to where they will be most needed, and start building. We have the capacity, but we need to find the will. Stephen Milton St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex • Conventional wisdom stresses the virtue of competition to achieve human progress (Cop26 targets too weak to stop disaster, say Paris agreement architects, 11 November). So the leaders at Cop26 need a mindset revolution, from nationalistic competition to global cooperation. The younger generations and the forgotten people get it – it’s their future after all – while older generations, who hold all the power, flounder in obsolescent thinking. We urgently need a peaceful power shift to avoid the planetary catastrophe, which is already under way. A vital test of democracy. Are we up to it? John Stone Thames Ditton, Surrey • It really beggars belief that some countries are putting their economic wellbeing, their selfishness, before the health of the world. Does it not occur to them that their economies will be useless without a world in which they could thrive? Catherine Roome Staplehurst, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Gareth Taylor said: “There is nothing for me to consider,” when asked whether his position as manager of Manchester City was in question after a 4-0 home defeat by Chelsea. “Until I’m told differently I’ll continue to work hard. I’m working so hard in this period,” he said. “Obviously with a lot of constraints with the injuries we have but the players today showed me that we are capable of playing the way we want to play and building the way we want to play, we just need that little bit of good fortune and to be a little bit more ruthless in attack. “Of course, we need to be better in the errors that we make, but as long as I can see the positives even when we are really short of a number of key players in the playing squad, I think nothing changes in my mind.” Describing the defeat and the 5-0 loss to Arsenal as “freakish results”, Taylor insisted the performance against Chelsea was strong enough to have on another day swung the result their way. “If you look at the stats, for possession, the opportunities and shots on goal, they were similar [in the Arsenal game], I think it was the same today, we dominated possession. “We look at the performances, usually the performance leads to the result, unfortunately on this occasion it hasn’t done. On another day, without the errors, we stay in that game and we give ourselves a chance to win it.” Karima Taieb was at fault for the opening goal, in the second minute. Taylor said of the goalkeeper: “We’ve just got to rally around her and make sure she’s OK. She’s performed really well for us for the majority of games this season and we have to look at that instead of single moments chastising people for single mistakes. It’s football. It’s rare that a goal goes in where a finger isn’t pointed.” The Chelsea manager, Emma Hayes, praised Erin Cuthbert for “taking one for the team” in man-marking Lauren Hemp and nullifying City’s most potent threat. “I mean, wow,” she said. “Erin Cuthbert did an unbelievable number on her. She was exceptional. She took one for the team and she did that better than I could have even expected.” Hayes added: “We played like champions today. The team delivered a top, top performance on the back of having a lot of travel.”The fallout continued on Sunday from last week’s raid at Ballintogher Stud in Ireland’s County Kildare which led to the seizure of a significant quantity of unlicensed drugs, as the Sunday Independent published details of a phone conversation involving John Warwick, an equine therapist who operates from the stud, as well as naming some of the trainers who sent horses for treatment by Warwick over a period of several weeks in the summer. In a separate interview with the Racing Post, meanwhile, Warwick admitted that he had been in possession of substances which should not have been in Ireland when the stud was raided, while also insisting there was “no dope” involved in the seizure. Officials from Ireland’s Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine arrived at Ballintogher Stud on Tuesday, accompanied by police officers, and subsequently invited officials from the Irish Horseracing Regulatory Board, including Lynn Hillyer, the IHRB’s chief veterinary officer, to attend. Hair and blood samples were then taken from all thoroughbreds found on site. Warwick, 74, has been a specialist in equine tendon problems for many years, and has been credited with assisting such top-class performers as Snow Fairy, the 2010 Oaks winner, overcome potentially career-ending injuries. In the Sunday Independent details emerged of a phone conversation between Warwick and an unnamed individual, which the newspaper said had been recorded seven months ago, in which the therapist says that he runs a clinic at Ballintogher Stud for two or three days “every couple of weeks” which is “unbelievably busy”. Warwick says his clinic involves “physical stuff” rather than drugs or surgery, and also claims to have “spent quite a lot of time in the States”, where he “learned a lot of things which are not really used here”, adding that “they have products that we don’t have, can’t have, are not supposed to have, whatever you want to call it”. The paper also revealed that a private investigator stationed outside Ballintogher Stud for several weeks during the summer photographed 56 horse boxes entering the premises. These included four which were branded with the names of licensed trainers: Jessica Harrington, Enda Bolger, Peter Fahey and Noel C Kelly. When contacted for comment, Fahey and Kelly both told the paper that they had never sent horses to Warwick, while Bolger said that he had not used the therapist for about 20 years. All three subsequently expressed surprise that one of their horse boxes had been photographed at Ballintogher. Harrington, meanwhile, said that she had been sending horses with tendon injuries for laser treatment by Warwick for a number of years, adding: “As far as I’m concerned [Warwick] has dealt with my horses for tendon injuries. And that’s it. And that does not involve drugs.” The directors of Ballintogher Stud include TJ Comerford, a travelling head lad at Aidan O’Brien’s Ballydoyle stable. O’Brien told the Sunday Independent that Warwick had “never” worked for him, and that he had previously been unaware that Comerford was a director of the stud. In an interview published in Sunday’s edition of the Racing Post, Warwick said: “There is nothing [in the seizure] that would fail a dope test but I’ve certainly contravened the rules.” He added: “There were some products that were destined for Kuwait and I brought them with me because I was flying to Kuwait but that’s beside the point. They shouldn’t have been in the country in the first place as far as the law is concerned.”Here’s a quick summary of what Boris Johnson and Alok Sharma have just said at the press conference: Johnson said the conference marked the “death knell for coal” with a mandate to cut the use of coal power for the first time. On the late watering down of the language around ending the use of coal, Johnson said we cannot force sovereign nations to do what they do not wish to do. Johnson said the Cop26 talks in Glasgow had put the world on course for around 2C of warming and that 1.5C was still alive. On their personal efforts to reducing climate emissions, Sharma said he did not believe in restricting the use of air travel by politicians. Johnson said he used to travel everywhere by bike. That’s it from me today. You can see all our Cop26 coverage here. Thank you for staying with us. Stay positive. Johnson is asked about sleaze and his own personal contribution to tackling climate change. Johnson says that of course he thinks things could certainly have been handled better by him (on the sleaze question). And says he used to travel everywhere by bike (on his personal contribution for reducing carbon emissions). He then ends the press conference. Both Johnson and Sharma defend India over the watering down of the coal resolution. Sharma says India is pledging to get 50% of power from renewables by 2030. Sharma says he travelled here today by train and electric car, at which point Johnson interrupts and tells him he is showing off. Sharma says he doesn’t agree with restricting the use of flights by politicians and says it’s a personal choice and that he prefers the carrot rather than stick approach to encourage change. Johnson is asked about how he rates the outcome of the Cop26 conference, he says it is “over 6/10”. Another non-Cop26 question on MPs and second jobs. Johnson says: “It’s very important MPs work primarily for their constituents and anyone who lobbies on behalf of a commercial interest is clearly in breach of the rules.” And back to the coal resolution issue, Johnson says whether it’s “phase out” or “phase down” it’s a downward gradient and that’s a first. He says Greenpeace has said as a result of Cop26 the era of coal is ending. The Greenpeace statement Johnson was referring to was this one from Jennifer Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International, who said in reaction to the final agreement: “It’s meek, it’s weak and the 1.5C goal is only just alive, but a signal has been sent that the era of coal is ending. And that matters.” China and India will have to explain themselves to developing countries for watering down the coal resolution from ‘phasing out’ to ‘phasing down’ coal-fired power generation, says Sharma. Johnson doesn’t comment directly on China or India. Alok Sharma is now talking. You will never get coal in the language, I was told he says, but we have done it. We’ve got every country to look at their 2030 targets next year. And every year ministers will look at this issue to see if we’re meeting these commitments. These are historic firsts, says Sharma. Johnson is now taking questions from the media. In a non-Cop26 question on the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, he says she needs to be allowed to get on with her “extremely difficult job”. Back to Cop26, Johnson says countries must stick to their pledges now. But he says the social power of people demanding change is growing and that in a matter of a few years it will be unacceptable to start a new coal-fired power station around the world. I accept this is not the solution, but we’ve delivered just about as much as we hoped including getting coal into the final text, which was a great achievement, adds Johnson. Johnson says the Cop26 talks in Glasgow have put the world on course for around 2C of warming. The world is undeniably heading in the right direction, he says, and 1.5C is still alive. In reference to the last-minute watering-down of the coal resolution, Johnson says: “We can lobby, we can cajole, we can encourage but we cannot force sovereign nations to do what they do not wish to do. It is ultimately their decision and they must stand by it.” 90% of the world’s economy is committing to net zero ending their contribution to climate change altogether, he says. And 130 countries have signed up to halt and reverse deforestation by 2030 and those countries are home to 90% of the world’s forests, he adds. “The conference marked the beginning of the end for coal,” says Johnson. “For the first time ever the conference published a mandate to cut the use of coal power.” “The conference has sounded the death knell for coal power”, he adds. The press conference has just started. Boris Johnson is joined by the Cop26 chair Alok Sharma. The UK prime minister is due to hold a press conference on Cop26 from Downing Street, London, at 5pm today. We will post updates here. Johnson has taken some flak for his contribution to the conference, particularly his decision to fly back on a private plane rather than take the four and a half hour train journey from Glasgow to London. He was accused of “staggering hypocrisy” after it later emerged that he had flown back to attend a dinner at a men-only private members’ club. Eriel Deranger, the executive director of the Indigenous Climate Action group, said the final agreement left her “sad, angry, empowered and scared”: This year global Indigenous People represented the second largest civil society delegation in attendance, second only to oil and gas lobbyists. Last night as the final language was adopted I couldn’t help but see both our presence and the presence of oil and gas in the outcomes. The final text left me sad, angry, empowered and scared. While we succeeded in getting references to human rights and rights of Indigenous peoples, it has fallen flat. These references mean little if they are also creating loopholes for dirty corporations and high polluting nations to “offset” their emissions by buying and trading the air and our lands and territories without our consent or participation. It’s simply lip service in the name of business as usual if our people do not have power to make decisions for ourselves, participate in the processes or have mechanisms for grievances. It’s clear governments are unwilling to decouple themselves from corporate interests, that dominated negotiations this year, and that the rights of our communities are nothing more than bargaining chips. For our communities the real work begins when we get home and have to tell our people we didn’t succeed, and that the risks and threats to our people and land will continue, and increase, and that our fight for climate justice still wages on. Tim Crosland, director with environmental charity Plan B which took the government to court over its plans to build a new runway at Heathrow, is pretty scathing about the outcome of Cop26. “Despite the determined efforts of many to present COP26 as “important progress”, such claims are no more than propaganda and greenwash. In objective terms, COP26 has ended in absolute failure,” he said. Crosland added that it was important for the media to “call this out” so “public and political attention can be turned to a) the causes of failure and b) what can be done about them.” It’s not that our politicians are evil. They don’t want us all to die. But they are blinded by ideology to the real cause of the crisis, which is an economic model which depends on short-term profits and compound economic growth, which can only be maintained through the concentrated power of fossil fuels. António Guterres, the secretary general of the United Nations, says Glasgow laid the building blocks for progress but is very clear there is much more to do – starting with ending the massive taxpayer-funded handouts that governments give to fossil fuel companies every year. Tzeporah Berman, an academic and activist with the Stand Earth charity, says that what was achieved at Glasgow was “historic” – but only because the bar has been set so low by a compromised system: This take from world renowned climate scientist and author Michael Mann warns of being overwhelmed with despondency about the outcome of Cop26, arguing that is what those opposed to real, urgent action want. His verdict: “Real progress WAS made, but much more work to be done.” This is a powerful and fascinating piece by my colleague George Monbiot who does not hold back in his verdict on what Cop26 achieved: “The Glasgow Climate Pact, for all its restrained and diplomatic language, looks like a suicide pact.” But he says there is still hope, which, he argues, lies with so-called positive social and economic “tipping points”that can flip our complex system very quickly. “Like natural systems, if they are driven past their tipping points, they can flip with astonishing speed. Our last, best hope is to use those dynamics to our advantage, triggering what scientists call “cascading regime shifts”.” We’ve just posted video of the moment in the final plenary session when Cop president Alok Sharma fought back tears. It followed his apology for the change in language around fossil fuel - and brought a warm round of supportive applause from the delegates. It was a genuinely emotional moment which reflected how much everyone there has put into these negotiations. And also how tired everyone was! And now I am going to hand over to my colleague Matthew Taylor, here to take you through the next few hours. Cop and out. So where does Cop26 stand in comparison to other Cops in terms of the now traditional overrun? Officially the deadline for the negotiations is Friday. But almost every Cop has overrun - a few by days. In fact in recent years the increasing trend has been for a Sunday finish (a fact of which all of us camped there, waiting for the end, were grimly aware). But Cop president Alok Sharma said firmly from the beginning that he did not want to overrun. When Friday evening came with no deal, the organisers announced that a new text would be published on Saturday morning and that that the final stage would take place on Saturday afternoon. And give or take a few hours for urgent huddling, he got the deal through by early Saturday evening. So, according to the table posted by @carbonreporter earlier this week, this puts Cop26 somewhere between Bali and Warsaw: about 20th on the table. My colleague Jessica Murray has spoken to locals about the impact of the conference on the city of Glasgow “It’s been truly amazing. We’re just really grateful to have been at least slightly a part of it,” said local cafe owner Gillian McIntyre. “Where else do you get exposure to such a vast range of people from around the planet all in one place?” Read her full piece here: Sir David King, a former chief scientific adviser to the UK government and current chair of the Climate Crisis Advisory Group, has responded to the final deal reached at the UN climate conference in Glasgow. “There were real advances made in the agreement, following on from Cop21 in Paris 2015. Adaptation, mitigation and finance were all strengthened. Rules on carbon markets were approved. The importance of the protection, conservation and restoration of nature and ecosystems was recognised – although the phrase “critical importance” was removed. And the “phase down” – not “phase out” – of coal was approved, at the last minute. “But there was no real understanding in the agreement of the extreme nature of the crisis. How do we, the current generation, ensure a manageable future for humanity? The threat to all of us from the loss of polar summer sea ice over the Arctic Ocean is a clear signal of the disaster from rising sea level, severe extreme weather events and high temperatures; but it was not addressed in any way. This was the meeting when the end of coal, oil and gas should have been set in place, in an orderly, efficient and fair way. The power of the USA oil and gas lobby meant that the USA was unable, once again, to show clear leadership on this critical issue. “Countries and their leadership, fossil fuel industry lobbies, and private companies must all be held accountable for not only failing to follow up on promises made at the meeting but also for the loss of life and damage to our ecosystems that follow from their actions. National and international lawyers have a critically important role to play in managing this accountability. “And we, the scientific community, have a critical role to play in analysing the actions year-by-year of each country to manage a safe future for humanity, to assist in the process of managing accountability. This role for the scientific community is effectively recognised in the first paragraph of the agreement. “The follow-up meeting of the UNFCCC will be held this time next year in Egypt. We now have to look to that meeting to set in place not only the rapid phase out of fossil fuels and deforestation, but also for the developed economies to take on the responsibility to fund the removal of excess greenhouse gases at scale from the atmosphere, aimed at bringing the level down to 350 ppm CO2 equivalent. In order to buy time to achieve these objectives, they will also have to develop and roll out the repair of the Arctic Circle so that it is once again covered with ice in the polar summer.” US nonprofit news organisation Truthout is reporting that in a couple of days’ time the Biden administration is due to “auction off more than 80 million acres of the Gulf of Mexico to oil and gas drilling companies less than a week after the United Nations COP26 climate conference”. According to a Reuters report on this auction, back in September, this is an annual auction which also took place last November. The timing, however, is poor. Truthout reports: “More than 250 environmental, social justice and Indigenous groups sent a letter to President Joe Biden on Wednesday with an ‘urgent plea’ to cancel the lease sale.” This is Bibi van der Zee, by the way, taking over from Alan Evans for the next few hours. Send any interesting Cop related thoughts to me via @bibivanderzee. Leo Hickman, the editor of the influential climate change website Carbon Brief, has posted this interesting breakdown of the controversial changes in language around coal. You can trace the way in which the negotiators were forced over three days to insert more and more conditional words so that in the end they could make sure that the document did, in fact, mention coal and fossil fuels, for the very first time. Chis Stark, head of the UK government’s statutory advisers, the Committee on Climate Change, has told the Herald on Sunday that both the UK and Scottish governments need to set a timetable for ending oil and gas exploration. Stark suggests it would be “useful and helpful” for the energy sector and could potentially reduce transition costs. Both UK and Scottish governments have been accused of hypocrisy for not opposing Cambo, a proposed oil drilling project off Shetland, although Scottish ministers point out they do not have power over licensing. Nicola Sturgeon gave her strongest indication last month of wanting to achieve “the fastest possible just transition” for the sector, but both governments were challenged at Cop26 for not yet signing up to the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance. Sturgeon has said her government is still “considering” joining the coalition of countries committing to phasing out those fossil fuels. Stark told the Herald on Sunday: “The information we have worked hard at is on the demand side. On that front, it’s clearly useful and helpful to name a date and then build the public support for that date behind it and crucially get commercial response that’s behind it. “You can see that in a lot of what the UK government has done in the last few weeks – which is to build that single idea that you phase out the sale of combustible engines by 2030 and then you have a mandate to increase it. You can do the same on gas boilers by 2033. The big one is the electricity supply by 2035 being fully decarbonised. Naming a date so that everyone is clear on what needs to happen, is a really useful way of clearing the path and bringing the costs down.” Richard Allan, professor of climate science at the university of Reading, has taken a relatively optimistic view of things and cites the remarkable progress made in recent years on some fronts: “Less than 10 years ago the solid science of human-caused climate change was still disputed by agenda-driven individuals and organisations who should be made accountable for their damaging delaying tactics. Based on the clear scientific evidence, Cop26 has made progress towards a net zero CO2 emissions world but continued expansion of ambition is crucial in limiting the growing severity of climate extremes and to avoid rendering some regions uninhabitable for future generations. “Given the glacial pace of progress on climate action, in part due to the blatant short term self-interest of powerful individuals and organisations, it’s almost tempting - like Gulliver at the end of his travels - to feel a sense of loathing for the human species. But there is also a sense of guarded optimism that a spark of the universe came alive, wondered at the beauty of our world, eventually noticed we were soiling it terribly before [we] imperfectly yet doggedly and collectively began digging ourselves out of our mess.” US climate envoy John Kerry has hailed the Glasgow climate pact as a success, saying that although it was imperfect, “we are in fact closer than we have ever been before to avoiding climate chaos and securing cleaner air, safer water and a healthier planet.” He warned that Cop26 was “not the finish line”, but said: “Thanks to the work here in Glasgow, the goals we are setting ourselves are much, much closer. And we will come even closer if we implement and follow through [on the deal agreed] … As we leave Glasgow, our code word is going to be implementation, followup and follow-through.” My colleague Fiona Harvey has more here: Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, says the Cop26 outcome was foreseeable for those who have been following international struggles over trade talks. There was a time when developing countries were expected to approve trade deals that had been cooked up by the Americans and the Europeans, but those days are over. China, India and Brazil are now big players in trade talks and are quite prepared to say no to proposals seen as biased towards the interests of developed nations. The last-minute watering down of the text on fossil fuels in Glasgow is a reminder of that. The anger amongst least developed countries over the failure of richer nations to meet their promises of $100bn (£75bn) a year to help them cope with climate change is another. Read the full piece here: The Cop26 Coalition, a group of some of the world’s biggest environmental organisations and civil society groups, has issued a damning statement on the outcome of the summit. Spokesman Asad Rehman, who gave a blistering speech in the conference centre as part of the closing plenary, said: “This agreement is an utter betrayal of the people. It is hollow words on the climate emergency from the richest countries, with an utter disregard of science and justice. The UK government greenwash and PR have spun us off course. “The rich refused to do their fair share, with more empty words on climate finance and turning their back on the poorest who are facing a crisis of Covid coupled with economic and climate apartheid - all caused by the actions of the richest. “It’s immoral for the rich to sit there talking about their future children and grandchildren, when the children of the south are suffering now. This Cop has failed to keep 1.5C alive, and set us on a pathway to 2.5C. All while claiming to act as they set the planet on fire. “At Cop26, the richest got what they came here for, and the poorest leave with nothing. The people are rising up across the globe to hold our governments and corporations to account - and make them act.” On BBC Scotland’s The Sunday Show, Baroness Parminter, chair of the Lords environment and climate change committee, said that the Glasgow pact did not put the world on the path to 1.5C. “Our view is that incremental progress has been achieved but not in line with the urgency we require. We’ve heard from countries across the Pacific, from Tuvalu and Marshall Islands, people’s homes are being flooded now. We’ve had reports from IPCC earlier in the year that really need to address these issues now. If we don’t reach 1.5C then some of these effects are going to be irreversible. The pledges and the pact that came out yesterday don’t put us on the path to 1.5C.” She added that her committee had significant concerns that government departments “don’t seem to be embedding the need for climate change considerations into their policy decision making. We see perverse decisions, like the change to the domestic fuel tax levy on aviation”. “Although the government has some really good targets … some of the delivery we’re seeing is actually running counter to what those targets require.” She said the UK government needed to provide “better and clearer leadership” in the next year of its presidency to meet the pledges that had been established. My colleague Will Hutton at the Observer has written on the complex dance between capitalism and the climate crisis that unfolded at Cop26. The environmental genie is out of the bottle. In Europe, greens are in government or coalition government in Austria, Belgium, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and Scotland – and about to be in Germany. Politicians are in the market for votes; Boris Johnson, who is closely tuned to voters’ preferences even if many in his party are not, has been quick to mount a volte face over the climate crisis. The consequences of the final Cop26 outcome are not clear, but more important is that it has happened at all. The momentum to “keep 1.5 alive” is obvious and that is as vital as the detail. What matters is how national governments and international agencies find ways of directing a capitalism that knows, given what its markets want, that it has to move in this direction. Read the full piece here: Evelyne Huytebroeck, co-chair of the European Green party, has said: “Climate justice remains vastly forgotten. The high expectations from developing countries for loss and damages to be fully recognised were not matched in the final agreement. But the fight is not over. As Greens, we will herald this fight for climate justice at the European level but also through our Greens in government across Europe.” The International Union for the Conservation of Nature has commented on the outcome of the talks: IUCN welcomes the progress made in Glasgow, including with respect to nature. However, it stresses that this headway will not be sufficient to “keep 1.5C alive”, and calls for significant and meaningful step change at Cop27. We are running out of time and options. For the first time, world leaders have clearly recognised the interlinked relationship between the global biodiversity and climate crises and the critical role that nature plays in both adaption and mitigation simultaneously. This is an important and welcome move forward. However, to keep global temperature rise within 1.5C, we need to move from recognition to establishing concrete pathways for delivery. In this respect, while the Cop decisions are an important step forward, the absence of a clear reference to nature-based solutions is a missed opportunity that will need to be revisited as soon as possible. Chris Stark, head of the the government’s statutory climate advisers, the Committee on Climate Change, says the body will publish a stocktake after the Cop26 summit. Ugandan youth climate activist Vanessa Nakate has tweeted about her disappointment about the lack of a “loss and damage facility” - essentially, compensation for climate damage - in the Glasgow pact. She also praises Nicola Sturgeon of Scotland, who became the first country to pledge to a loss and damage fund with a $2m pledge. Asked about the $100bn climate finance promise that has been broken by rich countries, Sharma says he understands vulnerable countries’ sense of frustration. “We know with confidence that that $100bn will come in 2023,” he says. He adds that adaptation finance will be doubled by 2025 as well (though does not mention that it is pledged to be doubled from 2019 levels, not current levels). Sharma says nations like China and India will have to justify themselves to developing nations. “This deal does keep 1.5C in reach,” insists Sharma, who says he has received many messages of thanks from around the world for the deal. But he says the commitments that have been made must be followed through on, he says. Alok Sharma, the Cop26 president, is now on Trevor Phillips. Phillips asks him about the Queen not attending a memorial service at the Cenotaph in London due to ill health and Sharma says he wishes the Queen the best. Asked about his emotional reaction at the end of the Cop26 summit, Sharma says “What we wanted to achieve at Glasgow was to keep within reach the goal of … 1.5C, and we delivered on that. We also closed off all the outstanding elements of the Paris rulebook.” “On the issue of coal, I should point out that for the very first time in any of these conferences the word coal is in the text. “Of course I would have preferred the words ‘phase out’ rather than ‘phase down’,” he says. “You heard that disappointment on the floor.” My colleague Fiona Harvey has looked at the UK’s hosting of the Cop26 conference and the behind-the-scenes choreography that led to the deal we ended up with. The choreography was a key part of the UK’s plan: the Cop talks are dominated by backroom technical discussions over the fine details of the Paris agreement. Slow-moving and impenetrable to outsiders, these can give the (correct) impression of stalling and delay in the face of a global crisis. So to gain a sense of momentum, the UK plan was to launch the summit with world leaders, then keep up a steady stream of “wins” that would cover aspects of the climate crisis that lie outside the scope of the annual UN talks but are no less vital to its resolution. Read the full piece here: Helm says a 2.4C hotter world is going to be bad for most countries, and worse for some than others. But he says it’s not clear exactly how the world will respond to that level of warming. “We don’t no precisely, but there are no suggestions that it’s going to be a good thing.” Helm points out that even if the costs of acting now are cheaper than acting later, they are still a significant cost. “29 years away is not really long enough for much technical change,” he says. “We’ve got to do it with what we’ve got.” Next up is the economist Dieter Helm, who is very pessimistic about the chances of keeping within 1.5C of global heating. “It’s dead,” he says. Helm says the future of climate will be determined in China, India and sub-Saharan Africa, and laments that “the key players are not at the table”. Helm says summits like Cop26 are not going to fix things. Helm says solving trade and carbon border pricing are the way to make a difference. Phillips asks Helm to estimate what temperature we are heading for if the Cop26 pledges are fulfilled. Helm refers to studies published during the conference which forecast between 1.8C in a most optimistic scenario and 2.4C of heating in a realistic scenario. Helm says these outcomes would be “really, really bad”. Phillips has been laying various traps for Miliband, but Miliband declines to walk into them. Phillips suggests climate action is not popular with poorer voters, although recent polling has found that is not the case, and Miliband repeats that climate action now is cheaper than not taking action in the long run. Asked about the upcoming Cumbria coal mine and Cambo oil field going ahead, Miliband says they should be cancelled. “It looks like total hypocrisy,” says Miliband. “We need to show we’re not looking both ways as a country.”” Miliband says that Labour have pledged to spend £28bn a year in tackling the climate crisis if they come to power. He says the government should be helping subsidise green boilers and electric vehicles. Miliband says borrowing now to spend on climate policies is the right thing to do, and cites a study that found not spending on climate would end up costing twice a much in the long run. “The biggest debt we can store up for future generations is not tackling this crisis,” says Miliband. Miliband says more needs to be done to put pressure on big emitters like China, India and Australia. He criticises the government for dropping climate commitments from a trade deal they are striking with Australia. “Climate policy cant sit on the side of other policies … we should be rewriting that trade deal,” he says, adding that if every country’s policies were in line with Australia’s, the world would be heading for 4C of warming The shadow business secretary, Ed Miliband, is speaking on the Trevor Phillips show on Sky. Miliband says the aim of keeping a heating target of 1.5C alive is “frankly, in intensive care.” He says the world is only 25% of the way to its goal of halving global emissions, and that all countries need to step up and deliver on the deal. Asked about the additional responsibility of developed countries, Miliband brings up the pledge of $100bn a year of climate finance that was promised to poor countries at Copenhagen in 2009 and formally pledged in Paris in 2015. “More than 10 years on, this has still not been delivered,” Miliband points out. He says the UK government’s cuts to overseas aid undermined its negotiating position during the talks. Welcome to the Guardian’s coverage of reaction to the “Glasgow climate pact” that was struck on Saturday night at the Cop26 climate summit. The deal was welcomed by many world leaders despite a last-minute intervention by India that saw the wording on “phasing out” coal weakened to “phasing down”. US climate envoy John Kerry said the change was regrettable but that “if we hadn’t done that, we wouldn’t have had an agreement.” Environmental groups have been less kind - Amanda Mukwashi at Christian Aid accused rich countries of “kicking the can down the road”, while Rachel Kennerley at Friends of the Earth dubbed the pact the “Glasgow get-out clause”. We’ll bring you all the latest reactions and fallout to the deal here. You can email me at alan.evans@theguardian.com or find me on Twitter at @itsalanevans.Better late than never? The US and Europe finally show signs of awakening to the dangers facing Bosnia. A crisis with long roots has escalated dramatically, with the international community’s chief representative, Christian Schmidt, warning that the country could soon break apart. He described a “very real” prospect of a return to conflict, 26 years after the Dayton peace accords ended a war that cost 100,000 lives, and the Srebrenica massacre of Muslim men and boys that was the worst atrocity in Europe since the second world war. Since then, Bosnia has been made up of the Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosniaks and Croats, with a tripartite presidency composed of one Serb, one Bosniak and one Croat. Milorad Dodik, the genocide-denying leader of the Bosnian Serbs, has pressed for years for them to go their own way. The limited international pushback has emboldened him. In response to the introduction of a genocide denial law by the previous high representative, Mr Dodik is threatening to quit state institutions – including the national armed forces. This would be, as Mr Schmidt noted, secession in all but name. In creating a new Bosnian Serb army, it would also revive the very body responsible for genocide. Mr Dodik has said he would force Bosnian troops out of the Republika Srpska and that, if necessary, his “friends” would back him. At the start, the high representative used the post’s considerable powers to keep politicians in check. But the role has been systematically weakened. Mr Schmidt was further undermined when references to his position were removed from the renewed mandate of the Eufor peacekeeping force in Bosnia, after Russia made clear it would otherwise veto the Security Council resolution. The broader context is the death of the European dream. Emmanuel Macron’s rejection of EU enlargement – ignoring warnings of the dangers of reneging on promises to the western Balkans – was a devastating blow, and the lack of coherence and stability in Europe has finished it off. That has left little to offer as an alternative to nationalism. Mr Dodik has found support from Hungary’s Viktor Orbán; Russia and, to a lesser extent, China and even Turkey have a growing hold. Amid political and economic stagnation, many citizens are simply leaving. Mr Schmidt’s report has pushed the crisis up the agenda. Gabriel Escobar, the envoy for the western Balkans, has just visited; a re-engaged US is crucial, though critics complain it remains too keen to appease. The EU remains largely muted and the more vocal UK can no longer press the case from within. The US sanctioned Mr Dodik in 2017 for obstructing the implementation of the peace agreement; what is needed now are robust sanctions against his circle, cutting off access to European markets and banking. However belatedly, governments should also make explicit their support for Mr Schmidt, and their belief that Mr Dodik is responsible for this crisis. The west should make clear that any attempt at violence would be met by reinforcement of international forces, with Nato doing the job if the EU is unable to, as set out in the Dayton accords. The EU should also ask itself what hope it might offer to Bosnia. The issue is not only whether the Bosnian Serb leader climbs down, as he has in the past, but how confident he feels in future provocations. That the best case scenario for the country now appears to be a continued, gradual deterioration must be a spur to do better.The anti-global heating movement is not strong enough. With last year’s defeat of Donald Trump, its enemies lost their most powerful figurehead. But the governments of Australia, Brazil, Russia and Saudi Arabia continue to obstruct progress and at Cop26, yet again, they and the other backers of the fossil fuel-powered status quo outgunned supporters of the immediate decarbonisation that is needed, if the goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C is to stay within reach. Now the Glasgow conference is over, the most important question for all those seeking to avoid and reduce climate harms is how to speed up the transition. Ramping up the pressure on polluters – both nations and companies – is the obvious answer. Questions surrounding tactics remain fraught, as the recent debate over protests by Insulate Britain illustrates. But there is no question that civil society has a vital role to play. If people, in a few years’ time, are to look back on Cop26 as a success, it will be because the Glasgow agreement created the mechanism whereby countries must revisit their emissions-cutting pledges every year, and the political conditions changed sufficiently to ensure that existing promises were strengthened. If Glasgow goes down in history as a failure, it will be because emissions keep on rising. This would mean that the world’s richest countries and organisations make the choice described in the opening speech by Mia Mottley, prime minister of Barbados, as “the path of greed and selfishness”. That is, the choice not to protect the world’s poorest people and places from catastrophic climate harms – including sea level rises that are already engulfing small-island states, humanitarian disasters caused by extreme weather events, and temperatures that will make large areas of the planet uninhabitable. That India and China are both actively engaged in the Cop process, alongside Joe Biden’s White House, is heartening, despite Xi Jinping’s absence. The new commitment to joint working by China and the US, and deal struck on methane, are tangible advances. But India’s last-minute insistence that a reference to “phasing out” coal be changed to “phasing down” was disappointing. India’s per capita emissions are around a 10th of the US’s, and a third of the UK’s. Environmental injustice largely fits an existing template of unequal wealth distribution, with the countries that have benefited least from fossil fuel-powered growth suffering the worst consequences. But the shocking failures of western governments with regard to polluting industries and subsidies – plans for a new coal mine in Cumbria are a particularly egregious example – in no way excuse the pro-coal policies pursued by India, China and others. Scientists are unequivocal that this dirtiest of fuels must be eliminated, and rapid falls in the price of renewables mean that cost is no excuse. Emissions must shrink by around 45% this decade to keep alive the chance of limiting heating to 1.5C. Based on current commitments, we are on track for 2.4C. Next year, at Cop27 in Egypt, governments have another chance. If they are to take it, the pressure on them, and on the central banks and private financial institutions – that should long ago have grasped their responsibility to shut down the environment-wrecking fossil fuel industries, instead of propping them up – must be massively stepped up. Needless to say, there is no time to waste – a fact clearly understood by Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, who was visibly upset when he told delegates on Saturday that he was sorry for the agreement’s limitations.Against the odds and defying the numbers, after a weekend of slings and arrows, Lewis Hamilton took arms against his sea of troubles with a remarkable win. He delivered a champion’s drive under circumstances that might have left a lesser man bowed. Instead by coming from 10th to beat his title rival Max Verstappen into second, Hamilton leaves Brazil head held high, having turned what might have been the weekend that ended his championship hopes into one that has reignited them. Hamilton’s fighting spirit is well documented. He needed every ounce of that character this weekend and draw on it he did to return what might be the defining moment of the season. The 36-year-old’s forward-facing attitude in his pursuit of success is such that his recollection of previous races is often vague. Yet the scale of the achievement was clear as he recalled with clarity the only similar weekend of his career in F3 at Bahrain in 2004. There he came back from 22nd to 11th in the qualifying race and then went on to win in the race itself. Fighting for his career at the time he was re-signed by McLaren afterwards and the rest, well, became history he is still making today. This weekend in Brazil was as important and will likely remain equally indelible in his mind. The scale of the achievement must be measured across the weekend, alongside Hamilton’s sublime delivery of the win at Interlagos. This was the comeback of the season after a weekend where he took two separate penalties and effectively made up 25 places though two different races. Hamilton received a five-place grid penalty for taking a new engine at the start of the weekend and then had to start Saturday’s sprint qualifying from 20th and last, after Mercedes were found to have breached the regulations on their DRS. At which point a win on Sunday was perhaps beyond any ambitions he or his team may have harboured. Yet he then delivered with clinical, aggressive precision to carve through the field in the sprint qualifying from 20th to fifth, making 15 decisive overtaking manoeuvres to do so. It meant he started from 10th in the race proper and did it all over again when it mattered. For all that Mercedes had a pace advantage in Brazil it was still a magnificent piece of clinical execution, doubly impressive given the pressure of the championship fight. A misjudgment in overtaking across Saturday or Sunday could have ended his title hopes in a nano-second of cartwheeling carbon-fibre wreckage. Hamilton did not pick up a scratch. It was a result he badly needed. Hamilton went into the race trailing Verstappen by 21 points. Now, with three races remaining and 78 points available, the Dutchman leads by only 14. Verstappen holds the advantage but in a season that has ebbed and flowed with such drama, any straightforward denouement is far from a given and with Mercedes’ pace at Interlagos they will feel it is game on. After his efforts on Saturday the race required every ounce of focus again. In the mix from the off the 36-year-old once more demonstrated commitment and fine judgment in equal measure in making nine passes and becoming the first driver to win at Interlagos from lower than eighth place. Verstappen had taken the lead at the start from second on the grid, diving up the inside of Bottas at turn one, while behind them Hamilton launched himself through the field. Up to seventh by turn 10 on lap one, by lap two he had passed Sebastian Vettel for sixth and then immediately dealt with Carlos Sainz for fifth. Charles Leclerc fell a lap later and he was third behind Verstappen’s teammate Sergio Pérez by lap five. The Mexican duly fell at Descida do Lago after a dogged fight on lap 19. A tense chase through the pitstops ensued as Hamilton hunted Verstappen. The pair were slugging it out in lap times until their second stops which left a fight to the flag. Of course with such competitive and closely-matched drivers this was not to be straightforward. Hamilton grasped his moment on the new rubber and pushed hard. On lap 48 he caught his rival on the back straight with a nose in front but was driven wide through turn four by Verstappen, both drivers going off the track. It was the season in microcosm, the two rivals wheel to wheel and uncompromising, with Mercedes convinced Verstappen had deliberately not turned into the corner sufficiently. The incident was deemed acceptable by the stewards, a decision derided by the world champion. Yet Hamilton regrouped and began another assault. Hard on Verstappen in turn one he forced him on to the defensive and over hugely tense moments, followed it up by finally making it stick through turn four on lap 59. It was the decisive move – in clean air the British driver stretched his legs and completed a sensational win, 10 seconds in front. He had proved, were any demonstration necessary from the seven-time world champion, that if the title is to be wrested from his grasp it will be one almighty struggle. The win puts him right back in it, outrageous fortune be damned, the title fight on fire once more. Red Bull’s Sergio Pérez was in fourth and Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc in fifth. Carlos Sainz was sixth for Ferrari, Pierre Gasly in seventh for AlphaTauri. Esteban Ocon and Fernando Alonso were in eighth and ninth for Alpine and Lando Norris in tenth for McLaren.Hamilton appears as I sign out, so let’s go again. He doesn’t remember another weekend like this other than that one he mentioned in Bahrain. His dad told him not to worry, just to “brush it off and go forward”, and he feels great in mind and body. He’s loved the crowd this weekend, saying the Brazilians and British flags inspired him through a hard weekend. The disqualification was devastating, but the mechanics stayed focused and did their jobs. Finally, on the Verstappen off-road incident, he says he knew the authorities wouldn’t penalise, but needs to go back and have a look at it. Here’s Giles Richards’ report from another monumental altercation - see you next Sunday for Qatar! And relax. That was, as the kids like to say, “awesome” and “epic”, except it actually was both of those things – not something that happens very often. No other driver would’ve got near doing what Hamilton did today, and very few in history had such behaviour in their ambit; Verstappen might yet hold out, but momentum and, most importantly, speed, are with the champ. Verstappen 332.5 Hamilton 318.5 Bottas 203 Perez 178 Norris 151 Leclerc 148 Sainz 139.5 Ricciardo 105 Hamilton accepts his winner’s trophy and accepts the acclaim of the crowd, absolutely loving it as you would. He then joins Toto Wolff, while Verstappen lifts his pot, a wan smile on his phizog. Draped in the Brazilian flag, Hamilton enjoys the British national anthem, after which Mercedes’ win is celebrated with the German version. There are some boos as Verstappen ascends the podium – that’s a bit odd, whatever you think of his running Hamilton off the track, or not, he’s an amazing driver and without him we’d not have what might just become the greatest season of all-time. Respect that, people. Bottas wasn’t happy with his start but is otherwise satisfied, and in as much awe of Hamilton as are the rest of us. Hamilton says he appreciates the support of the Brazilian people – it’s an “amazing country” – and it’s been a humbling weekend for him, thanks to the support he’s had. He praises Bottas, notes that he pushed as hard as he could in the hardest weekend of his racing life, and credits his dad with this win, for reminding him that something similar happened to him in Bahrain, racing Formula 3. “It feels like the first,” he says. Hamilton (Mercedes) Verstappen (Red Bull) Bottas (Mercedes) Perez (Red Bull) Leclerc (Ferrari) Sainz (Ferrari) Gasly (AlphaTauri) Ocon (Alpine) Alonso (Alpine) Norris (McLaren) Vettel (Aston Martin) Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) Russell (Williams) Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo)_ Tsunoda (AlphaTauri) Latifi (Williams) Mazepin (Haas) Schumacher (Haas) Ricciardo, Stroll, did not finish. Verstappen tells his team he did what he could, but Hamilton was just quicker. His team are happy with his performance, which they term “damage limitation”. Hamilton takes the Brazilian flag for his victory lap, and he is absolutely buzzing. We’ve just witnessed one of the all-time great performances. “That’s how you do it man,” Hamilton’s team tell him. “That - is -how - you - do - it.” “Whoooooo!” he replies. “Keep pushing.” Perez does nab the fastest lap point, taking it away from Hamilton. And just yesterday, he was 20th! Verstappen is second, Bottas third but really, whatever. That is a just a staggeringly brilliant, epochal piece of work from the champ. Lap 70/71 Perez does his bit for his team, trying to pinch Hamilton’s fastest-lap point, but I think Hamilton would’ve took this, as Ryan Giggs would say. Lap 69/71 Hamilton now leads by 8.385s, while Gasly had no down shifts on his gearbox, but does now. Lap 68/71 What’s odd about all this isn’t just what Hamilton has done, it’s how quickly he did it. It took him 14 laps to go from 10th to second, and he was in front with 11 laps still to race. An absolute doddle, basically. Lap 67/71 It really is ridiculous what Hamilton’s doing. He’s an absolute freak of nature, a joke. And the confidence he’ll take from this weekend makes him an even more terrifying proposition for Verstappen, who will be starting to wonder. Lap 66/71 Hamilton’s lead is now 4.933s, but Bottas has taken very little out of Verstappen. Lap 65/71 In F1 history, only 10 races have been won from 10th on the grid – though Esteban Ocon did it in Hungary a few weeks ago. Lap 64/71 Ricciardo retired, it seems, because his Mercedes engine ran out of power. Lap 63/71 Ultimately, Hamilton just needed this win too badly. If his car stays healthy, it’ll take a monumental effort from Verstappen to beat him, because he’s faster and better. I’m not sure Red Bull have enough points in the bag. Lap 62/71 Lewis Hamilton, though. Obviously he can handle a wheel and all that, but what continually amazes me about him is his competitive charisma: he just has that ability to impose himself on any situation, from any position, and that’s so of very few people, in any sport, ever. Lap 61/71 “Go get him!” says Toto Wolff to Bottas, roughly nine second behind Verstappen. Hamilton now leads by 2.414s, as Gasly passes Alonso and goes seventh. Lap 60/71 Verstappen is shown a flag for veering on the straight, but it barely matters now! He just doesn’t have the pace to dig into Hamilton from behind, and this most ludicrous of seasons takes yet another leap left! Bring it on baby! Lap 59/71 Hamilton goes again and this time Verstappen can’t shut the door! Hamilton makes him defend turn one on the inside, then veers outside at two and three, finishing the job at four! Yesterday, he was last, this morning hie was 10th, and now he’s in the lead! What a roar greets him! What a driver! What a competitor! Lap 58/71 “What the assessors are missing,” says Steve Ditchburn, “is that Verstappen braked late - Hamilton passed him and Verstappen braked late at the corner to get back past Hamilton. Thus in braking so late he could not take the corner properly and therefore went off to the right pushing Hamilton off even further. It was dangerous by Verstappen and the assessors have no clue.’ This seems a fair assessment. Lap 57/71 The problem for Hamilton is how long it’s taking him to get into an overtaking position. If his next bid fails, that might be it for him. Lap 56/71 Hamilton can’t get quite close enough to have another ashy at overtaking. Lap 55/71 Increasingly, it looks like Verstappen has the gas to stay in front while, in commentary, they wonder if we can see his steering angle, or lack of it. The FIA, though, tell us they had access to all necessary info, as we see it again and it really does look like there was room for Hamilton to pass, until Verstappen ran him off the road. He’s done really well to avoid a penalty here. Lap 54/71 Verstappen thinks he might get DRS off Raikkonen, but Raikkonen pits, then Hamilton has DRS and can’t get close enough. “Course,” Hamilton deadpans, when told there’ll be no action taken against Verstappen. Lap 53/71 Verstappen Hamilton Bottas Perez Sainz Leclerc Alonso Ocon Lap 52/71 no investigation necessary, say the FIA. If Hamilton wants to win this race, he’ll have to drive by Verstappen. Lap 51/71 It’s taken a couple of laps, but Hamilton is back to where he was, just under a second off Verstappen, as we see Ricciardo getting out of his car in the pit lane. he too is done for the day. Lap 50/71 Stroll, who’s had an eventful little afternoon, is out, but back to that Verstappen/Hamilton conflab, both cars did go off the track, but it looked like Hamilton did because Verstappen forced him to. Either way, the lads are investigating. Lap 49/71 I’d love to hear Horner’s reaction if they penalise Verstappen for that, but in commentary they reckon he deliberately didn’t turn into the corner which, if so, will put him at risk... Lap 48/71 Hamilton is closer as they come down the back straight and looks like he’s past, but Verstappen forces him so wide they both go off the road for 5-10m! That’s so ballsy from Verstappen and prevents what looked like a guaranteed pass, though the stewards might fancy a squizz at that. They didn’t touch, but did Verstappen stop trying to turn the corner to run Hamilton off the road?! Lap 47/71 The lead is down below 0.5s and Hamilton has DRS! He can’t get close enough down the hill, but he is looking dangerous, and his tyres might give him that extra bit of zip he needs to pass. Lap 46/71 Bottas reckons the second stop gave up track position, and that Mercedes could’ve tied up a one-two. Horner notes his driver has track position, but knows Hamilton is lapping faster, on newer tyres, conceding Verstappen doesn’t have the straight-line speed to come from behind. Lap 45/71 Hamilton wanted medium tyres but he’s been given hard; still, he’s cut the lead to 1.820s. Lap 44/71 In comes Hamilton and Verstappen’s told not to push too hard but to preserve his tyres; Hamilton comes out 2.753s behind, but with tyres that are a few laps fresher. Lap 43/71 Perez pits, meaning Hamilton is the only one of the top four still out there; meantime, Verstappen sets the race’s fastest lap. Lap 42/71 Bottas pits, before Hamilton; might it be that Mercedes think, with clear track and clear air in front, that they’ll be quick enough not to be caught? Lap 41/71 Verstappen goes in, coming out behind Latifi! That’s a bit of felicitous fortune for Hamilton, who leads him by 20 seconds; 22 is what you need to pit, so Hamilton will want to extend his lead towards that. Lap 40/71 Hamilton and his team are indeed considering another stop, but colour-code the tyres they’re discussing so that Red Bull are none the wiser. Lap 39/71 Verstappen’s lead is down to 1.171, while in comms they wonder if Hamilton will stop again... Lap 38/71 If Verstappen scores three points more than Hamilton, he could finish second to him in the three remaining meetings and still take his first title. Or, put another way, Hamilton needs to find a way of winning this, else it’s out of his hands. Lap 37/71 Verstappen leads from Hamilton by 1.331s... Lap 36/71 After an action-packed start, there’s not loads going on now. My guess is that Hamilton is consolidating, gathering himself before letting it all hang out. Lap 35/71 The lead is 1.223s, and Hamilton is struggling to make an impression. Verstappen Hamilton Bottas Perez Leclerc Sainz Gasly Ricciardo Norris Tsunoda Lap 34/71 Verstappen is told he’s three-tenths quicker in the middle sector – Hamilton is struggling in the dirty air through the corners. If he can stay in front, this’ll be an almighty statement. Lap 33/71 I say that, but Verstappen – then Bottas – set fastest lap times. This is intense. Lap 32/71 We see that Verstappen’s pit-lane performance was slightly better than Hamilton’s, but the gap has closed to below a second - that DRS help is surely imminent? Gosh, how do you keep the Mercedes off you? Lap 31/71 Verstappen now leads by 1.420, which doesn’t seem like much to defend; if Hamilton gets DRS, he’s toast. Lap 30/71 Hamilton nudges closer to the DRS limit - if he can get hold of Verstappen with Bottas still out there, he’s laughing. Further back, Gasly breezes by Stroll, and the virtual safety car is out, so Bottas takes the opportunity to pit. Bottas re-emerges in third. Lap 29/71 Hamilton sets the fastest lap and sits third, behind Verstappen and new leader Bottas. He’s 1.519s behind the former, a further 8.86s behind the latter. My guess is Bottas is staying out to slow down Verstappen. Lap 28/71 Leclerc pits so Hamilton moves into fifth, then uses DRS to nail Ricciardo, who emerges from the pits ahead. He’s fourth now, but then Perez and Verstappen both pit... Lap 27/71 Hamilton pits! That’s a bold strategy, sticking him on hards to put Verstappen under pressure. He comes out sixth, 24.318s off the lead. Lap 26/71 Norris, who was last, is now 13th; I wonder if he’ll be our next great. Meantime, Gasly pits, and countless Mercedes and Red Bull are playing close attention to how his hards get on. Lap 25/71 Australia have won the men’s T20 World Cup. Otherwise, it’s as you were. Lap 24/71 Verstappen leads Hamilton by 3.680s but it might be that both are conserving tyres now, opting to drive within themselves before pitting to giving it everything. Lap 23/71 Increasingly, it looks like the leaders will be pitting just once, and Verstappen’s team tell him his car has what it needs to stay in front. Lap 22/71 Verstappen Hamilton Perez Bottas Leclerc Sainz Gasly Ricciardo Vettel Ocon Alonso Stroll Giovinazzi Norris Tsunoda Raikkonen Russel Mazepin Latifi Schumacher Lap 21/71 Norris has made up three places since the restart – he now sits 14th. Red Bull, meantime, tell Verstappen that Hamilton’s tyres won’t have enjoyed the fighting he made them do. Lap 20/71 Hamilton takes a tenth of a second out of Verstappen... Lap 19/71 Right, eyes down! Can Hamilton dig into Verstappen? Earlier, they were saying that if he’s got the pace to nail Perez, he’s got the pace to nail Verstappen... Lap 18/71 But have a look! Perez gets DRS, climbs in, and nips back in front! Meantime, Verstappen takes the opportunity to extend his lead beyond three seconds and as I type that, Hamilton blazes by Perez at the end of the Senna S! Lap 17/71 Hamilton is getting closer to Perez now; Perez is moving around in front, trying to shake Hamilton off the slipstream, but Hamilton dances around his outside! Lap 16/71 “Wow! “ says Michael Cosgrove. “Hamilton seems to have found bucketloads of power just at the right time. And talking of he who has the Power...” I’m doing running man and sidestep under my desk. Lap 15/71 Tsunoda is handed a 10-second penalty for his collision with Stroll. Lap 14/71 Hamilton is 2.553s behind Perez but we get to the main straight – can he make his speed count? Well, he takes a few chunks out of the gap, but can’t get near enough to overtake. Lap 14/71 Verstappen has extended his lead – Hamilton is around two seconds behind – but the virtual safety car means no overtaking ... and it’s gone! Here comes the green and Perez is further in front of Hamilton than you’d expect. Lap 13/71 Norris, who had the situation at the start, is using the safety-car situation to motor through the field – he’s 15th now. Lap 12/71 The virtual safety car is out – there’s a piece of debris on the track – but this time, Verstappen won’t be able to decide when to stamp on iyt, the car will disappear and then it’s all against all. Lap 11/71 The Stroll/Tsunoda bump will be looked at, we learn, and we can see that Hamilton’s straight-line speed is serious. Back in last place, Schumacher has a bit of car hanging under his nose, so he’ll try and limp through to the pits. Lap 10/71 Hamilton can’t get at Perez; the Red Bulls seems to have warmed their tyres more effectively. Verstappen leads by 1.297, with Hamilton 1.760s behind. Lap 10/71 Horner concedes this safety-car sitch isn’t what he wanted to see and notes that Hamilton looks “ominous” out there, but knows his team have a job to do. In commentary, they reckon Verastappen won’t go till we’re right close to the line, to stop anyone cadging a ride in his slipstream and off we go again! Lap 9/71 I’d rather be Verstappen than Hamilton, but it won’t have escaped Verstappen’s attention that things are moving in Hamilton’s favor. Lap 8/71 The safety car leads the drivers through the pit lane as the marshals clear the remaining muck. This is going to be a helluva restart. Lap 7/71 This is the 13th race this season that we’ve seen a safety or virtual safety car. Verstappen Perez Hamilton Bottas Leclerc Sainz Vettel Gasly Ocon Ricciardo Alonso Stroll Lap 6/71 Hello! The safety car is out, I think because there’s debris on the track from Tsunoda’s car. That’ll suit Hamilton nicely, truncating the field, and yup, we see Tsunoda trying to overtake Stroll, who closed to door and chopped off part of yerman’s wing. Lap 6/71 Hamilton is just under five seconds off the lead, but he’ll find it harder to pass Perez than the seven drivers he’s taken out so far. Lap 5/71 Bottas lets Hamilton through, and he’s not 3.4s behind Perez, who’s 1,575s behind Verastappen. Elsewhere, Tsunoda has lost a wing. Lap 4/71 Hamilton passes Leclerc to go fourth. “Bottas had one job: not to back out,” says Hugh Molloy. “One job. He wasn’t even pushing the action, he just had to not bottle it and he did.” He actually started well, but then Verstappen found another gear. Lap 3/71 Hamilton eases by Sainz – he has rrrridiculous speed! In just three laps, he’s halved the deficit, but Verstappen has a lot of open track in front of him and a teammate bouncing behind. “If your name’s not down, you’re not coming in.” Lap 2/71 Hamilton moves by Vettel into sixth, but with Bottas back in third he’s got no one controlling the race for him from the front. 1 Verstappen 2 Perez 3 Bottas 4 Leclerc 5 Sainz 6 Hamilton Lap 1/71 Bottas gets away well, so does Verstappen, and Versatappen takes the lead! Norris gets a puncture, Hmilton get sup to seventh, and Perez nobbles Bottas to go second! It’s a Red Bull one-two! Right, ready? “Liberty Media have got most things right when it comes to updating F1,” emails Hugh Molloy, “but that Pirates of the Caribbeanesque replacement for The Chain remains abhorrent.” Ultimately, you can’t perfect perfection, but yup, you can have a better go at it. The formation lap is away! Bar Tsunoda, who’s on softs, they’re all on medium. Righto, we’re almost there. In the meantime, we see drone shots of Sao Paulo, which has grown somewhat since I last saw it from the air, in August 2000. Over the PA, they’re playing this banger: may we be blessed with the racing equivalent. Back with Horner he’s asked about Wolff’s gripe that he’s making changes to his rear wing. But he thinks his rival is just trying to throw shade, and nothing’s been done without the permission of the stewards. Lando Nozzer tells Sky that it’s much hotter today than yesterday; I’m not certain if that’ll help Hamilton, who has the quickest car, or allow the others to stay in front of him. Joao Carlos Martins is going to play the Brazilian national anthem on the piano. Toto Wolff isn’t happy at all, feeling that Red Bull have changed parts of their rear wing and not been punished, whereas Mercedes have. He doesn’t want to complain and thinks the talking needs to be done on the track, on which point he doesn’t know if Hamilton can win, saying Bottas and Verstappen both can; when asked when he’ll do if his two drivers are together, he doesn’t say that Bottas will let Hamilton through, but that’s clearly what’ll happen. Christian Horner thinks it’ll be harder for his boys, given how quick Mercedes are, but hopes Sergio Perez will help Verstappen keep Hamilton at bay by holding him off if ever he’s in front. Felipe Massa says the uphill start is crucial, and he doesn’t think Hamilton can win from tenth, but says the podium is possible. Those who know reckon it’ll be harder today than yesterday for Hamilton to carve through the field – the front wheels might slide about more than they did. Martin Brundle grabs Lance Stroll, who says he’s honoured as he’s never been required for one of these interviews. He thinks there’ll be some degradation today, but seems exactly as relaxed as you assume he’ll be. Vettel doesn’t think the shady side of the track will be a problem for his car – he’s checked, and it’s warm enough. Hamilton’s car arrives into its slot and has its tyres wrapped up. It’s on the sunny side of the track, so might need a little bleeding before racetime. Meantime, Man City’s women are taking another beating. The final of the men’s T20 World Cup is getting to that point... It’s nice and warm in Sao Paulo, and the cars are coming out to warm up as we learn that eighth is the lowest on the grid that anyone has ever won this GP, Giancarlo Fisichella in 2003. Likewise, it’s the furthest back anyone has won from this season, Esteban Ocon doing so in Hungary. Valentino Rossi, what a name. How can you be called Valentino Rossi and not be as cool as Valentino Rossi is? Elsewhere, the great Valentino Rossi has finally turned it in. Doesn’t he like racing? Let’s get into a Brazilian state of mind: here’s Innerground 100, a banging drum n’ bass collection, out last week, curated by Sao Paulo’s very own DJ Marky. In particular, Drumsound and Bassline Smith’s Sanctuary 93, featuring an Ofra Haza sample made famous by Eric B and Rakim, is a belter. Bottas (Mercedes) Verstappen (Red Bull) Sainz Jr (Ferrari) Perez (Red Bull) Norris (McLaren) Leclerc (Ferrari) Gasly (AlphaTauri) Ocon (Alpine) Vettel (Aston Martin) Hamilton (Mercedes) Ricciardo (McLaren) Alonso (Alpine) Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) Stroll (Aston Martin) Tsunoda (AlphaTuari) Latifi (Williams) Russell (Williams) Schumacher (Haas) Mazepin (Haas) Oh my days! Not words one expects to see at the start of sporting coverage, but here we are: it’s already been a ridiculous weekend in a ridiculous season, such that we await the actual race already ensconced in a state of disbelief. Max Verstappen, who leads the driver standings by 21 points from Lewis Hamilton, starts second on the grid, and ordinarily, he’d be confident of making it home in front of his rival – most likely, having won the race too. But Hamilton’s qualifying run yesterday, that took him from 20th to fifth, showcased every aspect of the genius that will surely see him finish his career as the greatest of all-time, and whatever Verstappen tells himself to feel better, he knows that the hunt is on. That said, Verstappen will also know that if he drives well today, it’ll take something monumental to beat him. A new engine penalty means Hmailton starts in 10th, and though 71 laps gives decent scope for overtaking, Verstappen is good enough to look after himself. This going to be something. Lights out: 2pm local, 5pm GMTFor 60 minutes a first Welsh defeat to Fiji since 2007 looked on the cards as Wayne Pivac’s side huffed and puffed against 14 men. Wales, frankly, were awful for large parts. That they came out on top to record a first win in the autumn was down to a late salvo which saw them score three tries in the final quarter through Alex Cuthbert, Louis Rees-Zammit and Liam Williams. Rees-Zammit’s effort clinched the game as he showed his trademark pace. It was a stunning effort. Fiji’s Eroni Sau was red carded in the 25th minute for a dangerous tackle to the head of the Wales centre Johnny Williams, but the home side struggled badly even with a man advantage. Fiji smashed Wales to bits at the contact area. Pivac’s attack was rudderless and lacked direction. It was a relief then for a strong Cardiff crowd when Rees-Zammit put the game to bed. “You can’t coach express pace and I’m really, really pleased for Louis. It was a moment of individual brilliance,” Pivac said. “Fiji threw everything at us when they went down a man. They had everything to gain and nothing to lose. The big problem for us for the first 60 minutes was the breakdown.” Wales’ preparation for the game could hardly have been worse. Prop Tomas Francis withdrew on the morning of the game after failing to recover from a concussion. Josh Adams then injured a calf in the warm-up. WillGriff John and Nick Tompkins stepped in, but John was forced off after just seven minutes for a head injury assessment. By then, Wales were already behind, Waisea Nayacalevu having taken just four minutes to open the scoring. Ben Volavola converted and kicked two penalties either side of Wales hitting back when the impressive hooker, Ryan Elias, was driven over from a lineout maul. The game changed when Sau saw red. He had already tackled Williams to the floor when he went in for a second hit and caught the Welshman. The referee, Nic Berry, consulted his TMO, Stuart Terheege, and initially seemed to suggest he would have been happy with a yellow card, but there was no other option than to show red. Fiji were reduced to 13 men when London Irish’s Albert Tuisue received a yellow card. Kieran Hardy promptly sniped over from a scrum and Wales thought they had grabbed a third try when Dan Biggar cross-kicked to Rees-Zammit, whose pace took him to the line. Berry and Terheege ruled out the score for Rees-Zammit being in touch in the buildup as he flicked a Fiji kick back into play. Wales were lucky to be ahead at the break, but Volavola landed a long-range penalty after half-time. Wales were all at sea. They had no direction, little ambition, and no platform to play off. Even a man light, Fiji showed them how it should be done. Setariki Tuicuvu took a poor Biggar kick, marked it inside his own 22, and set off on a careering run down the left. Vilimoni Botitu was in support and he then found Nayacalevu at full pelt. Nayacalevu beat the covering Liam Williams into the corner and Volavola nailed the touchline kick. An upset looked likely, but Fiji’s Eroni Mawi saw yellow for repeated infringements from his team. Wales took advantage with Elias being driven over for his second try before Cuthbert produced a memorable finish in the corner for his first international try since 2017. Rees-Zammit then stepped up. Picking up possession inside his own half, he kicked ahead with his weaker left foot. There were plenty of covering Fiji defenders, but Rees-Zammit’s turn of foot was extraordinary. He was first to the ball against all the odds and just got downward pressure before it went dead. There was still time for Liam Williams to put gloss on the scoreline after Tompkins scythed through midfield. Fiji’s Welsh head coach, Gareth Baber, said: “Discipline cost us the game. One of our players had a rush of blood.”Boris Johnson has said it was disappointing that China and India had watered down the Cop26 climate agreement, but claimed there was little difference between “phasing out” and “phasing down” coal usage. The prime minister declared the summit in Glasgow a historic success, rating it “more than 6/10”, but acknowledged his “delight at this progress is tinged with disappointment”. He said some countries had not been willing to “go there” to reach a high level of ambition at the summit, frustrating those from vulnerable island nations “for whom climate change is already a matter of life and death”. “We can lobby, we can cajole, we can encourage, but we cannot force sovereign nations to do what they do not wish to do,” he said. “It’s ultimately their decision to make and they must stand by it.” Labour quickly accused him of “overspinning” the summit’s achievements as he claimed there was really not much difference between the aim of getting an agreement to “phase out” coal and the actual text of “phasing down”. “It doesn’t seem to me as a speaker of English to make that much difference,” he said. The prime minister also praised India for having “come up with some really impressive stuff” on reducing emissions in the power sector by 2030 and said it was not necessary to include climate targets in any bilateral trade deal between London and Delhi. The Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, , was on the verge of tears after the summit ended on Sunday with a watered down version of the coal pledge. He joined Johnson in sounding a more upbeat tone later in the day, however, when he said he had been emotional after little sleep, relieved at reaching a deal and disappointed at the opacity of the process. Speaking alongside the prime minister at a Downing Street press conference, Sharma said: “We set out by saying we wanted to keep 1.5C within reach. We did do that.” He said he had been told he would never get an agreement on any language around coal and regarded it as a success that it was mentioned at all. “There was one really tense hour where I did feel the weight of the world on my shoulders,” he said. “This deal was in jeopardy.” Sharma had said earlier that China and India were “going to have to explain themselves to the most climate vulnerable countries in the world”. The shadow business and climate change secretary, Ed Miliband, said that after the summit “keeping 1.5C alive is frankly in intensive care”, with a “chasm” between what was agreed in Glasgow and what still needed to be done to slash emissions. “This was a classic Boris Johnson performance, overspinning and underdelivering,” he said. “This summit made modest progress, but the prime minister overselling what it achieved serves nobody.” The UN’s climate change chief, Patricia Espinosa, said the goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels was still “definitely alive”. The final agreement, after two weeks of negotiations, also secured a deal on finalising key parts of the “Paris rulebook” on how to count emissions. A roadmap was also drawn up for future revisions to commitments on cutting emissions.At one point, newly introduced Bel (Thaddea Graham) said: “I’ve no idea what that means, but it doesn’t sound good,” and it seemed she might be speaking about the episode as a whole. After last week’s fun romp with the Sontarans, this was a frustrating reversion to the mean of the Chibnall era. It looked good, but it was more a disjointed series of exposition scenes rather than a story that flowed. It was definitely the weakest chapter of Flux so far. On the plus side, we began to get some answers – and a look at the Doctor’s history with the Division and a mission on the planet Time, which had been hinted at by Swarm in the previous two chapters. (That said, it might have been more fun to see the Fugitive Doctor (Jo Martin) and Karnavista (Craige Els) let rip in those scenes rather than occasionally flickering into view.) Martin absolutely rocked it as the Doctor in Fugitive of the Judoon and has been desperately underused since. I appreciate that the series was filmed under Covid restrictions, but an awful lot of the chapter seemed to consist of one actor standing on one set giving a monologue about what was happening. While you would miss out on some of the nice space visuals and the unexpected sight of Daleks floating through a forest, Once, Upon Time would work as an audiobook without much alteration. That is surely a flaw in a television episode. Despite all that, it picked up in the last 10 minutes, setting up a couple of quests and more mysteries. If you were halfway through watching a movie – which I guess this is – we would be just at the point in the middle where everything seems hopeless. Sum it up in once sentence The regular cast are lost and confused as we learn a bit more about the Division’s ancient battle with Swarm and Azure. Life aboard the Tardis Vinder (Jacob Anderson) got his moment to enter the Tardis for the first time. Curiously, he already knew what one was (so we didn’t get “it’s bigger on the inside!”). We now find that he has been exiled for trying to be a galactic whistleblower and that his messages to loved ones were being sent to Bel. She is pregnant. We don’t know if he knows. Relations between Yaz (Mandip Gill) and the Doctor (Jodie Whittaker) were more fraught than ever – with some sharp words between them as the Doctor continued on what seems to be a one-woman mission to uncover her past. We didn’t get much more backstory to Dan (John Bishop), although we will presumably find out next week how he copes with loss. Fear factor They might have been in the trailer, but that barely counted as a cameo by the Cybermen. Weeping Angels were also used sparingly in this episode – but to much greater effect. I found the idea of a hidden Angel creeping up on Yaz via the mirrors on her police patrol car a nice twist on their usual approach. Some younger viewers will surely be a little disturbed at the idea Angels can get at you from a video game, especially if you have to smash up your precious console to save yourself. Sam Spruell’s Swarm had positively swaggered his way through the opening two chapters – he is easily one of the best “big bads” we have had in recent years on Doctor Who, absolutely relishing being evil for evil’s sake. I couldn’t say the same for Matthew Needham in the role of Old Swarm in the flashbacks, so it was a relief to get some of Spruell at the end. Rochendra Sandall didn’t have much to do as Azure, but did it as deliciously as ever. Mysteries and questions I enjoyed your theories below the line last week very much. Some thought the Mouri might turn out to be a Weeping Angels origin story – quantum-locked, linked to time? There had also been speculation Passenger might turn out to be housing Dan’s would-be girlfriend, Di (Nadia Albina), although older familiar faces (Sacha Dhawan? Timothy Dalton?) were bandied about. Now we know. Steve Oram’s Joseph Williamson again made a brief, but perplexing, appearance. There didn’t seem any logic to him being in the Temple of Atropos last week; in his one scene this week, he had a ray gun in the 1820s. He speaks as if he has leaked from an episode written by Mark Gatiss – a constant jumble of words showing off the writer’s 19th-century vocabulary. I am not sure my kids have understood a single sentence he has uttered. Lupari must live for a very long time as a species if Karnavista was knocking about with the Doctor in the Division. The fact that it was a multi-species team on the mission also poses a question: is the Division even really a Time Lord organisation? Or something else that sometimes employs Time Lords? Barbara Flynn also made her first appearance as Awsok, the mysterious woman who seemed to give the impression she was running the universe – theories? Deeper into the vortex The final words from the Doctor were “The Angel has the Tardis” – an obvious nod to “The Angels have the phone box” from Blink, a line good enough to go on a range of T-shirts. Jodie Whittaker was wearing her reversed coat costume in the scenes where she was placed into the Fugitive Doctor’s memories. CGI Daleks floating through a forest rather avoids the historical problem of getting the props to work on rough terrain. We first saw a Dalek levitate up some stairs unassisted for sure in 1988’s Remembrance of the Daleks, although a gravitational disk had been used by the deadly pepperpots to fly in 1973’s Planet of the Daleks – and you could argue we saw one levitate out of the sand of the desert planet Aridius as early as 1965 in The Chase. In other news, fans of vintage Doctor Who can enjoy a new version of the lost William Hartnell story Galaxy Four on DVD and Blu-ray from tomorrow (15 November). The soundtrack has been turned into a cartoon and the release includes remastered versions of the surviving one and a bit episodes. It is nice to see the Hartnell era getting some love in these animated releases. Presumably now that they have Vicki, Steven and the first Doctor drawn, animations of the other – gulp! – 25 missing episodes from the original season three will be easier to make. Next time Next week it is chapter four: Village of the Angels. Co-written by Maxine Alderton, who wrote last season’s excellent The Haunting of Villa Diodati, I have very high hopes for this – and for the re-appearance of Annabel Scholey’s intriguing Claire.People are dying in the back of ambulances and up to 160,000 more a year are coming to harm because they are stuck outside hospitals unable to be offloaded to A&amp;E, a bombshell report has revealed. Patients are also dying soon after finally getting admitted to hospital after spending long periods in the back of an ambulance, while others still in their own homes are not being saved because paramedics are trapped at A&amp;E and unable to answer 999 calls, said the report by NHS ambulance service bosses in England. In addition, about 12,000 of the 160,000 are suffering “severe harm” such as a permanent setback to their health. These include people with life-threatening health emergencies such as chest pains, sepsis, heart problems, epilepsy and Covid-19 because growing numbers of paramedics are having to wait increasingly long times to hand over a patient to A&amp;E staff. Ambulance logjams outside hospitals have become a major problem in the NHS in recent years as A&amp;E staff have struggled to find beds for patients they have decided to admit because the hospital has run out of beds as a result of Covid-19, their inability to discharge patients who are medically fit to leave and the record demand for care. That has left A&amp;E personnel having to limit the number of patients who can be in their unit at one time, which leads to sometimes long queues of ambulances outside. The problem has become much more serious in recent months as all NHS services have seen unprecedented demand for care. Labour and the Liberal Democrats said the “staggering” extent of damage to patients’ health underlined the risks posed by the deepening crisis facing NHS ambulance services. The report, seen by the Guardian, has been drawn up by the Association of Ambulance Chief Executives (AACE) and is based on official NHS figures, which until now were secret. AACE represents the chief executives of England’s 10 regional ambulance services, all of which have had to declare an alert in recent months after being faced with unprecedented demands for help. It concludes that: “When very sick patients arrive at hospital and then have to wait an excessive time for handover to emergency department clinicians to receive assessment and definitive care, it is entirely predictable and almost inevitable that some level of harm will arise. “This may take the form of a deteriorating medical or physical condition, or distress and anxiety, potentially affecting the outcome for patients and definitely creating a poor patient experience.” It does not say how many patients a year die because so many ambulances are stuck at hospitals. But it adds: “We know that some patients have sadly died whilst waiting outside ED [emergency departments], or shortly after eventual admission to ED following a wait. Others have died while waiting for an ambulance response in the community. “Regardless of whether a death may have been an inevitable outcome, this is not the level of care or experience we would wish for anyone in their last moments. Any form or level of harm is not acceptable.” AACE studied all handover delays lasting more than an hour that occurred across the 10 ambulance trusts on 4 January, and the harm resulting. It used the data to estimate how many patients a year suffer a deterioration in their health, or need much more invasive treatment such as surgery, as a direct result of waiting a long time to be treated by doctors and nurses. It concluded that: “If these results from 4 January 2021, which was not an atypical day, are extrapolated across all handover delays that occur every day, the cases of potential harm could be as high as 160,000 patients affected a year. “Of those, approximately 12,000 patients could potentially experience severe harm as a result of delayed handovers.” Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, said: “These staggering figures will shock people to their core. These are absolutely devastating findings, which reveal that there is a huge toll of harm and severe harm, including tragically patient deaths, as a direct result of the colossal number of ambulance handover delays we’re now seeing.” Ambulances are meant to hand patients over to A&amp;E staff within 15 minutes, with none waiting more than half an hour. However, queues of as many as 15 ambulances at a time have been building up outside hospitals in recent years because hard-pressed staff have been too busy to accept them. Last month the West Midlands ambulance service admitted publicly that handover delays were causing “catastrophic” harm to patients. Mark Docherty, its nursing director, said that despite its best efforts “we know patients are coming to harm” and that some patients “are dying before we get to them”. Pressure on its ambulances forced the service to raise the risk assessment of harm to patients from level 20 to level 25 – the highest ever. “The definition of 25 is that harm is almost certain – and it’s going to be catastrophic. I think we’re now at that place,” Docherty added. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “This is a devastating report. The scale of harm and severe harm being done to patients is a scandal. “Ministers should be ashamed that colossal numbers of patients – thanks to years of Tory NHS neglect – are languishing in ambulances waiting for vital life-saving care at risk of, and indeed suffering, serious harm, permanent disability or loss of life.” Hospitals are under such pressure that about 190,000 handovers a month – around half the total – now take longer than they should, AACE’s report said. Paramedics have been warning that patients whose health has collapsed in their home or another setting have also been put at risk because being trapped outside A&amp;Es means they are not available to respond quickly to 999 calls. A series of recent incidents illustrate the crisis confronting ambulance services: A patient died after spending about an hour in an ambulance outside Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge on 24 October. The patient had suffered a cardiac arrest. The hospital said the patient had “remained in the ambulance due to significant pressures on A&amp;E”. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, last week apologised for the “agony” endured by the family of Richard Brown, who died on the stairs outside his flat in Glasgow after waiting five hours for an ambulance A patient died of a cardiac arrest in Worcestershire royal hospital in Worcester on 4 October after waiting five hours in an ambulance outside. Paramedics warned A&amp;E staff the patient was having trouble breathing but the patient died despite being rushed into the resuscitation room. A woman died in eastern England last month after waiting an hour for an ambulance crew to reach her on what should have been a seven-minute response. No crews were available in the 50 miles between Cromer and Waveney in Norfolk, so an ambulance from Ipswich in Suffolk had to answer the 999 call. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting ambulance crews who work tirelessly responding to emergencies every day. NHS England and Improvement has given ambulance trusts an extra £55m to boost staff numbers for winter, helping them to bolster capacity in control rooms and on the frontline. “We are supporting the NHS to meet the unprecedented pressures it is facing, with record investment this year including an extra £5.4bn over the next six months to support its response to Covid-19 and £36bn for health and care over the next three years.”India and China will “have to explain themselves to poor nations” after watering down the Glasgow climate pact, warned the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, adding that their actions had left him “deeply frustrated”. He told the Guardian: “We are on the way to consigning coal to history. This is an agreement we can build on. But in the case of China and India, they will have to explain to climate-vulnerable countries why they did what they did.” Boris Johnson, the prime minister, also said the Glasgow deal, even with the weaker wording, “sounded the death knell for coal power”. He told a press conference in Downing Street on Sunday: “The conference marked the beginning of the end for coal. For the first time ever, the conference published a mandate to cut the use of coal power.” In the closing stages of the Cop26 summit, Sharma told the Guardian he feared that the deal would be lost when China and India – both heavily dependent on coal power – attempted to reopen the text of the deal by objecting to a commitment to “phase out” coal. They proposed instead the slightly weaker “phase down”, which implies that they could still carry on using coal in some way. The commitment, contained in the “cover decision” from the Cop26 summit, does not attach any deadline to the use of coal, but is regarded as significant as it marks the first time such a resolution has been agreed by a UN climate conference. Sharma accepted the compromise, he said, because “it was my view that otherwise we might end up with no deal at all. We would have lost two years of really hard work, and would have ended up with nothing to show for it for developing countries.” At the Cop26 summit, the UK as host nation set the goal of “keeping 1.5C alive”, meaning setting a roadmap for the world to cut greenhouse gas emissions by the 45% by 2030 that scientists say is needed to cap global temperature rises at 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. That threshold marks the limit of safety, beyond which the impacts of the climate crisis, such as heatwaves, floods, droughts and sea level rises, are likely to become catastrophic and irreversible. The national plans on emissions set out at the conference would take the world to about 2.4C of heating, according to an analysis presented in Glasgow, but that was expected before the summit began. “People who know Cops say they are not about one big bang solution to climate change, they are a building block,” said Sharma. At the summit, nations agreed to return next year to revise their national targets in line with the 1.5C goal, which was regarded by most countries as a good outcome. Johnson acknowledged that his “delight at this progress is tinged with disappointment”. He said some countries were not willing to “go there” to a high level of ambition at the summit, frustrating “those for whom climate change is already a matter of life and death” from vulnerable island nations. “We can lobby, we can cajole, we can encourage, but we cannot force sovereign nations to do what they do not wish to do,” he said. “It’s ultimately their decision to make and they must stand by it.” Sharma told the Guardian, speaking from the train as he returned to London, that he was told during the conference that the commitment he wanted on coal was “never going to get in” the final outcome, so having the commitment present even with watered down language was “important”. “It wasn’t quite the wording I wanted, but I have been saying for quite some time I want us to consign coal to history [at this Cop]; therefore having this wording about coal is incredibly important,” he said. Other experts agreed that the “Glasgow package” sent a strong message on coal around the world. Nicholas Stern, the peer and climate economist, said: “The last-minute watering down of this statement is unfortunate but is unlikely to slow down a strong momentum past coal, a dirty fuel of an earlier era.” John Kerry, the UN climate envoy, was also visibly annoyed, telling journalists afterwards: “Did I appreciate we had to adjust one thing tonight in a very unusual way? No. But if we hadn’t done that, we wouldn’t have a deal. I’ll take ‘phase it down’ and take the fight into next year. Developing countries told the Guardian the deal reached in Glasgow was “imperfect” but that it contained many good elements. Milagros de Camps, the deputy environment minister of the Dominican Republic, a member of the Alliance of Small Island States, said: “Although this is far from a perfect text, we have taken important steps forward in our efforts to keep 1.5 alive and deliver the much-needed outcomes on adaptation. We acknowledge it was not an easy task.” But she said a key developing country demand, for finance to address the “loss and damage” that poor countries have suffered from the impacts of the climate crisis, had not been met. “Instead, what we got was a ‘dialogue’. How is this climate justice?” Tina Stege, the climate envoy for the Marshall Islands, which chairs the High Ambition Coalition of developed and developing countries at the talks, praised the deal for delivering a doubling of the finance available for poor countries to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis. “Countries like mine have to fight for every outcome we get. We did that on adaptation financing, and securing that commitment to double adaptation finance took a huge effort. A year ago many developed countries I spoke to really didn’t understand, I think, why this dominated every speech, meeting, interview by many Pacific Island leaders – we just couldn’t let it go. And in the end we didn’t. I hope that aspect of the package gets the attention it deserves, because it really will provide a lifeline for so many people around the world.” Some developing country observers were less positive. Mohamed Adow, the director of the Power Shift Africa thinktank in Nairobi, said: “Sadly, this wasn’t a good Cop for developing countries. It was a developed country Cop that reflected developed countries’ priorities.” Saleemul Huq, the director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development in Bangladesh, accused the UK of failing to ensure strong provisions for loss and damage made it into the final text: “This was absolutely unacceptable as a process for arriving at a decision and has made the Cop outcomes a death sentence for the most vulnerable communities in the most vulnerable developing countries.”Which means another Strictly week is over – thank you for joining in, and please come back at 6.35pm next week for MUSICALS WEEK. Is it me, or does the Strictly start time get earlier every week? If it carries on like this we’ll be watching the Grand Final over lunch. ANYWAY, please come back. In the meantime you can find me on Twitter/Insta at @heidistephens, on BBC iPlayer, in a good bookshop near you, or watching JLS at the O2 on Friday night. I’ll send Aston your love. Have a great week! Which means SARA AND ALJAZ are leaving Strictly! I’ll miss Sarah’s sheer determination and Aljaz’s mesh vest and leather harness combo. Sara describes her Strictly journey as ‘a life-changing experience’ and I get the impression that it really has been for her. Aljaz makes a full Oscar acceptance speech, and I kind of love him for it. They take to the floor to dance their final dance, to ‘You Make My Dreams Come True. by Hall &amp; Oates. I miss the contestant pile-on at the end. Judging time! In a dramatic plot twist, all the judges decide to save Tilly and Nikita, like yesterday’s scoring never happened. Twenty-four hours* is a long time on Planet Strictly. I’m not saying it’s the wrong decision, but it kind of makes a nonsense of yesterday’s scores. *actually about an hour and a half. Sara’s next, once again dancing a Disco Argentine that really didn’t work for me (or the public, by the looks of it). But it worked for the judges, and they’re the ones that get to decide who stays and who goes. Plenty of attack from Sara too second time round - I’m pretty sure she’s done enough. Tilly’s up first, dancing their Quickstep from last night that I can remember absolutely nothing about. I think that may be the problem for Tilly – in a year with a handful of couples who are shining bright, everyone else feels a bit like they’re making up the numbers. Also Tilly’s a great dancer, but she’s inconsistent – her Cha Cha a few weeks ago feels like it was danced by a completely different woman. That said, Tilly isn’t going down without a fight. Feel like there’s definitely more energy this time round. It’s Musicals Week next week, which is a lot like Movie Week but with fewer couples and more superfluous backing dancers. I CAN’T WAIT. Mostly because I now know that Kai is going to be the Captain Von Trapp to AJ’s Maria. So if last night’s scoring is anything to go by, Sara (4th on the leaderboard) should easily have the edge over Tilly (7th on the leaderboard) in this week’s dance-off. But worth noting that the public has once again saved Dan and Tom (and AJ, although that’s no great surprise) at Sara’s expense. But since the judges’ scoring last night was largely erratic and inconsistent, I’m not sure we can judge the public for doing whatever the hell they like. So who is joining Sara and Aljaz in the dance off? Tom and Amy are safe, along with John and Johannes and AJ and Kai. Phew! That was BRUTAL, Strictly. Which means TILLY AND NIKITA in the dance off. Apparently Anton judges Dan against himself. Perhaps we could try judging him against everyone else, like...everyone else? Particularly at this stage in the competition. All I want is consistency - it doesn’t feel like a big ask really. Grumble over. To mark Remembrance Day, the Strictly crew have gone to the Defence Medical Rehabilitation Centre at Stanford Hall in Leicestershire. They do incredible work. Incidentally, if you don’t follow James Blunt (@JamesBlunt) on Twitter you absolutely should. He’s very funny. His bio reads ‘proof that one song is all you need’, which always makes me laugh. Lovely dancing from Luba and Graziano. I know JB isn’t everyone’s cup of tea, but I actually really enjoyed that. This week’s performance is courtesy of mid-noughties Chris De Burgh tribute act James Blunt. He’s singing his other hit ‘Goodbye My Lover’, which will always make me think of Uncle Bryn on Gavin and Stacey. Come on James, sing the one about the wise men and the sea. Very excited that Rose and Gio are dancing to ‘Love Is An Open Door’ from Frozen next week. I’m sure Gio will make a lovely Prince Hans, but I kind of want him to be Olaf. So who is safely through to MUSICALS WEEK next Saturday? Rose and Giovanni are safe, along with Rhys and Nancy and Dan and Nadiya. First couple in the bottom two: SARA AND ALJAZ. Ooh, didn’t think that was going to happen. They were fourth on the leaderboard, who else has the public saved? Last night on Strictly: a hot mess of suspect costumes, wild scoring and mid-season madness. Highlights: Motsi in a dress that could be seen from the International Space Station, Rhys discovering he was born to Charleston, and Rose and Giovanni’s stunning Couple’s Choice. Possibly the most powerful and captivating dance in Strictly history, and it was such a privilege to watch it live. Lowlights: undermarking, overmarking, wombling free. Both in sober black - Tess in a pantsuit, Claud in a dress. Both stunning. How does Claud get her hair so glossy? It can’t be JUST Head &amp; Shoulders. And we’re off! Tonight’s opening pro dance is in honour of Remembrance Sunday, and as usual it’s heartfelt and beautiful. If you’re reading this later and missed this dance, watch it on iPlayer or YouTube. It’s quite special. Extra round of applause for the Tommy Blaize rendition of You’ll Never Walk Alone. Evening all, and welcome back to tonight’s Results show! Last night was something of a rollercoaster of emotions, from the WHY? To the WTF? To the OMG! So tonight’s show is going to be an interesting one – are we in for a massive upset? If the panic AJ voting from last night is anything to go by, I’d say probably not – but I’m definitely not counting my glitter chickens just yet. See you at 7.20pm! Thank you all for joining in tonight, you bring joy to the comment box and sunshine to my weekend. I’m off to read all your comments (I’m expecting them to be QUITE spicy), and I’ll be back tomorrow at 7.20pm for the Results Show. Please join me then, and let me know in the comments below who you think is heading home this week. Enjoy the rest of your Saturday! Hx Can you imagine if there’s an AJ/Dan dance-off and the judges save Dan? I think it’s more likely that the public will save both of them and it will be a Tilly/Tom dance off. A very odd show this week - some strange music choices, slightly unhinged scoring and plenty of unexpected twists. Maybe the nation has accepted the inevitability of an AJ/John/Rose Grand Final and the BBC has decided to create some chaos. So, what did we all make of that? We’ve ended up with Rhys and Nancy at the top of the leaderboard and AJ and Kai at the bottom. I’m not sure ANY of us would have predicted that. Time to cast your vote! Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for Rose and Giovanni. Motsi thought it was a beautiful and a real moment. Shirley stands up out of respect, and she congratulates Rose for sharing her heart and soul. Anton thought it was the greatest thing he’s ever seen on Strictly. Craig thought there were a couple of technical issues but it was FAB-U-LUSS. Goodness, bit dusty in here. Rose is a beautiful dancer and this is such an uplifting and joyful piece of choreography. Love the section in the middle with no music - an incredible representation of what it’s like to dance in Rose’s world. It’s a love story - for dance, for expression, and for living your best life. A real Strictly moment. This week they’re dancing Couple’s Choice to ‘Symphony’ by Clean Bandit featuring Zara Larsson. I think this has been one of my favourite Strictly journeys ever, and I’m fully expecting Rose and Giovanni to take it all the way to the Glitterball. An extraordinary partnership, and I feel like it’s brought out something special in them both. I still think Couple’s Choice should be fired into the sun, but I suspect this one might be something a bit special. Scores: 7,8,7,8 - a total of 30 for Tom and Amy. Only Rose and Giovanni to go! Craig thought it was a bit snatch and grab, but he liked the realness and it was unusual. I think he said he liked the street elements, but maybe I misheard that - is Street Viennese a thing? Meanwhile Motsi liked the specialness of Tom and Amy’s speciality, it makes them special. Shirley liked the flow but there was some suspect footwork. Anton thought it was generally good but it wasn’t big and bold enough for the music - he wanted more power. It was...nice. Well this...nice? Tim has lovely footwork and very elegant arm work, but I’d have loved a little more storytelling and connection between these two. It just feels like a thing that happened, I can’t really get excited about it. Has it been a weird week? It feels like a weird week. This week they’re dancing the Viennese Waltz to ‘Iris’ by Goo Goo Dolls. I feel like this is a Strictly Waltz standard, but I can’t find any evidence of it being used since Jason Donovan. Maybe it just lives in my head, like the essence of Radio 2. Scores: 9,10,10,9 - a total of 38 for John and Johannes. Anton thought it was amazing, but John’s shoulders drop a bit far back. Craig agrees, John sits back too much but the energy was incredible. Motsi wanted to be at John and Johannes’ party, and she loved the connection between them. Shirley loved the combination of weight, time, energy and space, which is all you need for a dance like this. The Strictly cafe table and chairs have been sprayed yellow, and John is giving it full Samba shimmy. He’s got great hip action and as usual his timing is impeccable. I could watch these two dance all day long, and it’s great to see John showing us a bit of party abandon. Really enjoyed that. This week they’re dancing the Samba to Acuyuye by DLG. This is a proper no-holds-barred Samba track, and I’m very much hoping this is going to be the brilliant party Samba we’ve been waiting for. Just to lay that Greg Wise spectre to rest, if nothing else. Scores: 7,8,8,9 - a total of 32 for Sara and Aljaz. Shirley thought it was atmospheric and she loved the passion, but it needed to be looser in the legs. Anton loved how clean it was, and the timing was great - a good job. Craig agreed with Shirley on the over-stiff legs but it had attack, drive and drama. Motsi loved the energy and Sara left her heart on the dancefloor. Sara is emoting next to a giant disco ball, and I suspect that her lovelife is boring her to tears. Enough is definitely enough. Quite difficult to see Sara’s feet in the ankle fog, but to me the music is hampering the changes of tempo you’d normally expect to see in an Argentine. There’s no tension and there are definitely some timing and balance issues. Didn’t love that, sorry. This week they’re dancing Argentine Tango to ‘No More Tears (Enough is Enough)’ by Donna Summer and Barbara Streisand. I’m always a bit nervous about Argentine Tangos performed to non-traditional music, and the prospect of this disco ballad-into-banger is making me feel a bit itchy. That said, Sara is at her happiest and best when she’s velcro-ed to Aljaz (and who can blame her), so maybe this will be amazing. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - full marks for Rhys and Nancy. Right now, I’m feeling like Tilly is in trouble. Motsi thought it was the Charleston of the season, like AJ and Kai last week never happened. Shirley has never seen a Charleston like that and it was astounding. Anton thought Rhys smashed the place up, it was unbelievable. Craig thought it was A-MAY-ZING. A week is a very long time on Planet Strictly, isn’t it? Rhys’s stripey suit and boater is supposed to be Henley Regatta, but instead it’s giving me Dick Van Dyke in Mary Poppins vibes - he just needs some dancing penguins. Great performance from Rhys here and his timing is impeccable - not wholly tidy in the details but definitely an energetic showstopper. Loved that - I think Rhys has found his thing? This week they’re dancing the Charleston to ‘The Charleston’ by Bob Wilson and his Varsity Rhythm Boys. Not sure it’s possible to have a song choice that’s more appropriate for a Charleston, so let’s see if Rhys and Nancy can do it justice. Rhys has the natural exuberance for this dance, if he can just keep his limbs controlled and those swivels precise. Scores: 4,8,8,9 - a total of 29 for Dan and Nadiya. The scoring is off the rails this evening. Craig thought it lacked feeling and style and it had no swing and sway, but Motsi thought it was Dan’s best dance so far. Shirley loved it, and Dan is representing all the men who have never danced before. Anton wanted Dan the man but got Dan the dancer, and his hold was amazing. This is going to get megascores, isn’t it? King Of The Road is quite a ploddy song, isn’t it? A bit pedestrian, kind of like this American Smooth. I have a bit of a soft spot for Dan and he’s come a long way since Week 1, but he struggles with transitions and that final lift looked perilous. Not enough style for a smooth. Also why wear ballroom tails for Country and Western? It’s just odd. Oh, Shirley’s on her feet. Whatever. This week they’re dancing the American Smooth to ‘King of the Road’ by The Proclaimers (or originally by Roger Miller, if we’re being nit-picky). Dan is unquestionably the weakest dancer left in the competition now, but he’s also this year’s People’s Choice, so I’m not counting him out just yet. Especially after the first two sets of scores. Scores: 6,7,7,8 - a total of 28 for AJ and Kai. EEK. Anton thought it was a strong performance, but she needs to work on her levels of tension as she tends to get a bit stiff *DO NOT MAKE CHEAP KAI JOKE HERE*. Craig thought it looked pedestrian in the walks and it needed more Spanish line, he was disappointed. Motsi loved the suspense and the passion but it wasn’t a good dance for AJ. Shirley loved the beginning and the end but there wasn’t enough flamenco for her liking. Ooh, this is intense, and I’m transfixed by AJ’s sparkly merkin. Lovely staccato footwork from AJ and some nice armography too. No idea if that was a good Paso from a technical standpoint, but I really enjoyed it either way. This week they’re dancing the Paso Doble to ‘Game of Survival’ by Ruelle. Ooh, this is going to be good, isn’t it? If anyone can give us a powerful Paso, it’s these two. I want PASSION and FIRE and absolutely NO POLITENESS WHATSOEVER. Loving AJ’s mum, she’s immense. You may have noticed that I never bother mentioning the Terms &amp; Conditions. No plans to change that any time soon. Scores: 7,7,7,8 - a total of 29 for Tilly and Nikita. Shirley thought Tilly did the Quickstep very well, but it looked a bit heavy in places and it was a bit out of sync. Anton thought Tilly’s frame has improved, but her spine needs to be tipped to the left. Craig thought it could have been lighter and the footwork was sloppy, but her personality came into its own. Motsi thought there were improvements but now Tilly needs to focus on the details. Goodness, this CGI set is busy. Another ugly outfit for Tilly, and most of the intro to this Quickstep is actually Charleston, which I know is A Thing but I don’t like it. She’s got a nice top line at the start, but her feet are turned in and her footwork looks a bit scrappy in places. Love the enthusiasm, but this feels under-rehearsed to me. Not Tilly’s best week, I don’t think. Tonight they’re dancing the Quickstep to ‘I Won’t Dance’ by Damita Jo. I mean, you probably should, Tilly, now isn’t the time to throw in the towel. Last week’s Paso put Tilly in the dance-off, so she needs to rediscover her mojo with this Quickstep. Out come the judges! Loving Motsi in eye-watering neon yellow. Out come the stars! Highlights include Dan in a dapper suit, John and Johannes in shirts made from early 90s ethnic-print curtains, and Giovanni in institutional grey pyjamas. Tess in wet-look pleather body armour, Claudia in cutesy red polka-dots and white stilettos. Weird. And we’re off! The pressure continues to grow, and everyone’s upping their game because nobody wants to go home. They’re all pushing each other, which is probably not advisable in a pandemic. Just saying. It’s a Tess and Claud special tonight – take a swig of something sparkly and fabulous for any occurrence of the following: Black sequins Assymetric hems Look at their little faces They’re on their feet Early mentions of Musicals Week It’s getting tough to separate out the pack now – I think Rose, AJ and John would have to have a seriously duff week to end up in the bottom two, but any of the others could be going home tomorrow. The competition’s getting fierce, but I’ve put Rhys in the bottom two with Dan because he’s never quite lived up to his early potential, and his Charleston could go either way. But I’d probably say the same about Sara’s disco Argentine, so we’ll have to wait and see. Group 1: one eye on the final – Rose and Giovanni, AJ and Kai, John and Johannes Group 2: hot on their heel leads – Tilly and Nikita, Tom and Amy, Sara and Aljaz Group 4: dodging the dance-off – Dan and Nadiya, Rhys and Nancy In shameless self-promotion news, if you’re a fan of this (or any other) liveblog, you might be interested in my bit on Radio 4’s Front Row on Thursday, where I talked about ‘the art of the liveblog’. Yes, it’s officially an art form, because Radio 4 says so. I don’t make the rules. I’m the last ten minutes, although the rest of it is actually really interesting. Also the people at Radio 4 are delightful and made me very welcome despite me being a cultural wasteland and making the place look untidy. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly liveblog! We’ve made it to Week 8 (well done everyone), and only eight couples remain – usually at this point we’d be getting ready for Blackpool next week, but the coach trip has been cancelled for the second year. But no matter, because Strictly is doing Musicals next Saturday instead, a week earlier than usual. Kick off tonight is at 6.40pm, so please gather your family and gird your loins for another rainbow glitter explosion. The wine is chilling, the snacks are ready and the comment box is open – let’s do this thing, shall we?Good morning. Around the world, people mourn the failure of Cop26. Australian taxpayers are paying at least $59m for government advertising campaigns in the lead-up to elections. And the start of a new series on Australian housing. The Glasgow climate package, aimed at ensuring the world limits global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, was acknowledged even by the UK hosts as “imperfect”, and leaves much of the hard work on cutting greenhouse gas emissions for next year. These are the main points in the text, highlighting that current national plans on cutting emissions are inadequate and that language on phasing out coal is weak. The United States climate envoy John Kerry said this agreement will bring the world closer than it has ever been to the goal of limiting temperature rises to 1.5C while Guardian columnist George Monbiot called the deal a “suicide pact.” What does it mean for Australia? It is unclear whether Australia will respect the terms of the text, with senior minister Greg Hunt refusing to say if Australia under a Morrison government will update its 2030 emissions target as required under the Cop26 Glasgow agreement. Australian taxpayers are paying at least $59m for major government advertising campaigns to run in the lead-up to the 2022 election. The campaigns span the topics of cybercrime and online safety, the job trainer program, domestic violence, recruiting a carer workforce and, most controversially, climate change, as the government seeks to explain its road to Damascus conversation on the net zero by 2050 target. According to AusTender contracts and evidence to Senate estimates, the industry department spent a total of $12.9m excluding GST on the Positive Energy campaign, which ran from September in the lead-up to the Glasgow Cop26 climate talks. When Jade Seenarain and his wife Aideanna bought the plot for their home in Truganina in Melbourne’s west in 2015, the couple thought they were buying into a leafy, suburban dream. But three years after moving into their home, reality bears little resemblance to the life the Seenarains thought they would be living. “It’s a broken dream,” Seenarain says. In the first of a short series on Australian housing, Elias Visontay examines how Victoria’s planning system is failing residents and the environment. In Truganina, plans for a local school have been derailed, and plots of land still lie empty while residents wait for shops, services and infrastructure. Urban planning experts say it’s a common situation across the city’s outer suburbs. Australia The NSW government’s latest attempt to restructure how public transport assets are funded – through the establishment of the Transport Asset Holding Entity – has been labelled “cooking the books on a grand scale”. A parliamentary inquiry has heard allegations that treasury officials pressured transport figures and independent assessors who raised concerns about the financial and safety implications of the new body into reevaluating their findings. Governments must set a date for banning the sale of cigarettes through retailers, and find new ways of boosting revenue without relying on tobacco excise taxes, leading public health researchers say. The end to the National Affordability Rental Scheme could leave thousands at the whim of the private market. The Abbott government scrapped the scheme in 2014, grandfathering the homes already on it but not allowing new ones to join. That means that over the next three years, the vast majority of NRAS properties are going to lose their subsidy. The world Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, one of the sons of the former Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi, has confirmed that he will run for the presidency of Libya in elections due to start on 24 December. The Queen was absent from Remembrance Sunday commemorations after spraining her back, leaving other members of the royal family to honour the UK’s war dead in public. The monarch, 95, had been under doctor’s orders to rest for almost a month after spending a night in hospital in October. Confidence in Joe Biden continues to plunge amid a crisis over inflation and supply chain problems. In alarming news for the White House, only 41% of voters approved of Biden in a Washington Post/ABC survey published on Sunday, continuing a steady downward trend in the president’s ratings. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, has called for Nato to take “concrete steps” to solve the migrant crisis on Europe’s border as dozens of asylum seekers reportedly broke through Poland’s border defences with Belarus. Recommended reads In modern Australia, why must caring for your family come second to your work duties? Van Badham argues Australia should collect tax and disburse it through a variety of government-sponsored support for people’s caring commitments. “We could relieve families of intersecting economic, industrial and domestic pressure, simultaneously create local jobs, as well as hugely boost local productivity,” says Badham. Ahead of the season two premiere, the Australian screenwriter Tony McNamara explains his fresh, bawdy and wilfully anachronistic take on Catherine the Great. “I like the stakes of the era, the life and death stakes of the court world,” McNamara says. “I also like that they’re dealing with stuff we’re still freakin’ dealing with … We’re still dealing with privilege, and how to give people equality.” It’s Bondi Hipster Christiaan Van Vuuren, but not as you know him. Maddie Thomas asks what the comedian’s doing sniffing around the political arena in his debut docuseries Big Deal, which premiered on the ABC in October. “Across two one-hour episodes directed by political satire writer Craig Reucassel (The Chaser’s War on Everything, The Hamster Decides), Van Vuuren has some uncomfortable revelations as he follows the money trail in Australian politics: scrutinising the conduct of the fossil fuel, gun and gambling lobbies, as well as the political parties that lap up their gargantuan donations.” Listen When Adelaide United’s Josh Cavallo sat down to film his announcement to the world that he was coming out as gay, he didn’t know what to expect. Cavallo tells Michael Safi that the response has been overwhelming as messages of support have poured in from around the world and from fellow players such as Gerard Piqué, Marcus Rashford and Antoine Griezmann. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Australia has won their first T20 World Cup with an eight-wicket victory over New Zealand. They had promised to attack this game with bravery and aggression and their assault on a target of 173 left New Zealand punch drunk, with Mitch Marsh leading what amounted to a gleeful pile-on on a previously outstanding group of bowlers as his team raced to the finish line with seven balls to spare. The Wallabies face the ignominy of losing all of their Tests on a spring tour of Europe for the first time in the professional era if they do not address the ill-discipline which contributed so heavily to their defeats to Scotland and England, says Bret Harris. After a caning from French referee Romain Poite in their 15-13 loss to Scotland at Murrayfield two weeks ago, the Wallabies were penalised 18 to nine by South African referee Jaco Peyper in their 32-15 loss to England at Twickenham last Sunday morning. Media roundup The Chinese embassy in Canberra has lodged an official complaint with the Australian parliament about a speech made by Liberal senator James Paterson in which he accused Beijing of trying to divide democratic states, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. The ABC examines how vaccine mandates and lockdowns have become the ‘Trojan Horse’ of New Zealand’s far-right. And there are calls for Queensland to open its borders earlier than planned, according to the Courier-Mail. And if you’ve read this far … Learn about why snorers wake themselves up. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Australia’s relationship with Twenty20 international men’s cricket has always been strained. When Ricky Ponting captained the first ever match in 2005, with players in fancy dress wearing contrived nicknames on their shirts, even smoking an unbeaten 98 couldn’t stop him looking like an unimpressed cat unable to bring up a hairball. Influential people shared his disdain, but even after taking the format seriously, and developing one of the better domestic leagues, Australian teams in T20 World Cups fell flat. It was easy to dismiss the importance of the condensed form, but for a dominant Test power that also collected 50-over titles like stamps, the shortfall was a quiet irritation with no immediately apparent remedy. So when Australia rolled up to the 2021 tournament with what looked suspiciously like a Test team wearing a false moustache, it invited scepticism about their chances. It looked like another muddled approach from people who hadn’t come to grips with the format. Yet on the final night of the tournament, here they were, winning it with a Glenn Maxwell switch-hit and plenty of time to spare. No matter what tactical or data arguments can be made otherwise, this campaign has been proved right and those of us who questioned it are wrong. Primarily, it relied on a Test-hardened pace attack. Josh Hazlewood, Pat Cummins and Mitchell Starc played every match through the tournament, and in the final, just about did the job again. They suffocated New Zealand during the six overs of the powerplay, taking one wicket while conceding 32 runs. After parsimonious legspinner Adam Zampa bowled until halfway through the innings, the score was 57 for one. It was all but impossible for New Zealand to post a sufficient total from there. Hazlewood was once thought too predictable for the format, but has been a revelation recently by consistently hitting a hard length with steep bounce that is difficult to attack. He returned an astonishing three for 16, Cummins the exemplary economy of none for 27. The plan nearly came undone during two overs from Mitchell Starc, one costing 19 runs, the other 22. Hazlewood had a hand in that, having dropped a catch off the bat of Kane Williamson. To that point, Williamson had three runs from Starc. Afterwards, Williamson took him for 36. In three overs Starc bled 51 runs, and New Zealand were back in with a chance. All of this was amid Williamson producing one of the great innings in the format. A captain, in a final, unsupported, starting way behind a decent run-rate and having to catch up. After Daryl Mitchell was out early, Martin Guptill’s job was to keep his foot down while Williamson got the measure of the match. Instead, Guptill played with a timidity that belied his experience. However well they bowled, he made no attempt to take on Australia’s quicks. He lasted into the 12th over to finish with 28 from 35 balls, caught from his first big hit. Glenn Phillips followed with a stuttering 18 from 17. Considering that the finisher Jimmy Neesham saw only seven deliveries at the end, these strike-rate offences were criminal. Williamson is not supposed to be the fastest scorer in his team, but the one that bats through an innings. To compensate, he had to be both. The staid and steady skipper produced a one-handed sweep off Maxwell for six in a style reminiscent of India’s Rishabh Pant. He spotted a Starc slower ball and middled that into the crowd. He picked deliveries, picked gaps, and had time to pick his nose before playing a delicate lap shot over short fine leg. He deserved to be on a winning team. But winning teams can’t play half an innings, and even a fine recovery to 172 for four left too slender a target. That was where Australia differed. After starting the tournament prodding to a win over South Africa that had no right to be close, this side retired caution. Despite a brilliant opening over from Trent Boult, David Warner went after the bowling from ball five. Aaron Finch fell early, but that introduced Mitchell Marsh to demolish his first ball for six, helping himself to Adam Milne’s pace to whip off the pads, followed by a couple of fours. Marsh never slowed down, and Warner upped the ante to loot 17 from an over of Ish Sodhi spin. By the time he was out at a similar point of the innings to Guptill had been, Warner had 53 from 38 balls and Australia were into triple figures. To forestall any chance of a concerning rise in run-rate, Glenn Maxwell climbed into every short ball he received, whacking three fours and a six before his final flourish. Meanwhile, Marsh ploughed past his own half-century, on to 77 not out and player of the match. So here they are. An outfit that didn’t look built for T20 cricket, in a tournament where two slicker outfits in Pakistan and England lost their semi-finals. A team that won, meaning the why and the how and the strengths no longer matter. Most of all, the first Australian winners of a T20 World Cup title, the one that has been so elusive. For New Zealand, having fumbled three white-ball World Cup finals in the past six years, the details of what kind it was wouldn’t have been important. For Australia, the detail mattered more than anything.After Australia completed a remarkable comeback from being humiliated by England in the Super 12s to winning the T20 World Cup, sweeping New Zealand aside in the final with a display that perfectly fused attitude and ability, Aaron Finch insisted that even at their lowest ebb he never saw his side as anything other than champions in waiting. “I think a few things would have had to go our way to do that but honestly we had such belief in our group that we were good enough, that our team, our squad were the right players and as good as anyone in the world,” the Australia captain said. “Don’t get me wrong, in T20 cricket you need a bit of luck and we won six out of seven tosses which goes a long way, but we also played some really good cricket. This team is pretty special. The camaraderie, the way that everyone really cares for each other and looks after each other, looks out for each other – pretty special.” In another remarkable turnaround having come into the World Cup in desperate form David Warner ended it as player of the tournament, having scored 289 runs, including 191 in his last three innings and 53 off 38 in the final. “You didn’t expect that? I certainly did,” Finch said. “No word of a lie, I called Justin Langer a few months ago and said, ‘Don’t worry about Davey, he’ll be man of the tournament. “He’s a great player, one of the all-time great batters and he’s a fighter. He’s someone who when his back’s against the wall, that’s when you get the very, very best of David Warner. It was a special finish to the tournament for him, the last couple of knocks.” It was New Zealand’s third white-ball World Cup final in six years, a superb achievement particularly when coupled with their victory in the World Test Championship earlier this year, but all three have been lost. “You sign up to play the game, and you win or you lose. These are things that can happen on any day,” their captain, Kane Williamson, said. “If you look at the campaign as a whole, and the type of cricket we have been able to play, I can say we are very proud of our efforts through this period of time. You get to a final and anything can happen. We turned up and played some really good cricket, and it wasn’t quite enough.”“To find out what it’s capable of,” growls Chris Harris, as he accelerates a £280,000 McLaren 675LT towards its top speed of 200mph, “you’d better bring your A game. And possibly a spare of boxer shorts.” What he doesn’t say – but is possibly thinking – is “and your mum to do the washing”. Top Gear (BBC One) is back for its 31st series. It remains a space where men can be boys: perving over curves, pulling on their proverbial gear sticks and otherwise sublimating their erotic drives. Perhaps there are women behind the cameras – and, yes, there are a few in the studio audience – but by and large this is the BBC’s answer to the Garrick Club. Top Gear would have been more in tune with prevailing diversity norms had Sue Perkins replaced Jeremy Clarkson as its host, or if Victoria Coren Mitchell had done a reverse takeover of Top Gear with a TV version of Women Talking About Cars. Maybe Katy Balls could have adapted her Women With Balls podcast with a special about gendered motoring practices in Riyadh. But none of those would have done what this, the Great British Jerk Off, manages to do unwittingly – to eloquently psychopathologise the patriarchy. In this first episode, each of the three hosts – the surrogate Richard Hammond (Harris), the James May-like mild-mannered geek (Andrew Flintoff) and the gobby Clarkson stand-in wearing genitally challenging jeans (Paddy McGuinness) – is assigned a fast car and tasked with, so far as I can understand the rules, driving it faster than the others. It is the wrong sort of drag race for our times. Before we get down to boy racing, though,there is a data dump for the petrolheads in the audience. Flintoff’s Aston Martin Vantage F1 Edition, we learn, has more downforce than earlier models, increased compression, a V8 turbo engine, 527 horsepower and can go 0-60mph in three and a half seconds (all of which are useless in the real world when you are in a seven-mile tailback on the M6 with a full bladder). To do a reverse Greta Thunberg, this technical blah blah blah is beside the point: what viewers want is planet-despoiling burned rubber, toxic emissions bigger than the gross methane output of Argentine cattle, and the possibility of Flintoff being cut from his leatherette catsuit by firefighters – revealing his trim abs – while his wrecked motor burns in the background. Flintoff’s Aston Martin is pitted against McGuiness’s Alfa Romeo and Harris’s McLaren. I know so little and care even less about cars that I once wrote off a perfectly serviceable Talbot Horizon by ineptly changing the oil filter, but even I can see how this contest is going to pan out: the little man’s big car will go faster than the bigger men’s little ones. And so it proves. Later, the three presenters race at Silverstone against three F1 drivers. This segment does little to change my sense that these middle-aged blokes are having more fun than the licence fee-payers in the TV audience who footed the bill. To be fair, the response to that last criticism is presumably that foreign sales of Top Gear to other territories teeming with car-fixated kidults more than warrants the outlay. Top Gear then changes gear for a fond profile of Eddie Kidd, Britain’s answer to Evel Knievel. In the 80s and 90s, Kidd was a daredevil stunt rider who leapt the Great Wall of China, served as James Bond’s stunt double and defeated Evel’s son Robbie in a contest with a jump of 215ft (65.5 metres), before suffering a serious brain injury after a stunt crash in 1996 that put him in a coma for three months. Here, McGuinness pays tribute to his childhood hero and even arranges an evening of stunt motorcycling to honour the 62-year-old, who attends with his carer, family and friends. If this segment had come in smell-o-vision, the scent of petrol and sentiment would have been overpowering, but for once Top Gear’s heart is in the right place, hymning a British action hero who in his pomp achieved more than many of us ever will. Vivienne Westwood designed a fetching leather biker suit for Kidd. He was always good-looking, with a fine head of hair and – at one point – a recording career. If all that wasn’t enough, he also got the glad eye during a TV interview from Gloria Hunniford. All of these, oddly enough, are on my bucket list – but will I realise them? Not in this lifetime. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to correct the name of the McLaren 675LT.• A defence contract that was cancelled by Australia prior to the announcement of the “Aukus” pact was for France to build 12 diesel-powered submarines, not six as we said (Biden tells Macron he regrets ‘clumsy’ handling of Aukus, 30 October, page 38). • Due to an editing error, the Leicestershire village of Church Langton was rendered as “Church Lunatum” in the signoff to a reader’s letter (Paterson affair exposes contempt for standards, 5 November, Journal, page 5). • Other recently amended articles include: Sadio Mané limps off for Senegal to hand Liverpool fresh injury scare Greek pilot should face premeditated murder trial over British wife’s death, prosecutor says Why are so many Tory MPs able to get filthy rich? Because we let them Low-carbon aviation fuels are on the horizon. But for now, activists say we need to stay groundedLewis Hamilton hailed his victory at the Brazilian Grand Prix as the greatest of his career. The British driver delivered an outstanding comeback to go from 10th on the grid to win, beating his Formula One world championship rival, Max Verstappen, into second and, in so doing, rejuvenating his title challenge. Hamilton endured a testing weekend at Interlagos, penalised twice, once for a replacement engine and then for a DRS infringement. The world champion then came back from last on the grid to fifth in Saturday’s sprint qualifying race and then overtook half the field on Sunday to seal an unlikely victory. He has 101 wins, seven titles and is attempting to take his eighth in his 15th season in F1. Yet his achievement in Brazil was a standout moment, because of how hard he and his Mercedes team had had to fight. “I just gave it everything,” he said. “This has definitely been one of the best weekends, if not the best, I have experienced in probably my whole career. “I feel that this has been one of the most challenging, if not the most challenging, with the things we have faced through the weekend but, in terms of driving, it has maybe been my best.” His feelings were echoed by the former world champion Damon Hill on Twitter: “That was one of the best drives I’ve ever seen in F1. By anyone. Utterly awesome.” Hamilton trailed Verstappen by 21 points going into the race but is now only 14 behind with three meetings left. He emphasised how, despite the penalties over the weekend, he refused to be bowed and got past nine drivers on Sunday to win, including a tense battle against Verstappen. “Mentally you can just think it’s over, it’s impossible,” he said. “Nothing is if you put your mind to it. That’s really why we just cultivated a positive mental attitude and went in fighting, guns blazing.” The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, echoed the sentiment, bullishly noting how fired up his team were for the final three races in Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. “The team has always been together but these decisions have brought us so close together,” he said. “It’s against us. Lewis has felt this all his life. Now we all feel it together and we are going to fight. We are not going to be victims. That is the feeling in the garage.”For Kyle Sinckler the 2019 World Cup final is a day he can barely remember and an experience he will never forget. As England prepare for their first meeting with South Africa since that match, Sinckler recalls the buildup to that day in Yokohama – and his struggles in processing the subsequent disappointment – with alarming honesty. And it should come as no surprise that Saturday is set to be an exercise in catharsis for the 28-year-old. To recap, Sinckler had starred in England’s run to the final, having been named man of the match in the quarter-final win over Australia and performed exceptionally in the last-four victory over New Zealand. But after just three minutes against South Africa, Sinckler was replaced having been knocked unconscious in an accidental collision with teammate Maro Itoje. England were unable to recover from the shock of the early setback, were dominated in the scrum thereafter and slumped to a 32-12 defeat, having gone into the match as favourites. Sinckler recalls the aftermath, sitting at home in a dark room, dealing with the disappointment and the lingering effects of the concussion he suffered. He compares the feeling of deflation to that which he experienced when initially overlooked for the British &amp; Irish Lions squad to tour South Africa last summer and while he was subsequently picked and appeared in all three Tests, Saturday’s showdown at Twickenham with the Springboks has been ringed in Sinckler’s calendar for quite some time. “It was tough, after that experience, I’m not going to lie to you, two or three weeks after I just sat in my house in a dark room, obviously concussed, trying to process it all,” he says. “I was only on the field for a minute or two. It’s a tough one. It took a while for me to process what happened. Since I could remember all I wanted to do was play for my country … and then you get to that moment and I can’t remember any of it. It was quite tough, but that is the universe’s plan for me and I have to just keep my head and use it as motivation now.” Sinckler has been working with an organisation called Saviour World for some time now in an effort to deal with disappointments, to channel the anger he has spoken about coping with in the past. He believes part of the problem in coping with the fallout from the World Cup final was how he let the pre-match hype go to his head. “I am very grateful, in terms of the mentor I have at Saviour World, it took a while for us to process that, understanding why it actually happened,” he adds. “It probably was the lead-up to the game and my preparation, probably losing myself a bit, in that week, it was hard to stay grounded when everyone is telling you how great you are, and how excited everyone was, just to go to that moment. Obviously, I can’t remember it. I just try to use it as motivation.” Given England’s problems at loosehead prop – with Joe Marler and Ellis Genge both in isolation having contracted Covid-19 – Sinckler’s importance to the side is all the more obvious against the Springboks. The last time they were at Twickenham England edged home in controversial circumstances when Owen Farrell escaped punishment for a robust tackle on André Esterhuizen and Sinckler is expecting another ferocious battle. “I’m very motivated to play,” he says. “I want to give it all for my brothers. It’s a huge game and they’re the best. We’ve got to be there. I’d be lying if I didn’t look at that fixture and was like ‘I need to be ready for that game’. I really want to be selected and hitting my straps for that game because I know if selected I’ve got to be at my best otherwise they’re a world class side and they’ll make us pay, especially up front in the scrum.”Retaining the Cook Cup is all fine and dandy but what England would really love this week is to settle some old scores. Bitter memories of the 2019 Rugby World Cup final, with a further dash of frustration still lingering from last summer’s British &amp; Irish Lions tour, are already lending their final fixture of 2021 an extra edge and South Africa’s visit to Twickenham feels like a genuine grudge match. Satisfying as it is to beat his native Australia for the eighth time in a row, Eddie Jones is keenly aware a stiffer challenge now looms. The Springboks’ characteristically effective 30-15 win over Scotland was another reminder of how tough it remains to knock over the world champions, which is perhaps why Jones reached for a favourite boxing analogy on Saturday night in the wake of England’s similar 32-15 margin of victory. Specifically he has in mind the famous Rumble in the Jungle in 1974 when Muhammad Ali’s “rope-a-dope” tactics of leaning on the ropes, covering up and encouraging George Foreman to punch himself out paid legendary dividends in Kinshasha. “If you are taking on a heavyweight contest and you are fighting against George Foreman who can whack and whack and whack, you have to do something a bit different,” said Jones. “We have got four days to come up with something a little bit different. And we will.” Given the stunning success Jones enjoyed with Japan against the Boks in the pool stages of the 2015 World Cup, he has more expertise in this specific syllabus than most. A quick dive into the archives reveals he also made Rumble in the Jungle comparisons in 2016 prior to his first game against South Africa as England’s head coach. The hosts ended up winning 37-21 and Jones has always possessed a long memory. The fact remains, though, that England’s 2019 finale in Yokohama against the same opponents could hardly have gone any worse, with Jones’s men effectively flat out on the canvas long before the end. Ten of those red rose starters are still on parade but in some ways Japan feels a lifetime ago. It certainly must do for the Vunipola brothers and George Ford who, along with the injured Anthony Watson and Elliot Daly, are currently on the outside looking in. South Africa, for their part, will be missing the injured Faf de Klerk, Cheslin Kolbe, Pieter-Steph du Toit and the retired Tendai Mtawarira but all their other key pillars and tactical beliefs remain firmly in place. “I worked with the Springboks for a year so I have a pretty reasonable understanding of what they try to do,” stressed Jones, a consultant to the World Cup-winning Jake White in 2007. “South Africa have a very clear game plan, based on the accuracy of their kicking, their kick chase, the physicality of their forwards and a very strong scrum. The first thing we need to do is be really consistent in our scrummaging so we don’t allow them access into our half. We have to try to take away their maul and then be really good at neutralising their kicks. If we’re able to do that we can create opportunities to attack against them. Like any team, they have weaknesses in their defence and we’ll be able to find a few of those.” Easier to say than do on the biggest occasions, clearly, and Jones has had plenty of time to poke through the ashes of the 2019 debacle, just a week after England had put New Zealand away with the same authority that Ireland showed in Dublin on Saturday. This time, though, he has the ex-Springbok scrum coach Matt Proudfoot on his staff and no one will be getting too far ahead of themselves. “Every time you play against South Africa and get beaten there’s a lesson there,” said Jones. “They play to their strengths. They play the way they have traditionally been educated to do since a young age. Just like the All Blacks play a catch-pass game, movement game. The great thing about rugby is they can play any of those contrasting styles and be successful. It just depends what players you have and the sort of game you want to play. I only have admiration for what they do.” Given England have yet to concede a try in two games since the arrival of their new defence coach Anthony Seibold, their own foundations are reasonably firm but, with Joe Marler due out of Covid isolation on Thursday, it will be no surprise if the loosehead prop is rushed back into the squad. The 21-year-old debutant Bevan Rodd performed stoutly but the Springboks’ illustrious “Bomb Squad” will be a step up from a Wallaby tight five lacking some key stalwarts. Jamie George’s sore knee is another complication but might Owen Farrell’s ankle injury potentially allow Jones to simplify his selection elsewhere and maximise the rising talent he clearly has at his disposal? If ever there was a moment for the bustling Alex Dombrandt to start at No 8 and and to pit himself against Duane Vermuelen it is surely this Saturday, with the Harlequin’s instinctive understanding with Marcus Smith an obvious plus. Re-establishing the midfield combo of Manu Tuilagi and Henry Slade would also make Smith’s life easier, as would the return of the multi-skilled Max Malins on one of the wings. With Freddie Steward looking to the manner born at full-back, England will ideally be hoping to fashion more of the smartly-worked moves that saw Smith send Steward away for his first Test try and again hinted at encouraging progress under the attack coach, Martin Gleeson. Stay brave and positive and there will be a better chance of those nagging demons being buried. “It is the final game of the autumn so we want to go away with a good feeling,” said Jones, unable to resist another more risqué analogy. “It’s like when you go out on a date with a girlfriend, the night finishes well and you can’t wait for the next date. We want to make sure the players have that feeling.” Roll on next Saturday.When the new NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, toured a Hunter Valley coalmine a year ago, managers complained about how hard it was to renew insurance for their pit. In light of the weekend’s conclusion of the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, those challenges will get more difficult, Kean has now predicted. “Glasgow just accelerated where the market was already going,” he said. “The fossil fuel industry is going to find it harder to get insurance, raise capital or refinance their operations.” Those sentiments, from the treasurer of the state home to most of Australia’s thermal coal exporters, were echoed in post-Glasgow comments by Australian-based analysts tracking investor and legal trends. Among Glasgow’s achievements was the decision to press member states to return by Cop27 in Egypt next year – rather than wait another five years – to raise targets for 2030 emissions cuts. Settling rules at Glasgow for international carbon markets under article six of the Paris climate accord may also benefit Australia as both a buyer and seller of carbon credits, the analysts said. “The shifting of global economic realities is definitely the water in which Cop is swimming,” said Tennant Reed, a senior adviser at the Australia Industry Group. “The economics of coal for power have already become quite unfavourable.” Other shifts evident at Glasgow included the growing global rivalry for leadership in the race to make hydrogen from renewable energy to supplant oil and gas. “I think there’s a warning there for Australia,” Reed said. “We can’t assume that just because we have pretty high quality renewable resource centres … that we’re going to automatically be an energy superpower.” Emma Herd, a climate change partner at consultancy EY, said the media naturally focused on the final hours “of drama and theatre” of settling the Glasgow agreement’s text, but much had already been achieved in the preceding fortnight. Progress included creating the International Sustainability Standards Board to require high quality, transparent, reliable and comparable reporting by companies of their carbon and other environmental reporting. “That’s also going to be a big part of accelerating business action,” Herd said. That Covid did not derail Glasgow was itself positive. An EY report out last week found the pandemic actually increased their focus on climate change, she said. ‘The market has decided’ One chief investment officer told Herd that “when everything is uncertain, you look at the long-term trends because they become a safer bet”. “And the market has decided that one of those key long-term trends is decarbonisation.” Erwin Jackson, director of policy at the Investor Group on Climate Change, said Cops “set norms”. These now include discussing a warming limit goal of 1.5C rather than 2C, raising 2030 ambitions, and the end of fossil fuels, even if Glasgow’s official text settled on “phasing down” rather than “phasing out” coal. Jackson said investors were already demanding annual rates of return of 40% for investments in coal and 20% for oil, compared with just 10% for solar and wind ventures, because of the greater risk associated with fossil fuels. “[It’s] probably better than I would have thought we would have got two years ago,” Jackson said. But the Morrison government’s refusal to change Australia’s target of cutting 2005 level emissions by 26% to 28% was an outlying performance that sent a jarring note. “The whole thing together gives investors confidence in making long-term investments,” Jackson said. “The risk for Australia is because we haven’t updated the 2030 target, you’re undermining their confidence.” Martijn Wilder, a founding partner of the climate change advisory firm Pollination, said legal action against fossil fuel companies was already gathering pace, and Glasgow would only add to that. Corporations signing net-zero targets – including many at Glasgow – should brace for legal action if they didn’t follow through. “In the last six months the greenwashing issue has become enormous,” he said. The Carbon Markets Institute welcomed the Cop26 result, saying it “delivered a platform for greater international cooperation and established a governance framework for international emissions trading capable of high integrity”. “Booming voluntary global and Australian carbon markets will now need to appropriately align with these rules to ensure verified emission reductions and other social and environmental benefits are achieved in industrial decarbonisation and natural climate solutions,” the institute said. However, Malte Meinshausen, an associate professor at the University of Melbourne’s Climate and Energy College and a former Cop negotiator, said he was “very much sceptical” about the market agreement, not least because it allowed the use of credits generated under the Kyoto protocol. “I think that leaves the door open to all the domestic targets only being watered down, so the real action on the ground might actually suffer,” he said. “Cross boundary trading schemes in the past have always been shown to undermine the integrity of the system.” In sum, though, the Glasgow Cop provided “moderately suitable steps forward but with many more steps in the marathon still to do”, Meinshausen said. Separately, a study has found the cost to the Australian economy of reaching net-zero by 2050 has fallen 80% in just eight years, mostly thanks to the plunging price of renewable energy. The modelling from Victoria University’s Centre for Policy Studies compared business as usual with the transition to zero path and found the difference was barely discernible. “Cutting greenhouse gas emissions is like buying an insurance policy: we incur a cost (a loss in GDP) to reduce a risk (catastrophic climate change),” the report by Prof Philip Adams said. “However, if it costs only 1% of income, as estimated in our modelling, then taking the insurance policy is a very good option.”It wasn’t quite 17 November 1993, but that was still a memorably dramatic night of World Cup qualification. We’ll have reports from Lisbon, Seville and Luxembourg City on the site shortly. Thanks for your company and emails - goodnight! Look at these celebrations! The tracksuit top going up in the air at the bottom of the picture might be my favourite bit. After all that, these teams have qualified for next year’s World Cup Qatar Brazil Germany France Belgium Serbia Spain Denmark Croatia And these teams are guaranteed a playoff place Scotland Wales North Macedonia Portugal Russia Sweden Austria Czech Republic The World Cup, bloody hell, etc These are tonight’s final scores. Group A Portugal 1-2 Serbia Luxembourg 0-3 Republic of Ireland (Serbia qualify and Portugal go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 1-0 Sweden Greece 1-1 Kosovo (Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Serbia are going to the World Cup after a legendary victory in Lisbon! Portugal will have to go via the playoffs, and there are no guarantees there. “This game should have been a non-event after the reverse fixture,” says Dave Correia, “but no VAR in Serbia ruled out a third goal for Portugal.” Spain are heading to the World Cup after a tense victory over Sweden. The substitute Alvaro Morata’s cool finish settled the game; now they’ve qualified, Spain’s young side will be among the favourites in Qatar. Spain 1-0 Sweden While that was going on, Ibrahimovic sent Azpilicueta to the canvas with a snide shove. Portugal 1-2 Serbia That Mitrovic goal sparked one of the great celebrations, an almighty bundle by the corner flag. It’s well worth looking up after the game. A very good night for Ireland. Tadic worked a short corner on the right and curled a cross beyond the far post, where the substitute Mitrovic was criminally unmarked. His downward header bounced up to beat Rui Patricio and sneak into the net. It’ll be checked by VAR but he was just onside. Serbia have stolen a place at the World Cup, and their entire squad are going ballistic! Oh my goodness! Ireland are finishing a difficult campaign in style! McClean drives a very deep cross to Knight, who cushions it back across goal on the volley for Robinson to tap into the net. That’s another excellent, selfless assist from Knight, his second since coming on as substitute. Dani Olmo’s sizzling long-range strike was pushed onto the bar by Olsen, an outstanding save, but Morata was first to the rebound and dinked it lazily into the net. Spain are going to Qatar! 83 min: Portugal 1-1 Serbia A very good chance for the substitute Alexsandar Mitrovic, who flicks a header wide from Filip Kostic’s booming cross. 84 min: Spain 0-0 Sweden After an excellent run, Morata drives too close to Olsen from the edge of the area. 83 min: Spain 0-0 Sweden It’s exquisitely tense in Seville. For the first time in the game, Spain are struggling to keep the ball. Portugal 1-1 Serbia A very dangerous cross from Kostic is volleyed behind for a corner by Nuno Mendes. Serbia look the likelier scorers just now. Just over ten minutes remaining in Lisbon and Seville, where Portugal and Spain are hanging to automatic qualification for next year’s World Cup. GOAL! Greece 1-1 Kosovo (Rrahmani 76) Luxembourg 0-2 Republic of Ireland If it tays like this Ireland will finish third in their group, having taken seven points from the last three games. In both style and substance, their progress is palpable. That’s the kind of goal Stephen Kenny has been dreaming about. Jeff Hendrick, 35 yards out on the right, poked a superb pass through to the substitute Jason Knight. He drew the keeper and played a short reverse pass to Chiedozie Ogbene, who lifted his shot over the defender on the line. That’s a lovely goal, even more so because it was finished by an emerging star of Irish football. A delightful team goal! Spain 0-0 Sweden Pantomime b’stard Zlatan Ibrahimovic comes on to replace Alexander Isak. He’s 40 years old, and he has 17 minutes to score the goal that would take Sweden to the World Cup. #Noggin Spain 0-0 Sweden Nineteen minutes to go in Seville, where Spain are passing the clock down in their own inimitable style. Luxembourg 0-1 Republic of Ireland The re-emergence of Shane Duffy, for parent club and country, is one of the more heartwarming football stories of 2021. The latest scores Group A Portugal 1-1 Serbia Luxembourg 0-1 Republic of Ireland (As things stand Portugal qualify and Serbia go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 0-0 Sweden Greece 1-0 Kosovo (As things stand Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Shane Duffy heads Ireland into the lead! Cullen’s free-kick from the left skimmed off the head of a Luxembourg defender, and Duffy headed it in from a yard. That doesn’t quite do justice to the finish, though, because the deflection meant he had to stop and twist his neck back to the left to ensure the header would go on target. Spain 0-0 Sweden “Two promising but misfiring players for Spain replaced by two more guaranteed misfiring players - one of whom is poor old Morata, destined to be forever on the brink of redemption,” says Charles Antaki. Morata has got everything he needs to rule the world apart from confidence. If I’m honest, he reminds me of myself. Spain 0-0 Sweden The substitute Mattias Svanberg tries an Ibrahimovician overhead kick from 18 yards. It’s a decent effort, actually, which loops a few yards over th ebar. Spain 0-0 Sweden After a promising start, Morata shoots meekly wide. Spain 0-0 Sweden Rodrigo and Alvaro Morata are on for Spain. Sweden haven’t unsheathed Zlatan Ibrahimovic yet. Spain 0-0 Sweden When he plays for Sweden, Victor Lindelof looks really good. Discuss. “Hi Rob,” says Niamh Breheny. “Just to make you feel better about the draft excluder (and as we are talking about national broadcasters and football), on RTÉ they have so far called the orange jerseys yellow and also referred to Ireland as Liverpool. I think it’s been a long week for us all!!” So long as Dundalk get a result against Andorra tonight, we’ll all be happy. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland This is an excellent spell for Luxembourg, their best of the match, and they really should be ahead. I’d like to see a few more angles to be sure, but that didn’t look like a foul on Duffy. The latest scores Group A Portugal 1-1 Serbia Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland (As things stand Portugal qualify and Serbia go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 0-0 Sweden Greece 1-0 Kosovo (As things stand Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Daniel Sinani thought he had put Luxembourg ahead, but it’s been ruled out for a push on Shane Duffy in the build up. That looks a pretty generous decision. Spain 0-0 Sweden An opportunity for Forsberg, who almost falls over as he tries to half-volley a difficult ball dropping over his shoulder. Spain are living dangerously. Spain 0-0 Sweden: Chance for Spain! A near-post corner is headed dangerously across goal by Raul de Tomas, but there’s nobody at the far post to do the necessary. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland: Chance for Rodrigues! Ireland are almost caught playing out from the back. A Luxembourg player (nope, not a scooby) nicks the ball and plays it through to Rodrigues, who shoots too close to Bazunu. Rodrigues hurried his shot unnecessarily. Spain 0-0 Sweden: Chance for Isak! Azpilicueta plays a hideous pass across the aface of the Spain penalty area. Claesson (I think) intercepts and lays it off to Isak, who cracks the bouncing ball over the bar from 18 yards. That was probably Sweden’s best chance so far. Peep peep! The second halves are underway. Half-time reading Peep peep! It’s half time in the four Uefa qualifiers. Portugal and Spain - who both need a draw to avoid slumming it in the playoffs - are enduring a nervous night. Group A Portugal 1-1 Serbia Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland (As things stand Portugal qualify and Serbia go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 0-0 Sweden Greece 1-0 Kosovo (As things stand Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland Schon makes another good save, this time from John Egan’s header. Ireland have been really good in the first half and deserve to be ahead. GOAL! Greece 1-0 Kosovo (Masouras 45) Spain 71-29 Sweden Those are the possession stats. But Sweden have come closest to scoring. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland After more good pressing by Ireland, Chiedozie Ogbene hammers a shot from 18 yards that is tipped over by Ralph Schon. That was Ireland’s best chance so far. Ogbene caught it beautifully but it was too close to Schon. Spain 0-0 Sweden: just wide by Forsberg! Sweden are creating the better chances in Seville. Augustinsson’s very deep cross from the left is volleyed back across goal and just wide by Forsberg. That was perilously close. The latest scores Group A Portugal 1-1 Serbia Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland (As things stand Portugal qualify and Serbia go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 0-0 Sweden Greece 0-0 Kosovo (As things stand Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Portugal 1-1 Serbia Portugal will top the group as things stand, but Serbia are now only one goal away from pipping them to automatic qualification. The plot thickens in Lisbon! Dusan Tadic has equalised for Serbia. He made room on the edge of the area and whipped a left-footed shot that went straight through Rui Patricio and dribbled over the line. At first it looked like a howler, but replays showed a slight but crucial deflection off Danilo. It’s all a bit quiet, particularly in Seville. Sweden will be delighted with how the first half hour has gone. Spain 0-0 Sweden Spain continue their largely sterile domination. The longer it stays 0-0, the more Sweden will fancy their chances of a late sting. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland A lovely save from Gavin Bazunu, who is at full stretch diving to his right when he fingertips Olivier Thill’s deflected shot round the post. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland I MEANT DRAUGHT EXCLUDER OKAY. It’s been a long day and I’m trying to watch four games at once. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland Draft excluder! Bloody autocorrect brain. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland After some good pressing from Ireland, Robinson is fouled right on the edge of the area. He takes the free-kick himself, driving it under the wall and into the draught excluder. Some really sad news from Scotland Spain 0-0 Sweden A reminder, if it were needed, of Sweden’s threat. Emil Forsberg picks up the ball on the halfway line, surges all the way into the D and cracks a left-footed shot that goes just wide of the right-hand post. That was a fine effort. The latest scores Group A Portugal 1-0 Serbia Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland (As things stand Portugal qualify and Serbia go into the playoffs) Group B Spain 0-0 Sweden Greece 0-0 Kosovo (As things stand Spain qualify and Sweden go into the playoffs) Spain 0-0 Sweden A rare Sweden attack ends when Isak is penalised for being fouled by Gavi. Yep. Luxembourg 0-0 Republic of Ireland Callum Robinson draws a decent save from Ralph Schon with a snapshot from the edge of the area. Ireland have started well. I’m not sure about their kit, mind. Spain 0-0 Sweden In a surprising twist, Spain have had about 90 per cent of the possession in the first eight minutes. They had a hopeful appeal for a penalty turned down after a stylish run from Dani Olmo. “Hi Rob,” says Matt Burtz. “As someone who is merely 58 days older (and one inch shorter) than Zlatan, I hope he plays until the day he can no longer walk. The list of professional athletes born in 1981 and still playing is becoming ever shorter, which I think officially makes me middle aged.” The day Kazuyoshi Miura retires is when the dream of eternal youth officially dies. Portugal 1-0 Serbia The Serbia coach Dragan Stojkovic has been booked for his protests. Quite a start in Lisbon. Serbia tried to play out from the back and were punished. Gudelj was knocked off the ball by Bernardo Silva in the D, and Renato Sanches picked up the loose ball before slamming it past Rajkovic. Serbia were convinced it was a foul; the referee and Team VAR were not. Peep peep! And they’re off. Spain v Sweden I should have said that the Sweden bench includes popular quadragenarian Zlatan Ibrahimovic, who has been known to occasionally write his own scripts. “While Iceland’s qualification campaign may have concluded with a whimper, most supporters now feel moderately hopeful,” writes Kári Tulinius. “Recent revelations about sexual harassment, and worse, by players on the national team ended the era of good feelings with a bang. So to see a squad largely made up of promising youngsters made it possible for us Icelanders to reacquaint ourselves with ‘our boys’, as the nickname has it. Losing 3-1 in Skopje may not be a great result, but it feels like a new era has begun.” “So Jordi Alba and Sergio Busquets are back in the starting Spain line-up,” writes Charles Antaki. “Last week’s laboured win over Greece had nobody from the previous generation until Busquets came on to settle the midfield down late on. He seems ageless, but Alba’s return is something of a surprise, especially since apparently Luis Enrique froze him out fo a year or two, and at (... looks it up ...) 32 is not likely to be especially speedy any more. But the team missed his crosses in the last game, so maybe it’s that?” Marcos Alonso looked the part in the Nations League, yet he’s not even in the squad. I think Luis Enrique said it was something to do with “small details”. (With thanks, sizeable thanks, to my colleague Philip Cornwall for simplifying the unsimplifiable.) 1. There are three qualifying spots at Qatar 2022, to be played for by 12 teams: 10 group runners-up plus the two highest ranked winners of Nations League groups that have not qualified otherwise. Scotland, Russia and North Macedonia have qualified as runners-up. Several teams are guaranteed at least a play-off spot (including Poland, who stand only a theoretical chance of catching England). Either Wales or the Czech Republic will be runners-up in Group E, but whoever is not will get a spot via the Nations League route. Austria are guaranteed a spot via the Nations League route. 2. The six group runners-up with the best records, excluding games against the bottom side in six-team groups, will be seeded. Scotland are outside the seeded spots so need a result against Denmark. Wales, who need to draw with Belgium to be sure of being runners-up, would likely be seeded if they were to win. 3. The seeded teams will play at home in the one-off play-off semi-finals, on 24-25 March. The draw on 26 November will determine which semi-finals will provide the home team in the one-off finals, on 28-29 March. “Tell Bogdan (19.07) that he shouldn’t complain too much,” writes Alan Weir. “Here in Scotland, Scottish Television (STV) will, as usual, not be showing the Scotland game but instead they will have live coverage of the England game! “Hello Rob,” writes Bogdan Kotarlic. “Just to let you know, Serbia have played very well during qualification but there is not much enthusiasm in the country as far as the national team is concerned. The last game that Serbia played in Belgrade against Qatar, the attendance was only 1,000. The other reason is that the game will be broadcast on a TV channel that only something like 30 per cent of the population can watch.” Any team managed by Dragan Stojkovic is a friend of mine. There were three 5pm games, all in Group J, and they ended thus: Liechtenstein 0-2 Romania Armenia 1-4 Germany North Macedonia 3-1 Iceland Ilkay Gundogan scored twice for Germany, who have already qualified, and Kai Havertz was also on the thing we are morally obliged to describe as the scoresheet. North Macedonia’s win over Iceland means they finish second in the group, ahead of Romania, and are through to the play-offs. Greece (4-3-3) Vlachodimos; Androutsos, Hatzidiakos, Goutas, Tzavellas; Pelkas, Bouchalakis, Tsimikas; Masouras, Douvikas, Mantalos. Kosovo (4-4-1-1) Muric; Vojvoda, Rrahmani, Fazliji, Aliti; Idrizi, Shala, Loshaj, V Berisha; Rashica; Muriqi. Spain (4-3-3) Unai Simon; Azpilicueta, Laporte, Pau Torres, Jordi Alba; Gavi, Busquets, Soler; Sarabia, de Tomas, Olmo. Sweden (4-4-2) Olsen; Krafth, Lindelof, Nilsson, Augustinsson; Kulusevski, Ekdal, Olsson, Forsberg; Isak, Claesson. Portugal (4-3-3) Rui Patricio; Joao Cancelo, Jose Fonte, Ruben Dias, Nuno Mendes; Danilo, Joao Moutinho, Renato Sanches; Bernardo Silva, Cristiano Ronaldo, Diogo Jota. Serbia (3-1-4-1-1) Rajkovic, Milenkovic, Veljkovic, Pavlovic; Gudelj; A Zivkovic, Lukic, Milinkovic-Savic, Kostic; Tadic; Vlahovic. The teams who have already qualified for Qatar 2022 are... Qatar, Germany, Denmark, Brazil, France, Belgium ... and Croatia, who clinched their place with a 1-0 win over Russia this afternoon. Russia were ten minutes away from qualifying ahead of Croatia when Fedor Kudryashov scored a decisive own goal. Luxembourg (3-4-1-2) Schon; Jans, Chanot, Selimovic; O Thill, Martins, Barreiro, Mica Pinto; Sinani; Rodrigues, Borges Sanches. Ireland (3-4-2-1) Bazunu; Coleman, Duffy, Egan; Doherty, Hendrick, Cullen, McClean; Ogbene, Robinson; Idah. Hello jeopardy, my old friend. For too long, qualifying for major tournaments has been close to a formality for the big nations. This time, things are a bit more interesting. Though Italy, Portugal, Spain and the Netherlands still have a World Cup place in their own hands, they are all looking nervously over their shoulder before the final round of group games. A poor result would mean missing out on qualification and dropping into the play-offs - where, as Italy know all too well, anything can happen. And if the Netherlands lose at home to Norway, they probably won’t even make the play-offs. That game is on Tuesday, with Italy playing away to Northern Ireland tomorrow. Tonight we’re going to focus on Iberia’s finest. Both are at home, both only need a draw to qualify automatically for Qatar 2022 - but both have tricky opponents. Portugal meet Serbia in Lisbon, while Spain host Sweden - who beat them in the return fixture - in Seville. Sweden’s shock defeat in Georgia on Thursday was good news for Spain, who would otherwise have needed a win tonight to top Group B. Now, a draw will do. We’ll also keep half an eye on at the Stade de Luxembourg, where Ireland hope to continue their impressive progress under Stephen Kenny. If they win tonight they will finish third in the group, a decent effort after such a difficult start. Here’s list of tonight’s games, all 7.45pm GMT kick-offs. Group A Luxembourg v Republic of Ireland Portugal v Serbia Group B Greece v Kosovo Spain v SwedenEngland’s players plan to discuss how to express their concerns about human rights in Qatar once they have qualified for the 2022 World Cup. Players from Germany, the Netherlands and Norway have held on-pitch protests against Qatar during qualification for the tournament and there have been calls for Gareth Southgate’s side to speak out as well. England have so far preferred to keep the focus on reaching the World Cup but the mood is likely to change after Monday’s trip to San Marino. Southgate’s team need only a point from their final Group I qualifier and Conor Coady, who is part of the squad’s leadership group, said the players will hold talks over opposing Qatar’s human rights record after they have qualified. “A conversation hasn’t been had yet because we’ve always said – obviously we are seeing quite a lot in the news at the minute – that we make sure we do our job first,” Coady said. “We make sure we try to get to that competition as quickly as we can and then I’m sure the conversation will be had with the players. “If there is any way players can help going forward and help in different situations, I am sure us as players and part of the England setup will try to do that. At the minute it is tough to speak about it because it is not something we have had a real conversation about. “We are not robots, we are humans, we are seeing things in the news that are going on every day. But we’ve always said to ourselves over the last year that the most important thing is to get to where we want to be, which is to Qatar, and honestly speak about the situation when the time is right.” England’s players have made a difference on a number of social issues. Coady, who is expected to start in defence against San Marino, pointed to Marcus Rashford’s fight against child poverty and Jordan Henderson’s support for the NHS. “That is a fantastic part of this England group,” the Wolves captain said. “The players make an incredible difference trying to use that platform to help different people – try to help kids with Rashy, the NHS with Hendo.” England, who have travelled to San Marino without Jack Grealish, Henderson, Mason Mount, Luke Shaw and Raheem Sterling, have handed Conor Gallagher his first senior call-up. The 21-year-old midfielder has impressed since joining Crystal Palace on loan from Chelsea.Everybody knows that Harry Kane wants to start in every single game but nobody knows it more than his managers, nobody hears about it more vociferously than they do when he is stood down. Gareth Southgate has committed the sin, in Kane’s eyes, of naming him as only a substitute in England’s three World Cup qualifying ties against the Group I minnows so far – the two against Andorra and the one with San Marino, which together ended in victories by an aggregate scoreline of 14-0. Kane did get on in the 4-0 win over Andorra at Wembley in September, scoring one of the goals from the penalty spot, but imagine how he could have boosted his personal numbers with more time on the field? The captain has certainly imagined it. “He’s quick to let me know he hasn’t played in those games,” Southgate said, with a smile, as he looked forward to the final qualifier – the return against San Marino on Monday night – and considered the question as to whether Kane would be let loose at the outset. Southgate knows he must strike the right balance in terms of the experience of the line-up having lost, among others, Jordan Henderson to a minor injury and Raheem Sterling to a personal matter. The manager is expected to stick with the back-three system that he used in Friday night’s 5-0 win over Albania at Wembley with Harry Maguire, Conor Coady and Tyrone Mings in the positions. It is only San Marino, the worst ranked team in international football who, in 31 years of playing official games, have won only once – against Liechtenstein in 2004. But England do need a draw to make completely sure of direct qualification to Qatar ahead of Poland and, as such, Southgate will not allow his focus and professionalism to waver. “With Harry [Kane], I don’t think it would be right to treat this game any differently from any other by giving you the team,” Southgate said. “But, for sure, he is keen to play. He wants to play. We have got to make sure we get this game won and we still have to try to qualify for the World Cup. “When we are picking a team, no matter what the opponent, we are always thinking about having the right balance, leadership … In any game, if you don’t have the right leaders on the pitch and you don’t start the game well, then it can lead to anxiety and, if you have not got enough experience around, that can lead to unnecessary difficult moments.” Kane has his tail up after scoring a first-half hat-trick in the win over Albania. It moved him to 44 England goals from 66 caps – level on the all-time list with Jimmy Greaves – and closer to Wayne Rooney’s record of 53. The truth was that Kane had the chances to have scored six against a hapless Albania defence and, having been withdrawn on 63 minutes, he feels he has plenty in the tank for San Marino. Southgate has previously said that 45 minutes in a match is the equivalent loading to an intense training session and so nobody should be too unhappy if he were to push Kane into some of the San Marino game – namely, the striker’s manager at Tottenham, Antonio Conte. There stands to be an upside for Conte if Kane could return to Spurs in a positive mood; he had departed for the international break with one Premier League goal all season and plenty of questions about his form. “We want to make sure that the team we start with tomorrow is a statement that we’re here to do business, that we’re taking this very seriously,” Southgate said, while also acknowledging the large number of England fans that were travelling and wanted to see a top-level performance. Southgate did advance a caveat that felt pertinent to Kane, talking about the need for the regulars to support the “players who have been important squad members” when it was the turn of the latter to start. “I don’t think it ever does any of the starters any harm to recognise the incredible support they get [from the others] and repay it,” he added. Southgate’s other option up front would be Tammy Abraham. The themes of opportunity, cohesion and commitment seemed to apply strongly to Emile Smith Rowe and Conor Gallagher – players who have been promoted from the under-21s for their first senior involvement. Smith Rowe came on as a substitute against Albania for his debut while Gallagher was rewarded for his fine start to the season at Crystal Palace with a call on Sunday morning. It was easy to wonder how Callum Hudson-Odoi was feeling, having once again turned down the chance to join up with the under-21s. “It has become an even better opportunity for Emile and now Conor [because of the withdrawals] and they deserve it because of their club form and the way they have played for the under-21s, their professionalism for the under-21s,” Southgate said. “If they play well, there is a chance for them to stay with us.” Above all in San Marino, there is the chance to celebrate qualification to what Coady described as the “biggest show on earth.” It feels as if it has long since been taken for granted but Coady’s words struck a chord, highlighting the basic joy of it. “We speak about the excitement [of qualification] all the time,” Coady said. “We’ve seen images of what it’ll be like over there [in Qatar] and it’s important that we focus on how excited we have been. We’re at the end of the qualifying stage and tomorrow we can get to where we want to be. It’s a massive achievement.”An unexpectedly long, difficult journey and an increasingly nervous night eventually ended in almost the easiest way imaginable. With four minutes remaining, Álvaro Morata found himself all alone four yards out with the ball at his feet and the Sweden goalkeeper, Robin Olsen, on the ground, free to calmly, almost gently lift in the goal that took Spain to the 2022 World Cup. At last, it was over, for the home side anyway. Sweden will have a second chance to make it to Qatar via the play-offs. For much the final night of a qualifying campaign that closed with first and second in group B facing each other, it had seemed like Sweden might not need the play-offs. They enjoyed the best chances, putting Spain on a knife-edge. Until Dani Olmo’s thunderous shot crashed off Olsen’s fingers, against the bar and dropped to Morata, La Cartuja erupting. Rafael’s My Grand Night boomed round at the final whistle; it hadn’t been that good, but they had got there. Not since 1974 have Spain missed out but for a while here, that long run felt like it was at risk. Asked what he felt when the goal went in, Olmo replied: “relief”. This was a straight shootout, the scenario simple for both sides: win and you’ll be at the World Cup, lose and the play-offs await. Although a draw would put Spain through Luis Enrique insisted his players would not seek it. Yet by those final minutes they would have snatched at it. “If we can have 70% of the possession, so much the better,” the Spain coach said, and by half-time the stats said almost exactly that. Which is not to say this was going entirely their way: at that point the two shots that came closest had both been from the mightily impressive Emil Forsberg. Spain had never lost a World Cup qualifier at home and Seville is home, the chosen location whenever their life is on the line. Over 51,000 people were there, this great white elephant of an arena turned red and yellow. Sweden’s coach Janne Andersson though insisted: “We don’t at all feel we’re defeated before the event” – and they wouldn’t be until the end. It started with a Pablo Sarabia shot bent just beyond the far post and, with the superb Gavi showing fast feet, Spain led an enjoyable opening. Sweden though lay in wait, Forsberg dashing through the middle to curl fractionally wide after 15 minutes and Unai Simón almost getting caught on the edge of his six-yard box 15 minutes after that. That wouldn’t be the last time the Spain goalkeeper gave this place a collective coronary. Pau Torres had to be sharp to clear when Alexander Isak and Dejan Kulusevski were breathing down his neck. Then a superb lopping cross from Ludwig Augustinsson found Forsberg six yards out at the far post. His volley flashed wide, the moment that might have meant everything slipping past the post. When César Azpilicueta’s loose pass was picked off by Viktor Claesson early in the second half, Isak shot over where he should have scored. Something had to give and the game opened a little, Jordi Alba starting to appear on the left. Raúl de Tomás headed a corner past the post before Forsberg swiped at and missed a ball that dropped to him barely five yards out, the decision to remove Kulusevski and Forsberg soon after hard to interpret, implying a desire to protect a draw that would not do. That said, the substitute Mattias Svanberg did almost immediately leap to connect with an ambitious overhead kick and it was natural to respond to the way this had tilted Spain’s way – even if real chances remained few. Perhaps it was preparatory too, another plan about to be put into place: Zlatan Ibrahimovic was introduced with 20 minutes left. Immediately a chance fell, but to Claesson and he stumbled over a dropping ball deep in the Spanish area. The tension had taken this stadium, everyone on edge when Simón was almost caught by Robin Quaison, then roaring as Morata set off running with five minutes to so. This time his shot was saved by Olsen but not the next time, purgatory persisting a little longer until Spain’s fate fell at Morata’s feet.Joe Biden wished the Ireland rugby team luck in their game against mighty New Zealand on Saturday, saying in a letter: “Go spread the faith. I’ll be cheering for you.” Before the game in Dublin, the All Blacks had this autumn heavily beaten Wales and Italy and thrashed the USA by no less than 104-14. But Ireland went on to beat New Zealand for only the third time in more than a century, 29-20 at a packed Aviva Stadium. Their day grew more celebratory from there. On Saturday evening, Irish Rugby tweeted a picture from the team hotel, in which a phone was held up to cheering players and coaches. The caption said: “Incredible to have @POTUS [the acronym for ‘president of the United States’] address the team after today’s win over the All Blacks!” The White House confirmed the call, which it said Biden made with “members of his family”, and the letter written to “Team Ireland”. In the political realm, a spokesman for the Taoiseach, Micheál Martin, told reporters Biden called him too, saying, “Well done, I’m delighted for you” and discussing his own experiences playing American football in college. In fact, Biden’s links to and liking for rugby union are well known, not least in light of previous interactions with Ireland and New Zealand. On a visit to Auckland in 2016, as vice-president, he was given a shirt by two All Blacks forwards. “I played rugby but thank God I didn’t play against these guys,” Biden said, before telling the flanker Jerome Kaino he “played rugby for one year when I was in law school”, as a full-back. The White House has not confirmed where and when Biden played rugby. It did not respond to a Guardian request for comment sent on Saturday night. Earlier this year, however, Zach Levek of the Syracuse Rugby Alumni Association told the Rugby Network that though Biden graduated from law school at the New York university in 1968, a year before its rugby club was founded, the sport was played there before by students and local enthusiasts alike. “We would not be surprised if a tough young man from Scranton was willing to put on the Syracuse orange-and-blue-hooped jersey,” Levek said. “We fully support President Biden’s statements and proudly recognise him as an SU Rugby alumni.” Nor is Biden the only president to have played rugby. Bill Clinton played at Oxford, George W Bush at Yale. Other Washington power-players include the late Massachusetts senator Ted Kennedy, who played for Harvard; James Baker, George HW Bush’s secretary of state, who played at Princeton; and HR McMaster, Donald Trump’s second national security adviser, who played at West Point. Biden’s defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, also played as a military cadet. In Auckland five years ago, Biden mentioned following an All Black tour of Ireland in the 1970s, when he was a young Democratic senator from Delaware, during a congressional recess. “We packed up,” he said, “and we followed them all through Ireland. There was nothing but carnage left behind. But I am a real fan.” Ireland failed to beat New Zealand throughout that decade, part of 111 years of futile effort until a pulsating game in Chicago later in 2016. Biden congratulated that Irish team, which featured a full-back, Rob Kearney, to whom he is distantly related and who has visited the White House. In his letter to the Irish team this week, Biden cited his cousin’s triumph at Soldier Field and said: “Since then, you’ve beaten the All Blacks again in 2018 and I know that you can do it again this year. “… As the Irish blessing says, wherever you go and whatever you do, may the luck of the Irish be there with you. My grandfather, Ambrose Finnegan, would always say, ‘Keep the faith,’ and then my Grandmother Blewitt would add, ‘No, spread it.’ So go spread the faith. I’ll be cheering for you.” Biden often celebrates his Irish ancestry. Earlier this year, at the White House, he said: “Everything between Ireland and the United States runs deep. Our joys, our sorrows, our passion, our drive, our unrelenting optimism and hope.” On his father’s side, his ancestry is English and French. On Saturday, it was not immediately clear if the president had also wished good luck to England, who beat Australia at Twickenham, or to the French team picked to play Georgia in Bordeaux on Sunday.