The standoff over the House vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill continues. Speaker Nancy Pelosi had originally hoped to pass both the infrastructure bill and Democrats’ reconciliation package today, but a handful of centrists objected to passing the reconciliation package without an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office. So instead, Pelosi is trying to pass the infrastructure bill and the rule to begin debate on the reconciliation package. Joe Biden has cancelled plans to travel to Delaware, and reportedly called into the ongoing hours-long meeting of the Congressional Progressive Caucus in an effort to push the infrastructure bill forward. It remains unclear whether Pelosi has the votes to pass the infrastructure bill, as progressives are insisting the reconciliation package must be approved at the same time. The chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, Pramila Jayapal, reportedly told Biden that she won’t support the vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill tonight. Biden celebrated the strong jobs report, which showed the US economy added 531,000 jobs last month. In his speech, the president credited his administration’s vaccination policies and the passage of the coronavirus relief package with reinvigorating the economy. “Today is another great day for our economic recovery,” Biden said. “America is getting back to work. Our economy is starting to work for more Americans.” The president and the first lady attended the funeral of former secretary of state Colin Powell at Washington national cathedral. Powell, who was the first African American to serve as US secretary of state, died last month at the age of 84. - Joan E Greve and Dani Anguiano Joe Biden has cancelled plans to travel to Delaware this evening as the Democratic standoff over the infrastructure vote continues. The president called into the ongoing hours-long meeting of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, CNN reports, in an effort to push the bill forward and resolve the dispute between a handful of moderate Democrats and progressives. Progressives are reportedly frustrated that the House speaker is pushing for the infrastructure vote tonight, which they have long said they won’t support until the reconciliation package is also approved. New panels tasked with taking redistricting out of partisan control have had a shaky start, reports my colleague Sam Levine. Greta Harris had enough. The 16-person panel she was co-chairing was on the verge of a meltdown after months of trying to draw new boundaries for districts in the Virginia state legislature. The deadline for submitting maps had arrived but there was no plan. The panel was tasked with redrawing political districts, a task that lawmakers across the US undertake every 10 years. In recent years, there’s been a growing alarm at how politicians have taken advantage of that process, distorting district lines to essentially choose the voters they represent and locking in their re-election and party control of certain seats. There’s now a broader recognition of how the practice, called gerrymandering, can essentially rig elections in favor of one party. Ten years ago, Republicans launched an unprecedented effort to gerrymander to their advantage. In the 2010 election, they targeted under-the-radar races in state legislatures with the goal of taking control of those bodies to control the redistricting process. The effort, called Project REDMAP, was remarkably successful. Republicans used their newfound majorities in places like Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania to draw district lines that would lock Democrats out of power for years to come. In some places, Republicans weren’t subtle about what they were trying to do. In Michigan, A Republican aide bragged about cramming “Dem garbage” into certain districts. This year, Harris’s panel, comprising eight lawmakers and eight citizens and evenly split between Democrats and Republicans, was supposed to help prevent that kind of distortion from happening. But by the beginning of October, things were so bad that the commission couldn’t even agree on how they should start drawing the maps. More here: Trump justice department official refuses to answer questions from 6 January panel A former Trump justice department official declined to testify before the 6 January congressional committee on Friday. In a letter sent to congressional investigators, a lawyer for Jeffrey Clark, who assisted Donald Trump’s efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election, defended Clark and his refusal to cooperate with the investigation. “Mr Clark had nothing to do with the January 6 protests or the incursion of some into the Capitol,” the letter states. Clark plans to hold off on testifying until after the resolution of Trump’s lawsuit seeking to block the release of documents related to the US Capitol attack. The chair of the 6 January committee told Politico that the panel would consider voting to hold Clark in contempt of Congress. The panel previously approved a contempt of Congress citation for Steve Bannon for his refusal to testify before the committee. Congresswoman Pramila Jayapal has reportedly told Joe Biden she won’t support the vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill tonight and that the bill and the reconciliation package should pass together. Progressive congresswoman Cori Bush has also indicated she won’t support the bill until the reconciliation package advances. “Conservative Democrats are trying to tell my community that we should just shut up and accept a half deal,” Bush said. It could be a long night in the House of Representatives as Nancy Pelosi moves ahead with plans to hold the final vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill. The California Congressman John Garamendi said Pelosi would keep the House in session all night if necessary. The fight over the infrastructure vote plan is dividing Democrats. The House speaker had originally hoped to pass both the infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package today, but six centrist Democrats were opposed to passing the reconciliation package without an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office. Meanwhile, progressives insist both must be approved at the same time. Hi all, Dani Anguiano here taking over the US politics blog for the rest of the day. It’s been a chaotic day in Washington with the fight over the bipartisan infrastructure bill and reconciliation package dividing Democrats. As noted by my colleague Joan E Greve, Nancy Pelosi has indicated she will move ahead with plans to hold the final vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill today, even though progressives have long said they won’t support the proposal until the reconciliation package is also approved. Joe Biden reportedly called Pramila Jayapal, the chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, this afternoon. According to CNN, about 20 progressive Democrats plan to vote down the infrastructure bill tonight. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Dani Anguiano, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House is moving forward with a final vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill. Speaker Nancy Pelosi had originally hoped to pass both the infrastructure bill and Democrats’ reconciliation package today, but a handful of centrists objected to passing the reconciliation package without an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office. So instead, Pelosi is trying to pass the infrastructure bill and the rule to begin debate on the reconciliation package. But it remains unclear whether Pelosi has the votes to pass the infrastructure bill, as progressives are insisting the reconciliation package must be approved at the same time. The chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, Pramila Jayapal, said in a statement, “[I]f our six colleagues still want to wait for a CBO score, we would agree to give them that time — after which point we can vote on both bills together.” Joe Biden called on the House to pass the infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package “right now”. “I’m asking every House member, member of the House of Representatives to vote ‘yes’ on both these bills right now,” Biden said in his morning remarks on the October jobs report. Biden celebrated the strong jobs report, which showed the US economy added 531,000 jobs last month. In his speech, the president credited his administration’s vaccination policies and the passage of the coronavirus relief package with reinvigorating the economy. “Today is another great day for our economic recovery,” Biden said. “America is getting back to work. Our economy is starting to work for more Americans.” The president and the first lady attended the funeral of former secretary of state Colin Powell at Washington national cathedral. Powell, who was the first African American to serve as US secretary of state, died last month at the age of 84. Dani will have more coming up, so stay tuned. House speaker Nancy Pelosi has indicated she is pushing forward with plans to hold the final vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill today, even as progressives criticize the strategy. “We had hoped to be able to bring both bills to the floor today. Some members want more clarification or validation of numbers that have been put forth,” Pelosi said. “And we honor that request.” A handful of centrist Democrats are insisting they must see the analysis from the Congressional Budget Office before supporting the reconciliation package, and that report won’t be ready for at least another couple of weeks. Pelosi voiced confidence that the CBO analysis will be completed “before Thanksgiving,” at which point House Democrats will hypothetically be able to pass the reconciliation package. The speaker also thanked the Congressional Black Caucus for proposing the “creative alternative” of voting today on the infrastructure bill, as well as the rule for the reconciliation package. But it is still unclear whether Pelosi has the votes to pass the infrastructure bill, as progressives are insisting the two proposals must be approved at the same time. Stay tuned. House majority leader Steny Hoyer would not provide any clarity about whether he expected the bipartisan infrastructure bill to pass today, amid criticism from progressives. “We’re working on it,” Hoyer said as he left speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office moments ago, per Politico. As of now, it is looking less and less likely that House Democrats will be able to pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill or the reconciliation package today. A handful of Democratic centrists are insisting they must see the analysis from the Congressional Budget Office before passing the reconciliation package, and that report is not expected for another couple of weeks. So House speaker Nancy Pelosi called for a vote today on the final passage of the infrastructure bill, even though progressives have said for months that they will not support the proposal until the reconciliation package is approved as well. Unless something changes in the next couple of hours, House leaders don’t have the votes to pass either bill. Stay tuned. Progressive congresswoman Cori Bush has also made clear that she will not support the bipartisan infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package advances as well. “There’s no phone call I could get or nothing that could be offered to me that will change my mind,” Bush said, per Bloomberg. At least three progressives have already indicated they will not support the bipartisan infrastructure bill today, and that is enough to block the proposal’s passage (unless some Republicans vote “yes”). Congresswoman Ilhan Omar retweeted a message from congressman Jared Huffman saying the infrastructure bill would not pass without the reconciliation package being approved as well. And congresswoman Rashida Tlaib also criticized the vote plan, noting the infrastructure bill would lead to an increase in carbon emissions while the reconciliation package has more than $500bn in funds for climate initiatives. House progressives are making it clear (once again) that they will not support the bipartisan infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package advances as well. House speaker Nancy Pelosi has told members that they will vote today on the rule for the reconciliation package and the final passage of the infrastructure bill. But in a new statement, Pramila Jayapal, the chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, made clear that her members would not go forward with such a plan. “As we’ve consistently said, there are dozens of our members who want to vote both bills — the Build Back Better Act and the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act — out of the House together,” Jayapal said. “We now understand that there are six Democratic members who want to have a formal CBO score on Build Back Better before voting.” Jayapal pointed to the report from the nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation and analyses from the White House to argue that the reconciliation package “will contribute to reducing the deficit”. She added, “However, if our six colleagues still want to wait for a CBO score, we would agree to give them that time — after which point we can vote on both bills together.” House majority leader Steny Hoyer confirmed that the chamber will now begin one hour of debate on the rule for the reconciliation package. After that debate has concluded, the House plans to vote on both the rule and the final passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. The votes are expected to start in about an hour, according to the guidance from Hoyer’s office. Meanwhile, the vote has finally closed on the Republican motion to adjourn the chamber. House speaker Nancy Pelosi kept the vote open for more than seven hours as she tried to convince members of her caucus to advance the reconciliation package. By a vote of 207 to 219, the motion to adjourn was rejected, as expected. The delay made this the longest vote in House history. House speaker Nancy Pelosi has just confirmed that the chamber will vote today on the rule for Democrats’ reconciliation package and the final passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. “In order to make progress on the President’s vision, it is important that we advance the Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework and the Build Back Better Act today,” Pelosi said in a “Dear colleague” letter. “The Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework rule and debate have already happened. Now, we will bring to the Floor the BIF and a rule for consideration of the Build Back Better Act.” But it remains unclear whether House progressives will go along with this plan. They have repeatedly made clear that they will not support the infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package advances as well. And as of now, it is unclear when the House may give final approval to the reconciliation package, as some centrists are insisting they must see the analysis from the Congressional Budget Office before supporting the bill. That report may not be available for weeks. Stay tuned. Despite some lingering questions about whether House Democrats will have the votes to pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill or the reconciliation package today, the chair of the caucus is still voicing optimism. “Look forward to moving legislation on the House Floor today that will create millions of good-paying jobs #ForThePeople,” Hakeem Jeffries said on Twitter. Joyce Beatty, the chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, said the House will vote today on the final passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the rule for the reconciliation package. The CBC chair shared the plan with reporters after a long meeting with House speaker Nancy Pelosi. When asked about the timing of the final vote on the reconciliation package, Beatty said, “That’s forthcoming.” But it remains unclear whether House progressives will go along with such a plan. They have repeatedly made clear they would not support a standalone vote on the infrastructure bill. Stay tuned. At least one of the holdout centrists in the House has indicated support for advancing the reconciliation package without an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office. Congresswoman Carolyn Bourdeaux, a Democrat of Georgia, said on Twitter, “There are a lot of rumors swirling. Let me be clear—this bill is paid for and it has a number of my priorities in it. If it comes to the Floor today—I will support the Build Back Better Act.” But it appears that there are still enough Democratic centrists insisting on the CBO score to block the bill from advancing. Stay tuned. Attorneys general in more than two-dozen Republican-controlled states filed suit today against the Biden administration, challenging a new vaccine requirement for workers at companies with more than 100 employees. “This mandate is unconstitutional, unlawful, and unwise,” Missouri attorney general Eric Schmitt said in a court filing in the St. Louis-based 8th US circuit court of appeals on behalf of 11 of the states, The Associated Press writes. The agency further reports: “This mandate is unconstitutional, unlawful, and unwise,” said the court filing by Missouri Attorney General Eric Schmitt, one of several Republicans vying for the state’s open U.S. Senate seat next year. New regulations by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration mandate that companies with more than 100 employees require their workers to be vaccinated against COVID-19 or be tested for the virus weekly and wear masks on the job. The requirement is to kick in Jan. 4. Failure to comply could result in penalties of nearly $14,000 per violation. Schmitt said Missouri has 3,443 private employers who could be covered by the vaccine requirement, with nearly 1.3 million employees. He said he sued “to protect personal freedoms, preserve Missouri businesses, and push back on bureaucratic tyrants who simply want power and control.” The Biden administration has been encouraging widespread vaccinations as the quickest way out of the pandemic. A White House spokeswoman said Thursday that the mandate was intended to halt the spread of a disease that has claimed more than 750,000 lives in the U.S. The top legal official for the U.S. Department of Labor, which includes OSHA, has said legal precedent allows it to issue rules that keep workplaces safe and that those rules pre-empt state laws. Missouri was joined in the lawsuit by the Republican attorneys general of Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wyoming. The office of Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller, a Democrat, also joined in the suit, along with several private, nonprofit and religious employers. The Daily Wire, a conservative media company, filed a challenge in federal court on Thursday. So did companies in Michigan and Ohio represented by a conservative advocacy law firm, as well as two Wisconsin manufacturers represented by a conservative law firm. Despite Colin Powell’s track record including a presentation before the United Nations Security Council in 2003 pitching alleged evidence of weapons of mass destruction, that in fact did not to exist, as an argument to invade Iraq, nothing negative has been heard so far at his ongoing funeral service, writes Lauren Burke at the national cathedral. There are more than 1,500 present at the national cathedral in Washington, DC, to honor Powell on a clear, crisp, breezy November afternoon. The former secretary of state died last month at 84, from complications of coronavirus, which came on top of him suffering other serious illnesses. Friend and former diplomat RichardArmitage told a story of a casual office visit by the Harlem Globetrotters baskeball team, including Sweet George Brown playing in the background, and Powell taking a moment to relax from the pressures of his duties. “Nothing made Colin Powell happier than to sneak away from his security detail,” Armitage said. He relayed an account of a visit from the foreign minister from Sweden who presented an Abba box set to Powell when he was secretary of state. Powell was a huge fan of the pop group. He got down on bended knee and sang the Abba hit “Mamma Mia” after the gift presentation, Armitage relayed. Military musicians played music from Abba and Bob Marley in the cathedral before Powell’s casket was brought in by eight military pallbearers. Former secretary of state Madeleine Albright gave a eulogy and spoke of Powell as a man who connected with other people from different backgrounds and of very different ages. “He relished the opportunity to connect with other generations,” said Albright. “Colin was always true to himself,” she added. Powell’s widow and three children are at the service, as well as Joe Biden, Barack Obama and George W Bush and their wives. Michael Powell, Colin’s son, said: “My father is frequently remembered as a problem solver.” “Colin Powell was a great leader because he was a great follower. He knew you couldn’t ask troops to do anything you wouldn’t do yourself,” he added. Powell was America’s first Black secretary of state but, to some surprise, never ran for president. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden called on the House to pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package “right now”. “I’m asking every House member, member of the House of Representatives to vote ‘yes’ on both these bills right now,” Biden said in his morning remarks on the jobs report. But it remains unclear whether Democrats have the votes to pass the bills, as some centrists are raising concerns about approving the reconciliation package without a score from the Congressional Budget Office. Biden celebrated the strong October jobs report, which showed the US economy added 531,000 jobs last month. In his speech, the president credited his administration’s vaccination policies and the passage of the coronavirus relief package with reinvigorating the economy. “Today is another great day for our economic recovery,” Biden said. “America is getting back to work. Our economy is starting to work for more Americans.” The president and the first lady are now attending the funeral of former secretary of state Colin Powell at Washington national cathedral. Powell, who was the first African American to serve as US secretary of state, died last month at the age of 84. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Meanwhile, the confusion continues on Capitol Hill, as the House looks to hold votes on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package. Asked whether he believed there would be a vote tonight, House majority leader Steny Hoyer told reporters, “I don’t know.” Members of the House Democratic caucus are still meeting with Nancy Pelosi to determine whether the speaker can get the votes necessary to pass one or both bills tonight. The chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, Joyce Beatty, is now meeting with Pelosi, per Politico. Lauren Burke has more details on Colin Powell’s funeral service today: Powell was known as a revered army general and statesman who appealed to leaders and votes on both sides of the aisle and had made history as the US’s first Black secretary of state. He was also known as an approachable presence in a city that is so often bound up by protocol. He has also previously expressed regret at how he played a pivotal role in attempting to justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq. A staunch Republican, he nevertheless endorsed Democrat Barack Obama in his 2008 campaign that saw him become the first Black US president. Powell, a four-star general and former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, rose to the heights of military and diplomatic service from relatively disadvantaged beginnings, having been born in New York City to Jamaican parents and raised in the South Bronx where he was educated through public schools before he entered the army via a college officer training program. Powell is due to be eulogized by former secretary of state Madeleine Albright, friend and former diplomat Richard Armitage, and Powell’s son Michael. Former secretaries of state Hillary Clinton and Condoleezza Rice, one Democrat, one Republican, were also seated prominently at the cathedral. The dignitaries all wore face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Powell himself died of complications from the disease, while also suffering from cancer and Parkinson’s disease. Lauren Burke reports for the Guardian: Colin Powell, who rose from a humble background to serve as America’s secretary of state, was honored at Washington’s national cathedral on Friday, following his death last month at 84. The memorial was replete with the company of the current president and first lady and former presidents and secretaries of state in an atmosphere that could only be described as akin to a state funeral. Presidents Joe Biden, George W Bush and Barack Obama were all in attendance, along with their wives. Bill Clinton could not attend because he is recovering from an infection, while 97-year-old Jimmy Carter is not able to travel. Donald Trump was not expected to attend. The current secretary of state, Antony Blinken, is also in attendance for the service. Powell’s wife Alma Powell sat alongside their children, Linda Powell, Michael Powell and Annemarie as the service began on Friday afternoon. Progressive congressman Mondaire Jones urged his centrist colleagues to support the reconciliation package in response to Joe Biden’s speech. “@POTUS has asked House Democrats to vote for both bills today—for the American people,” the New York congressman said on Twitter. “I hope the small handful of my colleagues who have not yet committed to voting for these broadly popular bills will do the right thing.” Joe Biden noted that he would soon be returning to the Oval Office to keep making calls to House members, encouraging them to pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package today. “I want to say very clearly: if your number one issue is the cost of living, the number one priority should be seeing Congress pass these bills,” Biden said. After concluding his prepared remarks, Biden did not take any questions from reporters, but he said he would do so after the two bills passed. As of now, it is very unclear when that might happen. Some centrist members of the House Democratic caucus are still insisting they must see the analysis from the Congressional Budget Office before supporting the reconciliation package, and that report could still be weeks away. The president and the first lady will soon leave to attend the funeral of former secretary of state Colin Powell. Stay tuned. Joe Biden called on “every House member” to support the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the $1.75tn reconciliation package, as some centrist Democrats raise concerns about the latter. The president argued that the reconciliation package would provide American families with “just a little more breathing room” by lowering their healthcare and childcare costs. “Right now, we stand on the cusp of historic economic progress,” Biden said. “And passing these bills will say clearly to the American people: we hear your voices.” As the president spoke, it remained unclear whether the House would be able to hold its planned vote today on the reconciliation package. Some centrist Democrats in the House are insisting they must see the Congressional Budget Office’s analysis of the bill before supporting it, but that report may not be available for weeks. “I’m asking every House member, member of the House of Representatives to vote ‘yes’ on both these bills right now. Send the infrastructure bill to my desk. Send the Build Back Better bill to the Senate,” Biden said. “Let’s show the world that America’s democracy can deliver and propel our economy forward. Let’s get this done.” Joe Biden celebrated the strong jobs report, saying the addition of 531,000 jobs in October showed that the US economy is recovering after suffering because of the pandemic. “Today is another great day for our economic recovery,” Biden said in his speech at the White House. “America is getting back to work. Our economy is starting to work for more Americans.” The president noted new unemployment claims have fallen every week for the past five week and are now at the lowest level since the start of the pandemic. Biden credited his administration’s vaccination policies and the passage of the $1.9tn coronavirus relief package with reinvigorating the US economy. “This did not happen by accident,” Biden said. Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks on the latest jobs report, which showed that US employers added a solid 531,000 jobs in October. The strong number provides a boost to Biden, whose presidency has been battered by political setbacks in recent months as it struggles to enact his domestic agenda and suffered a major defeat in the race for governor of Virginia. October’s job growth outpaced the 450,000 new jobs economists had predicted from the job market, mitigating fears of slow growth in the jobs sector after far fewer jobs were added in September than was expected. The boost in jobs was expected after Covid cases and hospitalization rates declined in October. The rise has meant a continued decrease in the unemployment rate, which was 4.6% in October. The decrease in unemployment was mostly seen among white and Hispanic workers, while the Black and Asian unemployment rate has remained unchanged. The Black unemployment rate stands at 7.9% – more than 3% higher than the white unemployment rate of 4.2%. Josh Gottheimer, a centrist member of the House Democratic caucus who previously demanded an earlier vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill, indicated he was ready to vote for both bills today. “It’s time to stop delaying &amp; start delivering on priorities to help our communities,” the New Jersey congressman said on Twitter. “With the bipartisan infrastructure bill and reconciliation, let’s revitalize our infrastructure, invest in child care, &amp; cut taxes for middle-class families w/ SALT relief.” But some of Gottheimer’s centrist colleagues have indicated they want to see an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office before voting for the reconciliation package. House majority leader Steny Hoyer has said the CBO cannot complete its analysis today, per the Washington Post: Kurt Shrader, another centrist member of the House Democratic caucus, told CNN that there was “no resolution” to his concerns about the reconciliation package. The Oregon congressman also would not say whether he would vote “yes” on the bill if the Congressional Budget Office released its analysis, which is one of centrists’ demands before a vote happens. It remains unclear whether Nancy Pelosi has the votes to advance Democrats’ reconciliation package, as some of the centrist members of her caucus have voiced concerns about the proposal. After meeting with the speaker, congressman Jared Golden said he would vote “no” on advancing the reconciliation package until the Congressional Budget Office analyzes the bill. He also wants the chamber to first vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill. “You should be asking if there will be a vote,” Golden said, per Axios. As a reminder, Pelosi can only afford to lose three votes and still pass the reconciliation package, because of Democrats’ narrow majority in the House. This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Joanna Walters. Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks on the strong October jobs report, which showed that the US economy added 531,000 jobs last month. The president and the first lady will then attend the funeral of former secretary of state Colin Powell at Washington National Cathedral. The blog will be providing updates on all of those events, so stay tuned. The blog will have a live stream of the service today at the national cathedral in Washington, DC, to commemorate the life of groundbreaker Colin Powell, who became the first Black secretary of state in the US. Joe Biden and first lady Jill Biden will attend the service, which is due to begin at 12pm ET (4pm GMT). Powell served as secretary of state under president George W Bush and the general died of complications resulting from Covid-19, combined with cancer and Parkinson’s disease, last month. Powell’s reputation was tarnished by the fact that he played a pivotal role in attempting to justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq, an action he later said he regretted. He endorsed Barack Obama’s run before he became the first Black US president in 2008. Powell himself never ran for president, to the surprise of some. Former secretary of state Madeleine Albright will give a eulogy. Meanwhile, the US jobs figures for October have just come out and they are good for Biden. Read all about it in our business live blog, brought to you by the London team, here. Good morning, US live blog readers, it’s another busy day in Washington, DC, as the House is already meeting and debating Joe Biden’s flagship bills – $1tn on infrastructure, $1.75tn on social benefits and action on the climate crisis – and is hoping to vote on both today in a crucial step forward. It’s also a big day at the national cathedral. Here’s what’s ahead: The House of Representatives is already in session, having started earlier than normal at 8am ET, and members are debating the two enormous bills relating to physical and human infrastructure that are at the forefront of the Biden agenda. They hope to vote asap today on both. We expect two hours of debate but there will also be some procedural hassle from Republicans, so voting may not get under way until the afternoon. Senior Democrats have indicated they have the votes, but nothing is guaranteed at this point. If the bills pass today it’s a crucial stepping stone – the $1tn infrastructure bill will then go to the president’s desk to be signed. But the giant $1.75tn (though slimmed down from $3.5tn) bill that’s at the heart of the Build Back Better package will go back to the Senate – where arguments over it will begin all over again and centrist Democrats led by Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema are expected to hold everything up further. The Senate is not in session today, so no progress expected there. At 12pm, Joe and Jill Biden and many other prominent figures will attend the memorial service at the national cathedral in Washington DC for Colin Powell, the former Republican secretary of state who died last month.For weeks, Canadians have been gripped by a messy public feud splintering one of the country’s richest families. Kicked off by an accidental pocket dial that revealed an executive-level coup attempt, the battle has pitted mother against son, ensnared Toronto’s mayor and drawn comparisons to the HBO show Succession. Two separate groups of directors have proclaimed themselves the rightful stewards of Rogers Communications, a sprawling C$30bn telecommunications and entertainment empire with interests in media, professional hockey, basketball, baseball, football and soccer. On Friday, a Canadian court ruled that the faction led by Edward Rogers, son of the company’s late founder, had the power to legally replace directors without a shareholder meeting, granting the eldest son immense power over the country’s largest wireless carrier in a ruling viewed as a blow to shareholders’ rights. “These family squabbles are an interesting backdrop to this dispute that would be more in keeping with a Shakespearean drama,” wrote Justice Shelley Fitzpatrick in her judgment, adding the feud has “no doubt added a voyeuristic element on the part of many into the lives of a very wealthy Canadian family”, but that the public quarrel was a “distraction” to the narrow legal question at hand. Since the company’s founder, Ted Rogers, died in 2008, the company has been forced to fend off criticism that it has underperformed industry peers. And with no clear successor named before Rogers’ death, questions over who in the family would eventually take charge have lingered for more than a decade. While Rogers is publicly traded, it has a dual share structure, with voting control still held by the family. The saga began last month after Ted’s son Edward Roger covertly tried to replace the company’s chief executive, Joe Natale, with its chief financial officer, Tony Staffieri. The plan was foiled after Staffieri accidentally called Natale while discussing the plot with someone else – leading to perhaps the first use of the phrase “butt dial” in a headline by Canada’s Globe and Mail newspaper, which broke the story. As the power struggle spilled out of the boardroom and into public view, family matriarch Loretta Rogers and her daughters Martha Rogers and Melinda Rogers-Hixon publicly backed Natale. The trio, exercising their role as directors, ousted Edward as chairman of the Rogers board. But Edward pushed back, announcing the replacement of five board directors with his own handpicked candidates, who swiftly re-elected him. “I see Ed has appointed himself the chairman. LOL. This should be taken as seriously as if he appointed himself the king of England,” tweeted Martha. But in Friday’s ruling, the British Columbia supreme court sided with Edward, ruling that his unilateral changes were permitted. The bitter rivalries, power-grabs and scorched-earth battles waged through social media are reminiscent of Succession, the hit HBO show that chronicles members of an ultra-rich family clamouring for power. But Martha instead sees the situation more akin to Game of Thrones – a show defined by the swift and often brutal demise of central characters. Revelations that Ed Rogers “actively fought plans” to re-sign Masai Ujiri, head of the Toronto Raptors, in which the company owns a significant stake, did little to foster goodwill for the embattled executive. Rogers was alleged to have called the immensely popular Ujiri “arrogant” and expressed skepticism that he was worth his salary. As the feud deepened, Toronto’s mayor, John Tory, was tapped to mediate. But Tory was himself a board member and and longtime friend of the Rogers family, and revelations that he had drawn C$100,000 (US$80,000) in annual compensation from the board over the past seven years drew swift criticism from local papers. Overshadowing the public tussle for control of the company is the pending C$26bn takeover of a rival telecoms firm, Shaw Media. While the deal still needs regulatory approval, if successful, the combined company would become a Canadian media and sports behemoth. On Thursday, citing “recent family and board-level disagreements and related management uncertainties”, credit-rating agency Moody’s warned the company could be downgraded if the board issues continued to have a “sustainable detrimental effect” on the company. In a statement, Loretta Rogers, Martha Rogers and Melinda Rogers-Hixon called the court judgment a “black eye for good governance and shareholder rights” that “sets a dangerous new precedent for Canada’s capital markets by allowing the independent directors of a public company to be removed with the stroke of a pen”.It is the town in a far-flung corner of Western Australia whose name is now as well recognised in London as it is in Sydney. Carnarvon, a coastal community that’s home to 5,500 people at the mouth of the Gascoyne River, has had the type of searing spotlight shone on it that normally comes with events of global importance – earthquakes and other such disasters. This time it was the case of missing four-year-old Cleo Smith that drew the world’s attention. Her abduction from her family’s tent from a holiday camping ground, the subsequent massive police search and her final, dramatic rescue from a nondescript house on the fringes of Carnarvon itself, making international headlines. The 18-day drama ended early on Wednesday morning when she was carried away, smiling under the glare of a spotlight, by WA detectives and reunited with her family. Now, as the fleeting spotlight turns off and the public’s attention moves on, residents of Carnarvon say they will be left behind to deal with an event that has shaken it to its very core. Right now, the town is breathing a collective sigh of relief. Not just for Cleo and her family, but because many feared Carnarvon’s social fabric would not withstand the mystery of losing one of their own. Rennee Turner, a Carnarvon cultural awareness coach and Ingaarda woman, says for 18 days her town was lost to fear, despair and sadness. “The morning they found Cleo, I felt my town smile again,” Turner said. “I felt like a light, or a spark, had begun to shine again. I really felt like our community was back. It is overwhelming.” On Thursday, 36-year-old Terence Darrell Kelly was charged with abducting Cleo. The Carnarvon local was flown to Perth on Friday, bare-foot and shackled, where he was transferred to a maximum-security facility before his hearing next month. Some feared the fact the accused is Indigenous may ignite tensions that sometimes bubble below the surface here. Former Greens MP Robin Chapple says that Carnarvon has had issues with racism in the past. “Intrinsically, it has had problems [with racism] over many years,” Chapple says. “It’s certain sectors of the community, it’s not the community as a whole, and it plays out over many different ways over many years.” But Turner says while the abduction threatened to tear people apart, the journey brought the town together. “I get emotional just talking about it. At the end of the day, we have a lot of Vietnamese here, Islander people, obviously a lot of Indigenous people here, every one of them had one of those ‘Find Cleo’ stickers. “It brought us together even stronger because there has been division over the years, it flares up and it goes down, but I saw this as something that we all came together as a town, community and as a family.” More than 18% of the Carnarvon population are Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. For now, it’s still flooded with police working on the painstaking task of building a prosecution case, and still living under the glare of the media. The property that Cleo was rescued from is under heavy police guard and being scoured for evidence. On Friday Cleo’s mum, Ellie Smith, and step-dad, Jake Gliddon, released a statement thanking the police, those involved in the search, the Carnarvon community, local business and family and friends. “We are humbled by the love and support that we have received from not only our local community but the whole of Western Australia and across the country.” And while many say they are desperate for things to go back to normal, the resolution to Cleo’s disappearance doesn’t mean all the town’s problems are solved. Local state MP Vince Catania says that, like many regional towns across Australia, Carnarvon has its share of problems with mental health, family, drug and alcohol, and housing issues. The midwest/Yamatji region has one of the highest rates of youth suicide in the world, according to the Geraldton Regional Aboriginal Medical Service, which covers Carnarvon. Catania has called for the $1m reward offered by the WA government, for anyone with information leading to the safe return of Cleo, to be donated to the Town of Carnarvon. The opposition Nationals MP says it could be used for things the community vitally needs. “We have got a very high suicide rate and that goes to the lack of programs and mental health support,” Catania says. “It can provide counselling services to people, enhance the security and CCTV and support the hard-working and selfless volunteer groups.” Catania says many of the key social service operations are based 400km away in Geraldton. “Housing is the number one issue. If you want to ever fix these issues, the government needs to provide the housing for these government departments to be able to come back into town.” WA’s minister for mental health and Aboriginal affairs, Stephen Dawson, declined to answer specific questions about social service provisions in the town in the wake of the investigation. “State government agencies have mobilised to provide support to people in and around Carnarvon,” a spokesperson said. Turner says there are resources available, but because the agencies are based in Geraldton, the programs aren’t tailored for the community. “The agencies need to engage and listen more to impacted families,” Turner says. “We have programs and help that is available, but it’s not been targeted through Carnarvon, it’s in Geraldton.” Turner says she’s known Cleo’s family for a long time and hopes the family doesn’t leave because of what’s happened. “After this, I’m hoping this is something that highlights Carnarvon, it doesn’t scare people off Carnarvon. We have the best coastline on the planet.” Carnarvon has a warm climate and is famous for its rugged coastline, fishing and tourism. It’s known as the food bowl of Western Australia, supplying 70% of Perth’s winter fruits and vegetables. It was also the first place in Australia to grow bananas, according to the shire. In town, local pest controller and Blowholes Protection Association president, Shane Aylmore, says the lost child stickers and posters have been removed or crossed out with the words “found”. “I think as a community we will come together, give the family their space, but I think there is a whole community here for anything they need in the future,” Aylmore said. “There’s no racial tension here. This is not a black, white thing,” he says. “It would be good to see positiveness come out of this.” Aylmore says he is well-connected in the community and that the general feeling in the town is people need to heal and for normality to return. As that slowly starts to happen, a massive sign on the roadside says what everyone there is thinking. “Welcome Home Cleo. Thank you WA Police.”New data shows Aboriginal people in NSW and the ACT have been heavily and disproportionately affected by Covid-19, amid concerns that even after two months of “surge” efforts in 30 Indigenous communities, vaccination rates will not be high enough to withstand further outbreaks. Ten per cent of all Covid cases in NSW and the ACT are Aboriginal and Islander people, meaning they have been affected at twice the rate of other Australians. In the past three months, there have been 7,000 cases, 700 hospitalisations, 80 people in ICU and 14 deaths among Aboriginal people, according to data from the National Aboriginal community controlled health organisation (NACCHO). Prime minister Scott Morrison said on Friday that Australia had made a “massive breakthrough” in reaching the 80% fully vaccinated milestone. “We are breaking through in the economic recovery that will now follow from the success of that vaccination program,” Morrison told reporters. “We are seeing Australia open up and this is something that we’re all terribly excited about.” But concerns remain that the targeted surge in Aboriginal communities has not lifted enough to protect them from the virus. Two months ago, in response to criticism of the slow vaccine rollout among priority groups and the growing gap in vaccination rates, the federal government’s Covid taskforce announced a surge plan to target 30 Aboriginal communities nationwide, to increase vaccination rates and counteract misinformation and hesitancy. Analysis of the most recent data by Guardian Australia shows that the surge effort has produced some positive results, but the gap between the Indigenous and the overall vaccination rates remains high. In many areas the gap is no longer increasing, and has decreased by a small amount in some areas, such as the Central Coast and Wollongong local government areas. Western Australia remains well behind, despite the additional resources, with the gap continuing to rise in Geraldton, and the Swan and Kalgoorlie regions. Overall, there is a 19 percentage point difference between the Indigenous and overall first-dose vaccination rates in most of the priority areas. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning NACCHO says its figures also show the rise in vaccination rates from the surge is not enough to get those 30 priority areas above 80% fully vaccinated. “I think there’s what the government considers a surge area, and what the community-controlled sector thinks is a surge area, and we think all of our areas are priorities,” epidemiologist and medical adviser to NACCHO, Dr Jason Agostino said. “South Australia and Queensland have given quite firm dates on when they’ll open up, and at this rate there’ll be a number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people un-immunised. And we’ve seen in New South Wales, ACT and Victoria, what happens then.” The community-controlled health sector has long warned that Covid spreads rapidly in Aboriginal communities where there are high comorbidities, crowded housing and poorer general health. The far western NSW town of Wilcannia made international headlines when it recorded its first case in mid-August, and within 10 days had the highest transmission rate in NSW, sparking anger and outrage. NACCHO is calling for greater involvement in planning for living with the virus as borders reopen. “We’re essential to the response as we’re going to be more burdened with seeing Covid positive people than other general practices,” Dr Agostino said. “There needs to be shared decision-making at the local level, and our Aboriginal community controlled health organisations need to be involved in the pandemic response in our clinics, because many of our patients will be people with Covid.” Agostino is a member of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander advisory group on Covid-19, which was set up in March 2020 to advise the federal government. It has just held its 95th meeting. “We continue to meet regularly with [the Federal Health] Department and the different states and territories around their responses. At the moment we’re emphasising that living with Covid is about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities living with Covid, because they’re being disproportionately affected.” “Door-to-door” work by trusted local health workers to counter hesitancy and answer questions about vaccination in community languages has been effective. “It is staff intensive and time intensive work, but it makes a difference,” he said. On Friday national cabinet agreed to update its outbreak management plans, in partnership with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community sector, and would look at how to manage any outbreaks at December’s meeting. It remains unclear if the possibility of outbreaks would delay borders reopening.The first day of the Breeders’ Cup meeting at Del Mar racecourse in California concluded in extraordinary and chaotic circumstances on Friday after Modern Games, trained in Newmarket by Charlie Appleby, was scratched from the Juvenile Turf on veterinary advice and then reinstated, before running out an easy winner as boos rang out from the grandstands. The drama began when Modern Games’s stable companion Albahr, drawn on his outside in stall two, became upset in the gate and put his feet over the front of the stall. “He freaked out and put his legs across [the gate],” Frankie Dettori, his rider, said. “Thanks to the boys who got me out of there, it could have been nasty.” An initial inspection of Modern Games suggested that he had sustained a minor injury in the incident, and an announcement was made at the track that Modern Games had also been scratched. As a result, he was taken out of the betting pools, but a subsequent veterinary inspection showed that he was fit to compete and he was allowed to take his place in the field, to run for purse money only. The race then unfolded ideally for Modern Games and William Buick, who arrived with a storming run in the straight to win with something to spare. The spectators at Del Mar, however, did not react warmly to the spectacle of a Breeders’ Cup winner that could not be backed, and loud boos and jeers rang around the course as Modern Games returned to the winner’s enclosure. “I didn’t quite know what happened,” Buick said afterwards. “I could hear some people talking on walkie-talkies about scratching my horse, but I don’t think they realised my stall had been opened by the handlers to avoid the other horse. “He’s a real pro, he gave me a great ride around and ultimately he was a very good winner.” Earlier on the card, Corniche made all the running to give Bob Baffert his fifth win in the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile and move to the front of the market for the Kentucky Derby next May, but may need to switch stables if he is to line up in the Run for the Roses at Churchill Downs next year. Corniche was drawn widest of all in 12, but Mike Smith was still able to get him across to the rail before the first turn and he controlled the remainder of the race from the front. He found a decisive finishing kick when challenged in the home stretch and appears to be a leading contender for the first leg of the Triple Crown next year. Baffert, though, was suspended from saddling runners at Churchill Downs for two years when Medina Spirit – who runs in the Breeders’ Cup Classic at Del Mar on Saturday – tested positive for betamethasone, a banned corticosteroid, after crossing the line in front in the Kentucky Derby earlier this season. “This race is so important for Corniche’s career,” Peter Fluor, the colt’s owner, said afterwards. “We wanted to get to this race and see how we did. Then Bob and I will sit down and talk, and we’ll see what happens. It would be difficult [to move to a different trainer] but Bob and I have always talked, we’ve been candid, we’ve said we’ve got to do what’s right for the horse.” David Loughnane’s Go Bears Go, in the purple colours of the football agent Kia Joorabchian’s Amo Racing operation, finished strongly in the Breeders’ Cup Juvenile Turf Sprint but could not get past the front-running Twilight Gleaming, who was in front from the first stride. Twilight Gleaming was a third consecutive winner in the race for both Ward and Irad Ortiz Jr, her jockey, and is now likely to be aimed towards either the Commonwealth Cup or King’s Stand Stakes at next year’s Royal meeting at Ascot. “I was really confident in this filly,” Ward said. “I feel bad for the other two owners because we are all trying to win, but this filly, she had good spacing from her win in France [last time] and every work at Keeneland just kept getting better and better. She was coming into it just fresh and fit and ready to go and she did it.” Joorabchian’s string has grown to more than 100 horses in the past few years and Go Bears Go was within a length of being his first winner at the highest level. “Coming to the Breeders’ Cup and finishing second is heartbreaking but it is incredible,” he said. “He ran a stormer and this horse has shown a lot of heart, right from his first race. A performance like this in America is incredible.” Pizza Bianca, owned and bred by the celebrity chef Bobby Flay, found a miraculous run through the field from the home turn under rider José Ortiz to beat Malavath, trained by Francis-Henri Graffard in Chantilly, by half a length in the Juvenile Fillies’ Turf. Cachet, from George Boughey’s Newmarket stable, and Loughnane’s Hello You both ran well to finish fourth and fifth respectively, but could not resist Pizza Bianca’s stretch run after she rounded the final turn with just one of her 13 rivals behind her.New Zealand has passed 200 daily cases of Covid-19 for the first time in the pandemic, placing it on a worrying trajectory for the summer and raising expert concerns that the growing outbreak could overwhelm the health system. On Saturday there were 206 cases announced – 200 based in Auckland, the city at the centre of the outbreak. There were 73 people in hospital with the virus, seven in intensive care. The record case numbers arrived as the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, gave a speech promising the country better times ahead. “To all of New Zealand, but especially Auckland, I say: he rā ki tua, better times are coming,” she said on Saturday at the Labour party conference. “Over the coming weeks, we will see the level of protection in our communities increase as more people are vaccinated. In fact, we’re on track to have amongst the highest vaccination rates in the world, already having overtaken the likes of Australia, the US, the UK, France, Germany and Ireland.” According to the Ministry of Health, 89% of eligible New Zealanders – those aged 12 and over – have had their first dose and 78% are fully immunised. But experts have continued to raise concerns in recent weeks that New Zealand’s growing daily case numbers could outpace its vaccine rollout, leading to a devastating outbreak before enough of the population is protected. Epidemiologists at research centre Te Pūnaha Matatini released modelling last week indicating that a high-transmission scenario, which maps on to the current daily case numbers New Zealand is seeing, could result in around 2,300 hospitalisations and 160 deaths between the start of October and start of January – a potential need for hospital care that “would place extreme demands on health system capacity”. Vaccination rates are particularly low among Māori and Pacific New Zealanders, especially in younger age brackets. Three in four (74%) of eligible Māori have had one dose of the vaccine and 56% are fully vaccinated. Public health experts have raised ongoing concerns that Māori and Pasifika would bear the worst health consequences of a widespread outbreak. Ardern said higher vaccination rates would mean “not every Covid case will trigger the anxiety of sudden lockdowns, but it will also mean that we continue to treat Covid seriously and take measures to protect people from it”. “Life may be different for a time, but it can and will feel more familiar again. And after so much disruption, so much anxiety, everyone deserves that,” she said.It was the last pitched battle fought on British soil, and its outcome determined the future of the newly formed United Kingdom and its fledgling empire. However, the land around the Culloden battlefield near Inverness is now under threat – from spreading housing estates and other developments. As a result, historians and archaeologists have launched a campaign aimed at boosting protection for the site where Britain’s last civil war came to an end on 16 April 1746, when the Jacobite troops of Bonnie Prince Charlie were decisively defeated by an army of government soldiers. The researchers, backed by the National Trust for Scotland (NTS) which owns and manages a significant part of Culloden Battlefield, have launched a series of digs to establish the exact boundaries of the battlefield and to discover, in greater detail, how the conflict unfolded. “We know where the hand-to-hand fighting occurred in the battle but there were other important manoeuvres and encounters in the area,” said Catriona McIntosh, estate manager for Culloden Battlefield. “If we can pinpoint these, we will be better able to protect the area.” The battle of Culloden marked the end of the Jacobite rising of 1745, an attempt by Charles Edward Stuart to regain the British throne for his father, James, who was – in turn – the son of the deposed monarch, James II of England. The Jacobites won their opening battles of this campaign but, after returning from a brief invasion of England, they met government troops with a fresh British commander, the Duke of Cumberland. He had devised new tactics – including special training with bayonets – to take on the Jacobites at Culloden. Cumberland also had a larger army: 8,800 soldiers to the Jacobites’ 6,000, men who had also been exhausted after attempting – and then aborting – a surprise attack on the government soldiers’ camp the night before the battle. “There have been several puzzles about the battle, including the fact that the government troops lined up to face the south-east,” added Raoul Curtis-Machin, operations manager at Culloden. “Strategically, you would have expected them to face east. “However, recent research, including laser-ranging techniques, suggests that these troops were avoiding an area that would have then been treacherously boggy – it was drained not long after the battle – and this would have affected their deployment. The current dig would appear to support this thinking.” Such conditions would also have had an impact on the Jacobites’ ability to charge their enemies’ lines, a favoured technique for them. However, these head-on tactics would have foundered in the mire that was then Culloden moor. “We see from our research that the government troops must have been very well drilled and could manoeuvre quickly, something that Cumberland had been working on very carefully,” added Derek Alexander, head of archaeology at the NTS. Research has revealed that each government soldier was ordered to thrust his bayonet not at the man opposite him but at the exposed underarm of the clansman to his right, for example. The result of these tactics was a battle that lasted only 60 minutes and led to the slaughter of a vast number of Jacobite soldiers. “We know that 60 government troops died on the field and a further 200 died later of their wounds,” added McIntosh. “By contrast, around 1,500 Jacobites died either on the day or later of their wounds. So the ratio of deaths was about 5 to 1 for the Jacobites. It was very one-sided.” The battlefield commemorates this grim slaughter and marks a turning point in British history. However, the site is now suffering because it is being heavily encroached by housing schemes. “For example, just beyond the Culloden Battlefield Memorial Cairn you can see Viewhill estate where 16 five-bed executive houses have just been built,” said Curtis-Machin. “It is an entirely inappropriate development for this landscape. “The problem is that we have been besieged by planning applications for further developments on land on all six sides of Culloden. If this sort of thing continues, then we will be hemmed in and will end up looking like Central Park in Manhattan. “And that would be wrong. By putting something there that is so out of place, it becomes incredibly difficult to experience history in a meaningful way.” After the battle of Culloden was over, Prince Charles fled and spent five months on the run before escaping Scotland for France in September 1746. He never returned and died a broken alcoholic without an heir in Rome in 1788. Had he triumphed at Culloden, however, Britain and its fledgling empire would have had very different destinies. “A Stuart monarchy might have had a very different view of Britain’s colonies, and so we might not have had an American revolution,” said Curtis-Machin. “Similarly, Highland Scots who suffered during the Clearances, which dramatically accelerated after the battle, would not have been forced to emigrate to Canada and other parts of the world. Culloden made a great difference to the world and we should acknowledge that.”Emergency services are searching for a man who is believed to have been attacked by a shark off Port Beach in North Fremantle, Western Australia, on Saturday morning. WA police said that water police, police air wing, Surf Life Saving and the Surf Rescue helicopter responded to reports of a shark attack off Port Beach at 10.10am Saturday morning. Water police were co-ordinating a marine search for the missing man, whose age had not yet been confirmed. A spokesperson for St John’s Ambulance WA said they had received a call at 10.03am of a shark bite and sent three crew to the scene. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), Department of Transport (Marine) and Department of Transport (Marine) authorities also attended the scene. Local councils have closed Port Beach and all beaches from Leighton Dog beach to Sand Tracks beach. The ABC reported that, according to witnesses, the man was swimming next to a dinghy when a tiger shark and a great white shark attacked him. A group of boys who were in the dinghy say they saw the incident. WA police acting inspector Emma Barnes said the search was ongoing. Barnes added that “the actions of the witnesses were heroic and very brave”. “(They got) everyone else out of the water and notified everyone of what was happening,” she said. One man who was surfing at the time of the attack told the West Australian newspaper that a young teenager in a boat came “flying up in the beach” warning everyone. “He was obviously very distraught, letting everyone know, ‘get out, there’s been a shark’,” the surfer said. “He kept going down the beach … I’ve actually gone out to meet him at his boat to get more of an account of what’s just going on. He said ‘someone’s been done, they’ve taken most of him’. “That kid deserves a shout out, he was an avid little boatie, got everyone out.” It is pink snapper spawning season, meaning there are more sharks off the WA coast this time of year. Cockburn and Warnbro Sounds, two bays just south of Fremantle, are closed until the end of January because the spawning snapper tends to attract sharks.The Northern Territory’s Covid outbreak has grown to three cases after a woman from Cairns tested positive, but the source of the infections remain a mystery. The news came as Australia passed the 80% double vaccination dose rate in people aged 16 and over. The Katherine region was plunged into a snap three-day lockdown on Friday after the Territory recorded the first local case. The first case was an unvaccinated man in his 20s who tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday after spending time in Greater Darwin and Katherine. His housemate tested positive on Friday. Authorities announced on Saturday that a 21-year-old woman who arrived from Cairns on the 29 October, and spent time with the man, had also tested positive. She only became symptomatic on Saturday. They stayed at Darwin’s Mantra Hotel last weekend, and visited the Monsoons pub and nightclub. Since 12.01am Friday, Katherine residents have only been allowed to leave their homes for five reasons: to access goods and services, receive medical treatment, provide care and support, perform essential work and exercise. Greater Darwin is also locked out of Katherine in an effort to contain the spread of the virus. The NT chief minister, Michael Gunner, said that 1,200 Covid-19 tests had been administered on Friday. Asked whether the snap lockdown would end on Sunday as planned, Gunner said he was “feeling positive about the fact we have three cases who are linked”. But, Gunner cautioned, it is still likely there is another undetected case out there from whom the man and woman caught the virus. “What probably concerns us most at the moment is that we don’t have certainty about how the three people acquired Covid,” he said. “It may be, as we do further work, that one of these has a story we haven’t quite uncovered yet, maybe they are the missing link. “They could come up in further investigative work but at this stage it would be fair to say that we probably think the missing link is still unknown and that worries us.” The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said health authorities were also working to contact trace the woman who flew from Cairns and tested positive for the virus. Queensland reported a new local Covid-19 case on Saturday: a woman in her 20s from Goondiwindi, a town on the border of Queensland and NSW. The woman tested positive while in quarantine, but D’ath warned that she may have had one day out in the community while infectious. Speaking outside a Bunnings store that was hosting a pop-up vaccination clinic, the Queensland health minister urged residents to get tested. “The message remains clear, if you have any symptoms and if you have been in the town since the 30 October or anywhere in Brisbane, please come out and get tested,” D’Ath said. “We still have nine active cases.” Victoria recorded 1,268 new locally acquired Covid-19 cases and seven related deaths on Saturday, bringing the total number of active cases to 16,662. Victorian authorities confirmed that, as of Friday, there were 651 people in hospital, including 106 in intensive care. Of these, 70 were on a ventilator. Of the cases in hospital, authorities said 84% were not fully vaccinated, while 96% of those in intensive care had not received both jabs. In NSW, authorities reported 270 new local infections on Saturday. Three more people with Covid-19 died, none of whom were fully vaccinated. There were 270 Covid-19 cases admitted to hospital in the state. Authorities said 55 people were in intensive care, 27 of whom required ventilation. The ACT also recorded 18 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the total number of active cases in the territory to 136. There were only two people in ACT hospitals with the virus, one of whom was on a ventilator. On Saturday morning, Australia reached a double vaccination dose rate of 80.16% in people aged 16 and over, the prime minister’s office said, with a further 9% having received at least one vaccine dose. Scott Morrison said the vaccination rate was “another magnificent milestone”. “This has been a massive Australian national effort and the work doesn’t stop here,” he said. “We are on track to have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. “Ninety-nine per cent of Australians aged over 70 have had a first jab and over 90% have had a second. That is just extraordinary.” But vaccination rates vary significantly state-to-state, and are critically low in some communities. As of Friday, the ACT was leading the way in terms of vaccinations, with almost 95% of over 16-year-olds having received both jabs. A total of 89% of those over 16 in New South Wales, 83% in Victoria, 77% in Tasmania and 66% in Queensland were fully vaccinated. By comparison, only 65% of residents over 16 had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine in Western Australia and the Northern Territory. New data from the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO) shows concerning low vaccination rates in Indigenous Australians, two months after “surge” efforts from authorities to target 30 Aboriginal communities nationwide. Analysis of the most recent data by Guardian Australia shows that the surge effort has produced some positive results, but the gap between the Indigenous and the overall vaccination rates remains high. Overall, there is a 19 percentage point difference between the Indigenous and overall first-dose vaccination rates in most of the priority areas.House Democrats have passed a $1tn bill to rebuild the nation’s ageing infrastructure after months of delay, delivering Joe Biden a long-awaited legislative victory that he boasted would put the US “on a path to win the economic competition for the 21st century”. Applause filled the chamber as a bipartisan group of lawmakers gave final passage to the measure late on Friday night, sending it to Biden’s desk. The vote was 228 to 206, with 13 Republicans supporting the bill and six leftwing Democrats opposing it. Approval of the legislation fulfils one of the president’s central campaign promises to “build back better” in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, as well as his vow to work across the aisle with Republicans, even as he pushes the rest of his agenda forward on a party-line basis. In a second vote, held shortly after midnight, the House voted 221-213 to clear a procedural hurdle that paves the way for a final vote on a $1.75tn domestic policy and climate change bill, which they hope to pass before Thanksgiving. “Tonight, we took a monumental step forward as a nation,” Biden said in a statement, expressing his desire to swiftly sign both measures into law. “Generations from now, people will look back and know this is when America won the economic competition for the 21st century.” The pair of votes closed the curtain on a daylong saga that pitted House progressives against moderates, as Biden and Democratic leaders scrambled to salvage his agenda from yet another delay in a process beset by false starts. Under the terms of a truce, brokered by Biden and Democratic leaders, progressives agreed to end their blockade against the infrastructure bill in exchange for a commitment from moderates to support the social policy and climate change package, known as the Build Back Better Act, in a vote later this month if an official estimate of its cost and economic impact are consistent with White House projections. Marathon meetings on Capitol Hill and phone calls from the White House ultimately broke the logjam and yielded a deal between the party’s rival factions, which have been at odds for months over issues of policy and process. With the political stakes as high as ever, Biden on Friday stepped deeper into the legislative fray and asked Democrats to trust him that both bills would become law. As negotiations dragged into the evening, Biden delayed a trip to his home in Delaware to remain in Washington to continue lobbying lawmakers. In a statement, the president urged all members to vote for the infrastructure bill before them and promised that the House would advance on the broader package later this month. It worked. Shortly thereafter, progressives and moderates issued separate statements agreeing to advance the legislation. The five centrist holdouts in the House agreed to support the bill “as expeditiously as we receive the information” from the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO), but no later than 15 November. If there is a discrepancy between the cost estimates, the group said they remain committed to resolving them. “As part of this agreement, at the request of the president, and to ensure we pass both bills through the House, progressives will advance the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the House rule on Build Back Better tonight,” the Washington congresswoman Pramila Jayapal, chair of the powerful Congressional Progressive Caucus, said in a statement. The agreement marked a shift in position for progressives, who were under immense pressure from the White House and Democratic leaders to accept the deal. For months her caucus had pledged that it would only advance both bills together. It remained unclear until late on Friday whether Democrats could mount enough support for the infrastructure proposal, in the face of Republican opposition and resistance from progressives, who have long made their support for the measure contingent on the passage of the larger, social policy and climate mitigation spending package. “We had hoped to be able to bring both bills to the floor today,” the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said at an impromptu news conference earlier on Friday. Nevertheless, she insisted the House was on the cusp of a “historic” vote that would not only send the infrastructure bill to Biden’s desk, but would bring the party a “major step” closer to approving the social policy package. Expressing confidence, Pelosi said she had a “pretty good feel” about the evening’s vote. “We’re in the best place ever, today, to be able to go forward,” she said. The breakthrough came late into a chaotic day on Capitol Hill that began with Democrats confident they could advance the two central pillars of the president’s economic vision. But their ambitions were quickly dashed amid resistance from a small handful of moderate holdouts. A plan to advance both pieces of legislation was upended by pushback from about half a dozen centrists, who demanded an official accounting of the spending bill, which had undergone substantial changes in recent weeks. Before giving their support, these lawmakers wanted to first see a cost analysis from the CBO, which could take weeks. As tensions escalated throughout the day, Pelosi proposed a new strategy. In a letter to Democrats, she announced the House would hold two votes on Friday: one on the infrastructure measure and a procedural vote related to the spending package. The change of course infuriated progressives, who had for months said they would not vote for the infrastructure bill without a simultaneous vote on the spending package. That position derailed two previous attempts to advance the infrastructure bill first. “If our six colleagues still want to wait for a CBO score, we would agree to give them that time – after which point we can vote on both bills together,” Jayapal suggested in a statement earlier on Friday. Unexpected losses in Virginia and elsewhere across the country earlier this week injected a sense of urgency into the deliberations, with Democrats eager to prove they could govern a year after voters gave them control of the White House and Congress. With razor-thin majorities, Democrats need the support of every Democratic senator and nearly every House member. After accepting that she did not have the votes to advance both bills on Friday, Pelosi said the House would vote on the spending bill after the CBO figures are provided, in time, she hoped, for Congress to deliver a “Thanksgiving gift for the American people”. Negotiations have seen the initial Biden spending proposal nearly halved from $3.5tn, with many provisions pared back or dropped entirely. Biden, touting a strong monthly jobs report on Friday, implored House Democrats to “vote yes on both these bills right now”, arguing both pieces of legislation were critical to economic recovery. “Passing these bills will say clearly to the American people, ‘We hear your voices, we’re going to invest in your hopes,” Biden said on Friday morning. After his remarks, the president said he was returning to the Oval Office to “make some calls” to lawmakers. Pelosi worked furiously throughout the day, hosting rounds of meetings with lawmakers, to pave the way for a vote before lawmakers leave Washington for a week-long recess, whipping members on the House floor and keeping them late into the night in an effort to shore up support for legislation that runs to more than 2,000 pages. Progress on Biden’s agenda comes at a particularly difficult moment for the president. His approval ratings have slumped amid concerns over rising inflation, an unshakable pandemic and a harried withdrawal from Afghanistan. Biden departed for a pair of international summits without securing progress on domestic agenda, only to be met upon his return by news of his party’s poor showing in races across the country on Tuesday. In Virginia, a state he won by 10 points in 2020, Republicans won the governor’s race, and came much closer than expected to denying the Democratic governor of New Jersey a second term. The grim results helped jolt Democrats into action on Capitol Hill, where leaders hope enacting their ambitious agenda will help the party regain momentum and improve their electoral prospects ahead of next year’s midterm elections. The public works measure passed on Friday, substantial in its own right, passed the Senate in August with 19 Republican votes, including Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell. The five-year spending package provides $110bn in funding to upgrade the nation’s roads, bridges and highways; $39bn to modernise public transit, expanding the transportation systems and making it more accessible for people with disabilities, and $65bn to improve broadband access for Americans in rural areas, low-income families and tribal communities. It also includes provisions aimed at helping fortify the nation’s response to the climate crisis by building electric vehicle charging stations, modernising the electric grid and boosting carbon capture technologies. If passed, the spending bill will go to the 50-50 Senate, where it will face new challenges. Two centrist Democrats, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, have already thwarted many progressive initiatives and are expected to have further objections. The months-long legislative battle has seen the initial spending proposal nearly halved from $3.5tn, with many provisions pared back or dropped entirely. As drafted, the package would spend $1.85tn over 10 years to dramatically expand the nation’s social safety net, providing Americans assistance with the rising costs of healthcare, childcare and at-home elderly care. Medicare would be expanded to cover hearing aids while another provision would lower the cost of prescription drugs. At the heart of the sprawling legislation are plans to hasten the transition away from fossil fuels and limit planet-warming carbon emissions by incentivising electric vehicles, solar panels and wind turbines – all of which amounts to the largest US investment in clean energy. To satisfy a range of policy demands, House Democrats added key initiatives that may ultimately be stripped out by the Senate, including a paid family leave program and work permits for immigrants. The White House has argued that the plan would be fully paid for by raising taxes on the wealthiest Americans and large corporations.Tim Mak has written a sprawling tale of the greed, incompetence and narcissism which has dominated the National Rifle Association throughout Wayne LaPierre’s 30 years as its leader. Abetted by his wife, Susan, LaPierre has allegedly used his members’ dues to fund a billionaire’s lifestyle. The LaPierres’ wedding in 1998 was a near miss: he almost ran from the altar, until she and the priest changed his mind. Mak calls this “emblematic” of “a man driven by fear and anxiety over all other forces … his reaction to these emotions is usually to flee and hide”. These qualities, Mak writes, have made LaPierre “prey” to an endless series of conmen, throughout his leadership of America’s most-feared lobbying group. “Pushed and prodded” by his wife to discover “money’s alluring glow”, Mak writes, LaPierre saw his salary balloon from $200,000 in the mid-1990s to $2.2m in 2018. According to the investigation of the New York attorney general, which has done the most to expose serial excesses at the NRA, between 2013 and 2017 the black cars, private jets and hundreds of thousands of dollars of expensive clothing led to $1.2m in reimbursed expenses. Between 2013 and 2018, companies used to book the LaPierres’ private planes received an astonishing $13.5m. There were trips to Lake Como, Budapest and the Bahamas. Just the hired cars for trips to Italy and Hungary cost $18,000. LaPierre spent $275,000 on suits at a single Beverly Hills emporium, including $39,000 on one day in 2015. To disguise such excesses, the bills were sent to an outside vendor which the NRA reimbursed. Mak also does a good job of describing how every mass shooting has pushed the NRA ever further right, transforming it from advocacy group for gun rights into a fully fledged player in the culture war, especially after the massacre of 20 young children and six adults at Sandy Hook elementary school in Connecticut in December 2012. Mak offers a particularly depressing account of how the NRA chief lobbyist, Chris Cox, was personally involved in negotiations over the Manchin-Toomey bill, a Senate measure which would have modestly increased background checks albeit, as Mak points out, not enough to have prevented the Sandy Hook massacre, since that gunman used guns legally obtained by his mother. In any case, after months of negotiation the NRA double-crossed both sponsors, made sure the bill failed to get the 60 votes it needed to pass the Senate, then dropped its A-ratings for Manchin and Toomey to D and C respectively. The NRA’s role in the Trump-Russia scandal was substantial. Maria Butina, eventually convicted as a Russian spy, used “relationships within the NRA to build an informal channel of diplomatic relations with Russia”. Her efforts included a famous public exchange with Donald Trump during his first campaign, in which he expressed his affection for Vladimir Putin and promised to improve relations as president. The NRA spent $30m to help to elect Trump, more than his own fundraising super pac. Ironically, NRA membership dues fell after Trump entered the White House. The organization lost its most lucrative fundraiser when Barack Obama left office. The great unravelling began on 6 August 2020, when the New York attorney general, Letitia James, filed a lawsuit to dissolve the NRA entirely. She accused LaPierre of using the organization for 30 years “for his financial benefit, and the benefit of a close circle of NRA staff, board members, and vendors”. Six months later, the NRA filed for bankruptcy. But despite endless infighting, Wayne LaPierre remains in charge. And because Trump was elected, with the NRA’s help, the supreme court now includes three justices appointed by him – at least two of whom seemed eager in arguments this week to demolish most of the remaining state restrictions on carrying concealed weapons, in New York and six other states. The passions of gun owners – and the fear they have instilled in a majority of public officials – remain dominant forces in American politics despite the greed and incompetence of their leaders chronicled so thoroughly in this important book. Misfire is published in the US by DuttonWho killed Olof Palme? The Swedish prime minister was shot dead in a Stockholm street in February 1986, and for decades the identity of his killer remained a mystery. Even last year, when the case was finally officially concluded and the blame was pinned on Stig Engström – an insurance company employee who killed himself in 2000 – there was hot debate in Sweden about whether he had actually carried out the crime. No such doubts plague The Unlikely Murderer, Netflix’s new five-part drama about the Palme case. Engström guns the PM down in the first scene, leaving the show free to meld facts and speculation into an irresistible story of an eccentric who somehow outwits the police, set in a beautifully realised late-80s world of thick knitwear, chunky ashtrays and big, solid barnets. It’s a Scandi-kitsch Zodiac and highly bingeable. But, beyond the main narrative, The Unlikely Murderer becomes two parallel shows about frail, showboating men of different stripes. Trundling moistly through the foreground is Engström, who puts himself forward as the first eyewitness at the scene of the killing, playing the press off against the police and using shards of publicly available information to bolster his story. He is portrayed as a chaotic fantasist whose plan shouldn’t have a chance of working … except that it’s going to, because the police are inept, too. Constantly gulping cheap whisky or viscous red wine and obsessively cutting out newspaper clippings about the case, Engström is given just the right flavour of schlubby desperation by Robert Gustafsson, a comedian known in Sweden for sketches, impressions and sitcoms. He plays him as a comedy protagonist without the comedy, the sort of man to whom nobody at the dinner table or in the pub pays any attention, unless it’s to bully him for a quick laugh. His efforts to climb the social ladder in the nice suburb of Täby are a sozzled fiasco. You can almost whiff the bitter frustration emanating from his pores; that he is a failed councillor for the tax-cutting Moderate party is nearly too perfect. In the first three episodes – which are corking – Engström is an ensemble player in a drama about politics, the media and what happens when blokes with enlarged opinions of themselves dominate positions of responsibility. When it becomes apparent that the Stockholm police have an investigation on their hands that could not be more momentous, the county chief constable Hans Holmér swans in, confident and clueless, to take it over. In a delicious piece of casting, Holmér is played by Mikael Persbrandt, an actor who has “Sex appeal” as a subheading in his Wikipedia entry. Here, though, the rasping charm on show in Sex Education and the aggressive swagger he brought to Beck have been allowed to fade. Sporting a tremendous head of lank, rapidly thinning hair, Persbrandt nails Holmér as a smarmy, preening bluffer who dismisses the efforts of leathery veteran detective Arne Irvell (Peter Andersson), whose conscientious sifting of the evidence shows it all points to Engström. Instead, Holmér is obsessed with uncovering an international conspiracy that will make for a sexier news story. His bravado born of inadequacy causes harm, just as Engström’s does: a British version of the series would need to think carefully about which one Steve Coogan would play, but the correct answer would be Holmér. In the second half of the series, the focus shifts as we see journalist Thomas Pettersson begin to reinvestigate the case years after it’s gone cold (as well as appearing as a character in the series, the real Pettersson wrote the book on which the show is based). There are also flashbacks to the painful embarrassments that blighted Engström’s existence before the killing. The storytelling loses some momentum here, but Gustafsson holds our interest with his portrait of an impotent man who spots a chance to make an impact for the first time in his life. The series ends solemnly, with Engström having ruined his own already benighted life, as well as taking Palme’s. Despite being sinfully entertaining, The Unlikely Murderer can’t credibly be accused of taking the tragedy too lightly. Besides, that’s not the most important test that dramas like this have to pass: they should also tell us about something universal beyond the facts of the case. This one – with its fine observations of male pride turned toxic – hits the mark.Booster jabs will be available to book for those who need them a month earlier than expected in England, in an effort to speed up the programme, the government has announced. Those eligible for the top-up vaccination will receive their booking invitation five months after their second dose instead of six, after a change to the system means boosters can be prebooked. Office for National Statistics figures show that the prevalence of coronavirus infections in England remained at about 1 in 50 people in the week ending 30 October, steadying at its highest level of the year. Prevalence was unchanged from the previous week, after five weeks of rising infections. Infection rates decreased for older secondary school pupils over the week, the ONS said, dropping to 7.5% from 9.1% the previous week. Other suggestions that the spread of Covid is slowing include England’s R number falling to between 0.9 and 1.1, down from a previous estimate of 1.1-1.3. More than 9m top-up jabs have already been administered across the UK and from Monday, the English booking system will allow someone to prebook their booster appointment a month before they are eligible. Everyone over 50 and all those most at risk from Covid-19 should get a booster six months after their second dose. Currently, someone can only book an appointment at six months. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the plans would “accelerate the booster programme”. He urged people not to delay getting jabbed. Dr Michelle Drage, chief executive of Londonwide LMCs, which represents GPs in 27 of the capital’s 32 boroughs, doubted that the change would increase uptake much. “It may make a small difference. But it doesn’t tackle the levels of vaccine hesitancy and denial that are prevalent in communities right now.” But Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, applauded the move. “Vaccination remains at the heart of our response to the pandemic,” she said. “Primary care sites will do everything they can to ensure that those eligible for vaccination get them without delay, and to do that well, the supply will need to match the volume and timing of appointments as they are booked.” The latest evidence from the government scientific advisory panel shows that protection against symptomatic disease falls from 65%, up to three months after the second dose, to 45% six months after the second dose for the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and from 90% to 65% for the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. The booster programme is designed to top up this waning immunity. Early results from Pfizer show that a booster after a primary schedule of the same vaccine restores protection to 95.6% against symptomatic infection. The vaccines minister, Maggie Throup, said it was vital that people book their slots ahead of winter to protect themselves and their loved ones. The NHS national medical director for England, Stephen Powis, said: “While this winter is undoubtedly going to be different, the most important thing you can do is come forward for both your Covid booster and flu jab as soon as possible – now with the added convenience of booking in advance – making it even easier to protect yourself and loves ones.” The offer of a first and second Covid-19 vaccine is open to anyone who is eligible. Vaccines are available free of charge and from thousands of vaccine centres, GP practices and pharmacies. There are more than 500 extra vaccination sites now in England compared with April this year, up from 1,697 to more than 2,500. Vaccines are also available in schools for those aged 12-15, to offer the best possible protection this winter, as well as in more than 200 vaccine centres.I am sitting in front of my computer when my wife rings me from a train platform. “Busy?” she says. “Very busy,” I say, tapping at the keyboard. “Stiamo lavorando insieme,” says my computer, in a woman’s voice. “What was that?” my wife says. “Nothing,” I say. “Gerunds.” “Do we want to go to the theatre tomorrow?” she says. “Someone’s got spare tickets.” “Not sure,” I say. “I know what you mean,” she says. “The play is meant to be brilliant, though.” “What time does it start?” I say. “What does that matter?” she says. “I’m a businessman,” I say. “Just say yes or no,” she says. “Sto ancora decidendo,” my computer says. “Yeah, OK,” I say. As the fog of Covid restrictions lifts, I find it increasingly difficult to make logical choices about risk. I still wear a mask in shops, but I’ve also recently shaken the sweaty hands of strangers. I got on a plane in August, but I still haven’t been inside a pub. Or a theatre. That night I stay up late watching a film about demons invading an old family house. Paranormal investigators wearing headphones sit before screens at the kitchen table, while anguished wraiths float behind them. It’s meant to be terrifying, but to me it just looks like lockdown. Hours later I am having an anxious dream about shopping when my wife shakes me awake. It’s still dark outside, but she is already dressed. “What are you doing?” I say. “Working,” she says. My wife started a new business from scratch during lockdown, and the hours she keeps are a stark reminder of what is required to be a businessperson. “What time is it?” I say. “There are 190 people on my website right now,” she says, handing me my phone. “I need to know why.” “Someone influential probably recommended you,” I say. “It wasn’t me.” “I know it wasn’t you,” she says. “Can you find out what’s happened?” The wifi in the bedroom is patchy, but I track down the mention that is the source of the spike in traffic. “Thank you,” she says. “You can go back to sleep.” “No I can’t,” I say. “I’m a businessman – I need to check my emails.” “You do that,” she says. I have one new email, from the Italian language app I subscribe to. It says: “You’re on fire!” Later that morning my wife comes out to my office. “So,” she says. “We’ve had 30 orders already today.” “Oh,” I say. “That’s good, isn’t it?” “Yes,” she says. “But in the circumstances I think I need to go down there.” By “down there” she means the garage in the middle of the countryside that serves as her fulfilment centre. “Good idea,” I say. “When?” “Right now,” she says. “I’ll come back tomorrow.” “But that means …” I say. “It means you’ve got a spare theatre ticket,” she says. “What?” I say. “I can’t go by myself!” “So you take one of them,” she says, pointing back at the house. “That’s what children are for.” “OK, fine,” I say. “You could be a little more supportive,” she says. “I am being supportive,” I say. “I’m accepting my fate.” “You’re trying to make me feel bad,” she says. “You need to be more ruthless,” I say. “Screw my feelings – this is business.” “You’re being weird,” she says. “I think you’re trying to pick a fight with me because you don’t want to drive to Wiltshire.” “There may be an element of that,” she says. The theatre tickets come with a list of requirements: proof of double vaccination or natural immunity, or a negative test. I’ll also need a mask and a contactless payment card – the theatre has stopped taking cash. The evening may prove to be more of a test of my mettle than I’d imagined. I go inside to find the middle one gazing into a screen at the kitchen table, earphones in, like a ghost hunter awaiting an apparition. He’s the only one awake: first come, first punished. “You wanna go see this play tonight?” I say. “What’s it about?” he says, frowning. “No idea,” I say. “Sure,” he says, but his darting eyes say: sto ancora decidendo.No film director could have choreographed it better. At the very moment Joe Biden emerged from his helicopter into a cold, dark night on the White House south lawn, a new adversary was delivering his victory speech before a hot-blooded crowd in northern Virginia. The cable news split screen took place just after 1am on Wednesday. The president, a Democrat, was returning from G20 and Cop26 summits in Europe. Glenn Youngkin, a Republican, was celebrating a stunning victory in the race for governor of Virginia. The message from voters was emphatic. The Republican party was back in business, ready to take on a weakened president whose party is racked by infighting. Youngkin showed the way by deploying a formidable new weapon to which Democrats had no answer: a racist culture war fought over children. The businessman turned politician promised to ban critical race theory (CRT) from Virginia’s schools on his first day in office. It mattered little that CRT, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society, is not taught in Virginia’s schools. Moral panic over CRT has been fuelled for more than a year by Rupert Murdoch’s Fox News and other rightwing media, an apparent backlash to racial justice protests that followed the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis last year. In such hands, CRT became a catch-all for any teaching about race and American history. “It is a very convenient soundbite for encapsulating everything about the reckoning after George Floyd’s death and the Black Lives Matter movement,” said Tanya Hernández, a law professor at Fordham University in New York. “It is a way censor to gag and suppress any kind of reconsideration of our status quo. “Those who are making a lot of noise about critical race theory have no interest in learning what it’s really about because it’s not their focal point, just a nice encapsulation as a reference point of everything they don’t like. They don’t want any discussion about the accuracy and the truthfulness of our racial histories to be taught to children.” Youngkin turned the manufactured controversy into a seductive argument, even citing civil rights leader Martin Luther King on the stump. He told supporters: “What we don’t do is teach our children to view everything through a lens of race, where we divide them into buckets – one group’s an oppressor and another group’s a victim – and we pit them against each other and we steal their dreams. We will not be a commonwealth of dream-stealers.” It proved the right dog-whistle in the right place at the right time. Youngkin tapped into a surge of frustration among suburban parents after months of school closures due to the coronavirus pandemic. This included grumbles about teachers’ unions, mask mandates and what they witnessed about their children’s education during months of remote learning. A self-declared outsider with a suburban dad persona, if with a background in private equity, Youngkin promised to empower parents even as his Democratic rival, Terry McAuliffe – a career politician who launched his campaign with the slogan “Our Kids. Our Schools. Our Future” – vowed to keep them away from the curriculum. Tara Setmayer, a senior adviser to the Lincoln Project, a group opposed to Donald Trump and Trumpism, said: “Republicans are the masters at finding an issue playing on the racial resentment and grievance within the Republican party base and creating this perception that somehow this is a threat to children, to white America, and some type of invasion of the education system. “Critical race theory doesn’t even exist here and most people don’t know what it is. But it is a masterclass in how perception is reality and, when propaganda isn’t pushed back on, it can metastasise in ways that become problematic in campaigns. That’s exactly what happened in Virginia.” ‘The party of parents’ Youngkin’s success with CRT makes it likely to become a core part of Republican strategy for next year’s midterm elections. The House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, has announced support for a Parents’ Bill of Rights opposing the teaching of CRT. Jim Banks, chairman of the conservative House study committee, issued a memo suggesting: “Republicans can and must become the party of parents.” Democrats are likely to resist by contending that many top Republicans’ underlying goal is cutting funding from public schools and giving it to private and religious alternatives. The vast majority of American children attend public schools. Karine Jean-Pierre, the White House principal deputy press secretary, told reporters on Thursday: “Republicans are lying. They’re not being honest. They’re not being truthful about where we stand. And they’re cynically trying to use our kids as a political football. They’re talking about our kids when it’s election season but they won’t vote for them when it matters.” In many ways it is a case of back to the future, the return of a culture wars playbook that has served Republicans for more than half a century. In 1968, Richard Nixon’s “law and order” campaign wooed the south by appealing to racial fear and resentment without using overtly racist language. Ronald Reagan demonised “welfare queens”. In 1988, a political action committee linked to George HW Bush’s campaign funded a crude advert blaming Michael Dukakis, the Democratic nominee, for the case of Willie Horton, an African American convict who committed rape during a furlough from prison. Bush’s campaign manager, Lee Atwater, bragged that he would make Horton “Dukakis’s running mate”. Setmayer, a former Republican communications director on Capitol Hill, said: “Lee Atwater, who was considered one of the greatest Republican political operatives, understood that racial resentment animates a lot of white suburban voters and you can manipulate that to get people to the polls. Critical race theory now is the modern day version of the southern strategy.” Republicans are masters at simplifying messages and repeating them until they become a mantra, she said, while Democrats tend to lecture about policy. “Republicans are predictable in their methods but Democrats still haven’t figured out how to beat them because Democrats don’t do well in the culture war battle. They should learn from this election cycle that you cannot show up to a political guerrilla warfare fight with a policy pen.” Trump, who got his big break in politics by pushing the conspiracy theory that Barack Obama was born in Kenya, took the southern strategy to new and unsubtle extremes. Youngkin offered Republicans hope they can put the genie back in the bottle, returning to the coded race-baiting of the pre-Trump era. He did accept the former president’s endorsement and refrain from speaking ill of him. But during the campaign’s final weeks he almost never spoke of Trump, doubtless aware that he remains a toxic force among suburban voters, especially women. Democrats were unable to find a photo of Youngkin and Trump together and were forced to run ads that spliced them. Larry Sabato, director of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia, said: “Ever since [the insurrection at the US Capitol on] 6 January, they have been looking for ways to get around Donald Trump, and they think they’ve found it using this Virginia race. “It’s to not ignore him, because he will lash out and you’ll lose his base, but it’s to say good things and to make sure you have emissaries, which is what Youngkin did, who are keeping him informed and in the loop and telling him how important he is. And then just never being able to get together. ‘We just can’t get the schedules to match!’ It’s incredible they managed to do it for a whole campaign but they did.” But it is far from certain this Trump-lite approach will work for Republicans next year. Districts in the House of Representatives have different dynamics from state-wide races for governor; Republican primaries are generally won by the most ardently pro-Trump candidate. Few are able to self-finance like the multimillionaire Youngkin. And when the midterms campaign is under way, there seems little prospect of Trump holding back. His rallies are sure to dominate TV coverage and taint all Republican candidates, including those in battleground states who would prefer to keep him at arm’s length. His ego will not allow otherwise. Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee, said: “Donald Trump is not going to sit on the sidelines and make himself disappear from public life as much as the Republican party apparatus may wish that, so they can have their cake and eat it too. In my opinion, the Youngkin win is the exception to the rule. It’s not the new rule yet.” He continued: “The message for Democrats and for the president coming from Tuesday is: get shit done. It’s a lot easier to knock somebody over who’s standing still than to knock somebody over who’s moving forward. Ultimately, I do believe that the American people respond to action and progress and a momentum.” ‘Mean evil Republicans’ Early on Saturday morning, Democrats in Washington did get shit done, after months of stalling. Hard-won agreement between centrists and progressives in the House sent a bipartisan infrastructure deal to Biden’s desk to be signed. The party’s spending bill, which focuses on social support and action against the climate crisis, remains a live concern. Biden also received a boost on Friday when it was announced that the economy added 531,000 jobs last month. Nonetheless, the president has sunk to 50% disapproval and 41% approval in an Emerson College national poll. Democrats, who narrowly averted disaster in the election for governor in New Jersey, still face the challenge of communicating the benefits of Biden’s legislative plans to voters – one that Barack Obama failed a decade ago. And they will have to find a way to reverse their fortunes in the latest iteration of the culture wars. Ed Rogers, a political consultant and veteran of the Reagan and George HW Bush administrations and several national campaigns, said of Democrats: “They never respect the legitimacy of their defeat. It’s always because ‘the mean evil Republicans fooled people’. Well, here we are. “It is a harbinger. This was a time Republicans were supposed to do OK in these little off-year elections. They’re supposed to do real well in the midterms and it’s still certainly on that trajectory. If Democrats didn’t learn anything, they should learn that.”Glenn Youngkin, the Republican victor in this week’s election for governor in Virginia, reacted angrily to a report which said his 17-year-old son twice tried to vote in the contest. Responding to the Washington Post on Friday, a spokesman for Youngkin said: “It’s unfortunate that while Glenn attempts to unite the commonwealth around his positive message of better schools, safer streets, a lower cost of living and more jobs, his political opponents – mad that they suffered historic losses this year – are pitching opposition research on a 17-year-old kid.” The Post did not name Youngkin’s young kin, because he is a minor. It quoted a local elections official as saying the boy tried to vote once on Tuesday, then came back 20 minutes later and tried again, saying a friend the same age had been allowed to do so. The official, Jennifer Chanty, said she told him: “I don’t know what occurred with your friend but you are not registered to vote today. You’re welcome to register, but you will not be voting today.” The paper identified Chanty as a Democrat. She said the Youngkins were not registered to vote in her precinct and added: “It was just weird. He was very insistent that he wanted to vote in this election and I said, ‘Well, you’re not old enough.’” She also said: “Teenagers do stupid things. I’ll chalk it up to that. I’ll believe that first before anything else.” Youngkin’s spokesman said the governor-elect’s son “honestly misunderstood Virginia election law and simply asked polling officials if he was eligible to vote. When informed he was not, he went to school.” Elections officials told the Post no laws were broken. Youngkin won a startling victory in Virginia, beating the Democrat Terry McAuliffe, a former governor and close Clinton ally who led for most of the race. The Republican successfully distanced himself from Donald Trump, not least physically as the former president stayed away from the state. Youngkin acknowledged Joe Biden’s victory over Trump last year, but Democrats accused him of flirting with Trump’s lies about voter fraud. Most strenuously, critics accused Youngkin of using dog-whistle tactics to appeal to white voters, particularly in focusing on education and critical race theory. Critical race theory is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Virginia schools. Regardless, Youngkin promised to ban it.Once seen as dowdy, the cardigan is enjoying a renaissance, with Taylor Swift even penning a song about the knitwear favourite last year. There’s a huge array to consider. Block colours – particularly in autumnal shades, such as rust or mustard – are a good place to start. Designs with a V-neck might suit those over a D-cup. Cardigans aren’t just classic, though. They can bring something playful to a weekday outfit. Old-fashioned knits found secondhand provide a cute and cosy feel. Quirky brands like Cinta are worth looking at on rental sites. Treasures can be found in vintage stores and online. Think of channelling Nancy Mitford in a classic twinset, Marilyn Monroe on the beach in something more chunky, or Mad Men’s Betty Draper. Lauren Cochrane Buy Green checked, £25.99, Zara.com Wear a cropped cardigan buttoned up over a polo-neck dress Rust red, £180, sheepinc.com A seamless knit, made using zero-waste, solar-powered machines Navy aran, £110, peregrineclothig.co.uk 100% merino wool, made in England Rent Blue V-neck, £25 FOR TWO WEEKS, baukjen.com Elevate your work wardrobe with a classic blue cardigan – perfect with a white shirt Pink embroidered, £15 for four days, by Cinta the Label, rotaro.com Style a cute vintage-inspired knit with wide-leg jeans Pastel striped, from £45, endlesswardrobe.com Opt for a fun, embellished style for evening looks Thrift Preloved yellow Vivienne Westwood, £85, peekaboovintage.com For a 90s look, opt for a thin knit and wear buttoned up with a leather skirt Navy and orange, £39.95, goldsmithvintage.com Wear a sporty style over a jumpsuit with trainers Brown and cream Nordic, £25, onescoopstore.com Patterned and oversized, perfect for autumn walksGoing Out: Cinema The Card Counter Out now Oscar Isaac (pictured, above) burns up the screen in the role of a former Guantánamo Bay detention camp guard now making a living as a top-tier professional gambler in Las Vegas, in a muscular and unflinching character study scripted and directed by Paul Schrader, the man who wrote Taxi Driver. Spencer Out now If you have ever idly wondered what The Crown mixed with Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining might feel like, look no further than director Pablo Larraín’s gloriously unhinged vision of Christmas 1991 at Sandringham, which gives us Kristen Stewart’s Diana versus the gloomy spectres of her in-laws, in a chilling battle royal. Bull Out now Stylishly made, better acted and more violent than most low-budget revenge thrillers, Bull boasts can’t-look-away performances from Neil Maskell and David Hayman, as brutal stab-happy hard men from the wrong side of the tracks, and proves that British genre film-making of the Get Carter ilk is very much alive and well. Eternals Out now This is a truly rich week of cinema releases aimed at adult audiences (see above), but if you need something more family friendly, look no further than Marvel’s latest, directed by Chloé Zhao, in which Sprite, Kingo, Ajak and several other ancient alien superheroes must save the planet from the Deviants. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Pitchfork music festival Wed to 14 Nov; various London venues The music website’s inaugural London festival offers up a 10.0 lineup, featuring a smörgåsbord of 50 sonically adventurous artists over five days. Pop experimentalists Hannah Diamond and Namasenda headline a PC Music label showcase, while the likes of Stereolab, Iceage, Remi Wolf (pictured, above) and Nilüfer Yanya appear across the city in a multi-venue takeover. Glass Animals Mon to 27 Nov; tour starts Glasgow The Oxford alt-pop quartet head out on a celebratory jaunt basking in the slow-burn success of their hallucinatory track Heat Waves. Originally released last June as parent album Dreamland’s fourth single, it recently sashayed its way into the UK Top 5. Expect the roof to come off these mid-sized venues when it drops. Michael Cragg Takács Quartet Sat to 11 Nov; tour starts Sage Gateshead The world’s greatest string quartet make their first visit to the UK with their new lineup (viola player Richard O’Neill joined the group last June). Their repertoire for this tour consists of quartets by Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Smetana, Janáček and Dutilleux. Andrew Clements Archie Shepp &amp; Jason Moran Barbican Hall, EC2, Fri Prominent among 20-plus genre-hopping gigs on the opening night of the city-wide, 10-day London jazz festival, the seminal saxophonist Shepp and star pianist-composer Moran will share inspirations from Duke Ellington to Thelonious Monk and beyond for the London premiere of their Let My People Go partnership. John Fordham * * * Going Out: Stage The Drop 55 Aldgate High Street, EC3, to 31 Dec Swamp Motel theatre company dazzled during lockdown with its ingenious trilogy of dramatic online thrillers, Isklander. Now it ventures back into the real world with an immersive show for a maximum of four spectators. An invaluable book is missing and it is down to the plucky participants to plunge into the criminal underworld to track it down. A Christmas Carol: A Ghost Story Nottingham Playhouse, to 20 Nov; Alexandra Palace, N22, 26 Nov to 9 Jan Christmas is coming early in Nottingham with Mark Gatiss’s brand new adaptation of Dickens’s festive classic. Gatiss will play the sullen spectre Jacob Marley alongside Nicholas Farrell as Scrooge. Filled with spine-tingling special effects, this is Scrooge’s story given a supernatural spin. The show transfers to Alexandra Palace on 26 November for a Christmas run. Miriam Gillinson Samskara The Yard theatre, E9, Mon to 26 Nov Multitalented Lanre Malaolu is a dancer, actor, director, choreographer, film-maker and one-time Hollyoaks star, and the theatre works he makes are just as multifaceted. Inspired by real stories, Samskara uses hip-hop dance, spoken word and physical theatre to examine Black masculinity in 21st-century Britain across four generations. Lyndsey Winship Bridget Christie South Street, Reading, Thur; touring to 18 Dec Having made her name dismantling ridiculously sexist ephemera (see: her Edinburgh comedy award-winning show, A Bic for Her), Christie is now taking on another scourge of women worldwide: the menopause. She’s not alone: her show Who Am I? is proof that the needlessly mysterious hormonal milestone is finally having a cultural moment. Rachel Aroesti * * * Going Out: Art Peru British Museum, WC1, Thu to 20 Feb The art of Peru (above) is so ancient and extraordinary that some of it has been mistaken for the works of aliens. The Nazca earth drawings falsely associated with UFOs appear here alongside works from the Inca empire and later interactions with Christian Spanish culture, in what should be a captivating epic. Chioma Ebinama Maureen Paley, E2, to 19 Dec This Nigerian-American artist paints subtle, mystical and sensual watercolours that create a dream universe. The stories of Italo Calvino and traditional African belief are among her reference points. She spent the pandemic years on the move, living out of a suitcase, yet has produced a beguiling new body of work. Poppies IWM North, Manchester, from 10 Nov This is a permanent new layout of the ceramic poppies originally unveiled in the Tower of London’s moat in 2014 to mark the centenary of the outbreak of the first world war. It opens in time for another 11 November, a further chance to remember those who died “as cattle” as Wilfred Owen wrote. Petrit Halilaj Tate St Ives, to 16 Jan When he was 13, this Kosovo-born artist found himself in Kukës II refugee camp in Albania. The drawings he made in the camp are at the heart of this installation in which his enlarged childhood images are displayed on hanging banners. Beauty and horror, landscape and war surround you. Jonathan Jones * * * Staying in: Streaming The Tower Mon, 9pm, ITV; then ITV Hub This three-part procedural has prestige drama pedigree: helmed by Homeland’s Patrick Harbinson, it stars Game of Thrones’ Gemma Whelan as an officer caught up in some labyrinthine, organised crime-related police corruption – which means it might just scratch that Line of Duty itch. Close to Me Sun, 9pm, Channel 4; then All4 Connie Nielsen and Christopher Eccleston lead this psychological thriller about a woman with an apparently charmed life, who loses a year’s worth of memory in an accident – and slowly realises things were far from ideal in the first place. Come for the cast, stay for the spiralling twists. The Curse of the Chippendales From Fri, Amazon Prime With a Dev Patel film and a Kumail Nanjiani drama series both in the works, the 80s striptease phenomenon will soon be having a cultural moment. Get clued up on Chippendale history with this irreverent docuseries about the cloud of criminal activity (including murder) that sprang from the outfit’s colossal success. The Shrink Next Door From Fri, Apple TV+ Forget books: hit podcasts are now the go-to fuel for true-crime dramas. This high-calibre miniseries – starring Will Ferrell, Paul Rudd and Kathryn Hahn, and written by Succession’s Georgia Pritchett – is based on a 2019 pod about a therapist who insidiously invaded his patient’s life. RA * * * Staying in: Games Forza Horizon 5 Out Tue Video games’ most fun tourism simulator will have us driving impossibly fast and beautiful cars through Mexico, for those who like jaw-dropping scenery with their vehicular mayhem. The Elder Scrolls Skyrim: Anniversary Edition Out Thur Bethesda’s dragon fantasy epic turns 10 this year, and there are people who haven’t stopped playing it. It can now be revisited on modern consoles. Grand Theft Auto Trilogy Out Thur Rediscover the three classic PlayStation 2 GTA games, GTA 3, Vice City, and San Andreas - or, for younger virtual crime-spree enthusiasts, experience them for the first time. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying in: Albums Abba – Voyage Out now The above-average Swedish hitmakers return with their first album since 1981’s moody opus, The Visitors. Announced alongside a “digital concert residency” in London featuring state-of-the-art Abbatars, it includes the instantly familiar lead singles Don’t Shut Me Down and I Still Have Faith in You plus a soon-to-be-ubiquitous Christmas song. Snail Mail – Valentine Out now Sketched out on a battered acoustic guitar while in a rehab facility late last year, the songs on 22-year-old Lindsey Jordan’s second album are suffused with demons, both internal and external. The lead single Valentine picks over the end of a relationship, its synth-saturated indie rock building to a cathartic crescendo. Radiohead – Kid A Mnesia Out now To mark the 20th anniversary of their gamechanging, hit-adverse Kid A and Amnesiac opuses, Oxford’s finest are reissuing them as one album alongside a collection of rarities. The latter includes the elegantly foreboding If You Say the Word, as well as fan favourite Follow Me Around, which first surfaced in 1998. Diana Ross – Thank You Out now On her Jack Antonoff-assisted 25th album, Diana Ross’s aims are clear: let’s all just whack on a smile and enjoy ourselves. So the strutting title track and the string-drenched mid-tempo All Is Well both posit the power of love, while the pulsating If the World Just Danced shoots for dancefloor-based utopia. MC * * * Staying in: Brain food Am I Normal? With Mona Chalabi Podcast Data journalist Chalabi revitalises statistics in this fun podcast, crunching the numbers to answer key questions such as: “How long does it take to get over a breakup?” or “How many friends should a person have?” Internet Archive Online Founded 25 years ago in the web’s infancy, the Internet Archive has since grown to house an astounding repository of 616bn historical web pages, as well as millions of digitised library book collections from across the globe. The Hermit of Treig BBC Scotland After 40 years of living in solitude, 73-year-old hermit Ken Smith allows the cameras to witness his woodland way of life in this moving documentary. Having recently suffered a stroke, he now reconsiders whether he can continue alone. Ammar KaliaSeawatching – staring out to sea in the hope that birds will fly past – can be a gruelling pastime, often with little reward for your efforts. But I had high hopes as we set up our scopes on the shingle beach at Cley, soon after dawn on this mild autumn morning. For this site, on the north Norfolk coast, is one of the best places in Britain for seawatching. We were immediately rewarded with a pale, slender bird just offshore: a red-throated diver, moulting out of its breeding plumage for the winter ahead. Further out, gannets banked above the waves, a flash of black-and-white against the steel-grey seascape. A tight trio of razorbills – also black and white, with that distinctive heavy bill – bobbed up and down on the surface of the water. In spring and summer, razorbills gather along narrow cliff ledges to breed; for the rest of the year they head out to sea, diving to catch the fish they need to survive. This year, though, hundreds of razorbills and guillemots have been washed up, dead or dying, along Britain’s east coast. Many have been thin and emaciated, suggesting that food shortages are to blame. But another possibility is that warmer sea temperatures have caused toxic algal blooms to form offshore, poisoning these unfortunate birds. Yet another example, if any were needed, of the existential crisis that we, and the birds, are facing.“Flight cancelled”; “service temporarily suspended”; “not currently available”; “longer than normal wait times”: these are the messages that confront US consumers daily as the economy struggles to find a post pandemic footing. Now the phenomenon has a name: “skimpflation”. It’s a simple in concept – struggling with shortages of workers and goods, companies are skimping on what they offer consumers while, in many cases, charging the same price or more for that service. But skimpflation may have profound consequences, and may even go some way to account for the rising tide consumer of dissatisfaction seen in increasing air rage incidents and even the Biden administration’s plummeting poll numbers. Skimpflation is everywhere. Last weekend, American Airlines cancelled upwards of 2,000 flights, leaving thousands stranded, as a single weather event (high winds in Dallas) threw the carrier’s rotas of pilots and flight attendants, already in short supply, into chaos. But passengers weren’t the only ones affected. Crews found themselves having to work double shifts or stuck far from home at the end of work. All of this, says Alan Cole, a writer at Full Stack Economics and formerly a senior economist at the joint economic committee of the US Congress, is part and parcel of the skimpflation, a sometimes subtle, sometimes overt, sense among consumers that they are getting less for their money, worker unhappiness with consumers and employers, employers’ unhappiness with restive workers. It’s an economic force that leaves everyone feeling they are getting the bad end of the transaction. “Nothing prepared us for how much life has gotten worse,” Cole told the Guardian. “Most of these factors haven’t been picked up on by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We thought these changes to products were going to be temporary, so it was reasonable not to account for the changes. But now everything has got worse all at the same time, so even if you tried to account for them, you probably couldn’t.” Even if skimpflation cannot be measured conveniently, consumers have certainly noticed that the quality of service seems to be deteriorating everywhere. Consumer satisfaction indices are trending down, as they have been since before the onset of the pandemic, while consumer confidence was mildly better last month after dropping over the summer. At the same time, exit polls from the upset in the Virginia governors race this week showed that one-third of voters registered the economy as their chief concern. With the job market still 7 million workers down from pre-pandemic employment levels, inflation running at a 30-year high, and worker dissatisfaction triggering a mass resignation, circumstances could get worse. As National Public Radio noted last week, Domino’s is taking longer to deliver pizzas; airlines are putting call-in customers on hold for hours, and restaurants, bars and hotels are understaffed. And that’s before the holiday season, when yet more Americans are likely to run into examples of skimpflation in travel, present buying and entertainment. In a September column, Cole confessed to becoming “an inflation crank” after he stayed at an upscale hotel. “The breakfast was comically unimpressive: little more than some individual cereal boxes, a limited assortment of poorly cooled beverages, and paper dishware,” he wrote. Some of these degradations come, he argues, with a plausible Covid-19 justification but they are also down to companies reducing labor costs. In economic terms, the balance of power between supply and demand may have shifted post-pandemic. Cole reasons that consumers had become accustomed to a slick services culture and cheaper goods that are harder to support with the rollback of globalizationtriggered by the supply chain issues affecting western consumer economies. Employers had become used to having the upper hand with workers keen to keep their jobs and buy those cheap goods and services. “That has unwound,” he says. Successive rounds of stimulus cash from Washington flushed money into the economy at a time when capacity was constrained by Covid. Now that the pandemic is (hopefully) waning those consumers have cash to spend and workers have more job opportunities. “So now we’re seeing the opposite balance of power, especially if you have a house to sell or you’re a worker in the food service industry,” Cole says. To the consumer, who are sensitive to losses of services and generally take improvements for granted, the effects of skimpflation can be traumatic. “We expect civilizational progress, but this was an unusual case of a new development affecting the real economy that was obviously negative,” Cole says. The new world is still one of masks and vaccine mandates, workers remain anxious about Covid, and fear – and its close cousin anger – is everywhere. A small business owner offering more money or flexible working conditions is likely to feel that workers who don’t show up are being unreasonable. But workers are, conversely, likely to feel that they’re being endangered at worst or inconvenienced at best. “There are lots of non-wage dimensions to jobs and normally they’re not that big of a deal,” says Cole. “Now they’re all being renegotiated, with new conveniences and inconveniences to be argued about. That raises the transactions costs on both sides. So it’s possible for both sides to feel they’ve made sacrifices and to feel unhappy about the situation. But it’s really not one or the other, it’s just that the world has got worse.”Say what you like about how dismally difficult it is to get a ticket, but “global Britain” still knows how to put on a show. Cop26 has now finished its first act – the world leaders’ summit – starring more than 120 heads of state, thousands of their aides and hangers-on, and the city of Glasgow. I’m one of the hundreds from the British civil service working with the UN to stage-manage by far the most ambitious summit in either’s history. There was no shortage of volunteers – thousands of us applied, and for all the reasons you’d expect: idealism, ambition and simply to be present at a critical moment in modern world history. The world leaders’ summit was a two-day blizzard of high-level speeches, bilaterals, “family photos” and declarations. The basic idea? That an outpouring of presidential pageantry at the start of Cop26 provides political sustenance for the far trickier 10 days of negotiations ahead. We’ll see: I’m not a negotiator. But I can tell you what it feels like to be at the heart of the storm. The sheer scale of Cop26 impresses, long before you step inside; the police presence, the protesters, and the myriad cordons, diversions and temporary structures are all visible for miles around. Less impressive are the daily queueing and access problems generated by security and Covid apparatus struggling to cope with numbers some Premier League clubs would bite your arm off for. But once you’re in, there’s lots to see. Especially for lucky backstage grunts like us, who can access the two behemoth restricted plenary spaces (named Cairn Gorm and Pen Y Fan, after the mountains), as well as the maze of the pavilion, where gimlet-eyed government and NGO reps lure in delegates with Ted-style talks, free food and sustainably made merchandise. Behold too the giant globe beneath which every self-respecting delegate flocks to get that vital selfie. This isn’t a natural habitat for civil servants, unused as we are to the commercial whiff of fresh paint, glue and chipboard that emanates from the newly finished exhibition space, or to the acres of Cop26 “partner” branding that festoons every inch of wall space. You’re never more than 10 metres from armed UN security guards, though they never seem to lift a finger to prevent unwary delegates being barged by phalanxes of journalists and photographers stalking a celebrity or “marquee” politician through the main drag. There’s a distinct airport vibe, including in the uber-VIP world leaders’ lounge, whose soft furnishings and ethereal beings I caught a glimpse of between the praetorian guards who prowl its interior. UN officials are reportedly bemoaning a “business-class mentality” among delegates. Such a contrast with what’s going on outside – the protesters, bin collection strikes and travel disruptions, and the “large, naked Scottish man” who flashed Joe Biden. As a whole, the Cop process seems, according to civil society groups, to have become even more exclusive – and Covid restrictions don’t explain this. I saw it myself walking through the plenary zones, and Monday’s VIP reception photo demonstrates the shameful and persistent absence from the main leadership rostrum of women, people with disabilities and the young who – most of all – will face the consequences of the magical thinking that all homogenised elite groups seem to specialise in. Speaking of which, do civil servants working at Cop26 share the “cautious optimism” touted by Britain’s prime minister? My guess is no, we don’t. Some are veterans of previous Cop events, G7s and other diplomatic conclaves, but almost all of us carry scars from Covid and Brexit which remind us that, while good intentions are necessary, they are also woefully insufficient. Is “optimism” even an appropriate response to the climate emergency? It may be the closest thing to genuine hope that our showman prime minister is capable of mustering, but it’s not enough, as his speech at the Cop26 opening ceremony amply demonstrated. I listened to it in the company of some youthful delegates from several continents – their reaction to Boris Johnson’s remarks was one of muted, fascinated disgust. Civil servants, like the public, prefer urgent action to fatuous words. After all, we’re the ones who’ll wrestle with the implementation of climate action plans, financing and legislation, long after the politicians have scuttled off into gilded obscurity. This is what we share with the activists and the protesters outside Cop26: an instinctive understanding of what real change requires, and an acceptance of the inescapable fact that keeping the planet within anything like 2C of warming means leaving fossil fuels in the ground. All else is theatre – which is why, on Saturday, many of us will be joining the global day of action. The civil servant is a serving member of the UK civil serviceWill on Kate What were you hoping for? A fun evening with someone who didn’t take themselves too seriously and a good story to share with my friends. First impressions? Kate seemed far more relaxed and put me at ease very quickly. What did you talk about? Our go-to karaoke songs, swimming spots in London, , parkrun, Rowans (a bowling alley in north London), Emma Raducanu, Sex Education, sports documentaries. Any awkward moments? At the photoshoot beforehand I noticed that I still had the stamp on my wrist from the previous night’s gig but I think I got away with it. Good table manners? Exemplary. She even corrected me on my pronunciation of romesco. Best thing about Kate? Kate was really easy to chat with, and we had a lot in common. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yeah, I think they would all get along. Describe Kate in three words Intelligent, open, easy-going. What do you think she made of you? She might have thought that I was someone very keen on getting as much free food out of the evening as possible. Did you go on somewhere? No, the evening had reached its natural end. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I felt for Kate, a vegetarian, going on a date in a chicken shop. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? As friends, yes. Kate on Will What were you hoping for? A fun evening, and some vegetarian options. First impressions? He was tall, friendly, and not nervous. What did you talk about? Medicine, dating, running, how we both like being tall, the wonders of the Finsbury Park area of London. Any awkward moments? Taking a selfie on a date was a new experience. We decided to take it opposite the restaurant, and Will kindly let me hold the phone. I was anticipating multiple tries but we were happy with the first one. Good table manners? Yes, no food was wasted. Best thing about Will? He was relaxed and easy to chat to. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes, they like anyone who has been to Rowans bowling alley. Describe Will in three words Tall, confident, chatty. What do you think he made of you? Maybe that I was a bit fussy about the lack of veggie options. When I told him that I had asked if we could meet at a different restaurant, he joked that I was a diva. Did you go on somewhere? No. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? A less chickeny restaurant. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? I’m sure he will overtake me at the next parkrun. • William and Kate ate at Sidechick, London W1U. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comTom Hibbert is the chef and co-owner of my neighbourhood cafe Good As Gold, in Brockley, south-east London, where I often write this column. We regularly chat about reducing food and packaging waste, and, as Tom says, “I’m trying really hard to reduce waste in the kitchen, and it’s so hard, but we’re slowly making a difference, saving money and inventing new dishes.” Every Friday, he puts on a special both to flex his culinary muscles, and to use up surplus produce. Last week, it was one of his favourite Thai dishes, pad kra pao. As well as a traditional version made with minced pork, he also makes one with the offcuts from the mushrooms for Tom’s fabulous fry-up, because he believes that mushrooms roast better when skinned. Mushroom skin and stalk pad kra pao Pad kra pao is a traditional Thai stir-fry made with aromatic holy basil. If you can’t get hold of any, it’s also delicious made with Thai basil or even regular basil, at a push. Whatever you use, make sure you use a lot so the dish has a powerful aniseed flavour throughout. At Good As Gold, Tom Hibbert makes it by mincing the kitchen’s mushroom trimmings, then frying them with aromatics before stuffing them into a huge sub roll with crisp leaves, cucumber, carrot and sesame seeds, then topping those with a crisp fried egg for extra authenticity. Serves 2 1 tbsp vegetable oil 1 shallot, peeled and finely sliced 3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 2-3 birds eye chillies, to taste 170g mushroom stalks and skins (and/or whole mushrooms and other leftover vegetable such as peppers, green beans and spring onions), minced ½ tsp unrefined sugar 1 tbsp dark soy sauce 2 tsp fish sauce (regular or vegan) 1 tsp rice, white-wine or cider vinegar 3 large sprigs Thai holy basil (or Thai basil or regular basil) To serve (optional) Rice or a brioche roll, chopped baby gem lettuce, cucumber ribbons, carrot matchsticks, sesame, sriracha and a crisp fried egg Put the oil in a wok or frying pan over a medium-high heat. When hot, add the sliced shallot, garlic and bird’s eye chillies, and stir-fry for three minutes. Turn up the heat and add the minced mushroom stalks and skins and stir-fry for three to five minutes until caramelised. Add the unrefined sugar, soy and fish sauces, and the vinegar, then stir-fry until absorbed. Deglaze the pan with a tablespoon of water, scraping all the tasty bits from the bottom of the pan, then take off the heat and stir in the whole holy basil leaves and finely chopped stalks, and season to taste. Serve with rice or in a brioche roll topped with chopped little gem, cucumber, carrots, sesame seeds, crispy shallots, coriander, sriracha and a crispy fried egg.Public burning has understandably had a bad rap throughout history, from Savonarola’s late 15th century bonfires of the vanities and his own eventual death by fire, to the Nazi student book burnings of 1933; there is usually something ominous about fire in public places, the flicker of mob rule. Then again, the burning of effigies can represent an act of political solidarity. So what are we to make of the UK conceptual artist Jeremy Deller’s newest installation for the Australian Centre for Contemporary Art (ACCA), Father and Son, burning (until midnight Saturday) in St Saviour’s Church of Exiles in the inner-city Melbourne suburb of Collingwood? A grey life-size candle of Rupert Murdoch and son Lachlan posed in acquiescence to the tradition of corporate portraiture, it takes on a serio-comic ghastliness as it melts before our eyes, a patriarchy collapsing in real time as the figures slowly drip to the floor. Murdoch is rather an obvious choice for the installation, as towering a symbol of overweening media power and political influence as we can get in our current age, and Deller’s choice of Melbourne, Murdoch’s birthplace, is surely deliberate. The ACCA artistic director, Max Delany, sees something gentler, even contemplative, in the work. “It’s a work about the passing of time. We’ve thought a lot about the play of light, how it will change as the day progresses. We’ve talked a lot with Jeremy about the soft light of remembrance.” Its position in the centre of the deconsecrated church feels like a response or provocation to Michelangelo’s Pietà, which unlike this work has the decency to tuck itself away in the nave of St Peter’s Basilica. But then Deller’s use of the precarious medium of wax suggests a memento mori, a reminder of the impermanence of power. A Turner prize-winning artist, Deller has always been interested in the communal nature of public art, in ritual and performance, and the audience’s responses to and presence within his works make up a large part of their meaning. The specific nature of Father and Son was kept a tight secret until the unveiling, so the flocks of people who have come to see it seem to have been drawn as much by the mystery as by the chance to experience one of Deller’s famously interactive pieces. The producer of Joy FM’s Saturday Magazine program, Fiona Brook, “knew something was coming to this space for some time, and knew that nothing could be revealed, so that’s intriguing”. As people mill about, taking photos and filming with their phones, Brook contemplates the pace of change in the artwork, and what it might mean politically. “Time is running out, but like a lot of things in Australia it takes a very long time for change to come.” Art enthusiast Charles Lai “knew about Jeremy’s work, and I knew not to have any expectations before coming here”. “We tend to be cynical about the Murdochs in this country and I think the work promotes this cynicism,” he says. The greyness of the features suggests the colourlessness of the legacy, somehow. One of the aspects Brook and Lai both pick up on is Deller’s sense of humour, an impression that he might just be taking the piss out of Murdoch and his lineal pretensions. Deller has said himself of an earlier work involving the mashing up of acid house and brass bands, “there’s meant to be humour and absurdity in it, like in a lot of things I do”. He avoids the merely jokey; his works seem to start out in the realm of gimmick and subtly transform into something moving and multi-layered. What is certainly true is that nothing will be left of Father and Son by tomorrow, other than a pond of grey wax. By early afternoon, the skulls of Rupert and Lachlan were hollowed out, and long Rasta-like beads hung from their temples. Lachlan in particular seemed to be crying molten tears of wax, for a lost kingdom or a worthless inheritance. Deller is a master of event art, and his melting moguls are, as Delany puts it, “an invitation to a vigil”. One Melbourne seems delighted to attend. • Jeremy Deller’s Father and Son is at St Saviour’s Church of Exiles, 6 Oxford Street, Collingwood, from midday to midnight on Saturday 6 November.Millions of older people will see their pensions rise by 3.1% next spring in a move that will help protect them from the soaring cost of living – but Valerie Hepplestone and Sue Carpenter are among thousands who will not get a penny extra because of what has been dubbed an unfair “postcode lottery”. While the full UK basic state pension is to go up by £4.25 to £141.85 a week in April, almost half a million Britons who emigrated or retired to countries such as Australia, Canada and South Africa are receiving payments of as little as £22 a week, which never go up. Many of them are having to contend with even bigger increases in the cost of energy, food and other essentials than their UK counterparts. For example, Canada’s annual inflation rate hit an 18-year high of 4.4% in September, while in South Africa inflation has climbed to 5%. Hepplestone, 78, lives in South Africa with her husband, Ian, and receives a UK state pension of £43 a week. She says inflation there is “very high”, adding: “Just this month, electricity has gone up 13%. It is frightening to think about the future as food, rates and taxes, fuel, etc are going up all the time but our income stays the same.” Carpenter, is 73, now lives in Australia, where inflation is currently running at 3%, and receives a state pension of £64 a week. “I live modestly, some would say frugally,” she says. “With the increase of the cost of living in Australia, especially utility bills, insurance premiums, food price increases and so on, I am finding it increasingly difficult to live within my income.” The two women are among 492,000 older Britons living overseas who are losing out as a result of the UK’s “frozen pensions” policy. These people’s basic state pensions do not increase every year, as happens in the UK – they stay at the level they were on the date the individual moved away if they had already retired, or became entitled to the payment if they were already living overseas. Some whose pensions were frozen 20 or more years ago have missed out on tens of thousands of pounds. And every year, as inflation rises, the buying power of their pension diminishes. This week, campaigners attempted to turn up the heat on the issue, with delegates from the End Frozen Pensions group delivering their message to 10 Downing Street and calling on the government to take action to end this “morally bankrupt” policy. It is down to the fact that the UK state pension is payable overseas but is not uprated annually unless there is a legal requirement to do so – for example, where there is a relevant reciprocal social security agreement in place. There are more than 100 countries worldwide where the UK basic state pension is not “uprated” each year. In addition to the three mentioned previously, they include New Zealand, Thailand and India, plus British overseas territories such as the Falkland Islands. If you move to an EU country, the US or one of a disparate list of countries including Israel, Mauritius and the Philippines, your state pension increases in line with inflation. The policy has affected many members of the Windrush generation who accepted the invitation from the British government to emigrate from the Caribbean but, decades later, say they have been denied their rightful pension because they wished to spend their retirement years in their country of birth or ancestry. If an individual moves back to – among others – Antigua, Trinidad, St Lucia or Grenada, their UK state pension is frozen for life. Confusingly, though, those who move back to Jamaica or Barbados are not penalised. Ministers have previously conceded the rules are “illogical” but they have argued it would be too expensive to uprate those affected, and that the priority should be targeting money at the poorest pensioners at home. Research by End Frozen Pensions found that half of frozen pensioners feel financially insecure in their retirement, a quarter rely on family members for financial support, and a third have had to take on extra work to supplement their income. During August and September this year it surveyed 900 of those affected. Half said they received a state pension of £65 a week or less, and the vast majority live in Commonwealth nations with close ties to the UK. Many moved overseas for work or to be near family. Hepplestone says: “My husband also has a frozen pension of £66 a week. He has Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and heart disease. Our medical aid contributions alone cost £60 a week … We paid national insurance contributions even after leaving the UK, thinking that our pension would be secure. We did not realise that it would be frozen.” Carpenter says her adult children now help her financially. This is “something they want to do but shouldn’t have to, and in current times, if they become unemployed, they will be unable to continue doing so”. She adds: “I do not expect to be back paid for the nearly 14 years of frozen pension I should have received but it would only be fair if the UK government acknowledged that us UK pensioners living in Commonwealth countries have been disadvantaged for many, many years.” Others affected include Gretel Hunte, 67, who was born in Antigua and moved to the UK in 1959. She worked in the UK from the age of 15 for more than 25 years before moving back to Antigua with her mother. Hunte’s mother’s pension was frozen for 29 years before she died this year. Now that Hunte has started to receive her UK pension, her entitlement has also been frozen.Facebook is to start charging UK sellers who use its popular Marketplace a 2% commission if they opt to post items to customers via the platform. Last month the website launched a delivery service that allows sellers to directly post items to buyers using Facebook’s delivery partner rather than relying on face-to-face collections While it is currently free for sellers to use, it will carry a fee from the beginning of next year, according to MoneySavingExpert. Facebook says the delivery service gives buyers more choice, while enabling sellers to reach more people as they will not be limited by their geographical location. The 2% charge, which does not come into effect until January 2022, will be based on the total cost of the item, as set by the seller, plus the delivery charge as calculated by Hermes. An item selling for £20 with £5 shipping will cost the seller 50p. Facebook says the fee will help to cover the cost of customer support and purchase protection. Sellers will still be able to avoid this charge when it comes in by continuing to use Facebook’s collection-only option, it says. Last month the company revealed that its annual revenues grew in 2020 by 35% to $29.01bn (£21.3bn), thanks to a boom in online advertising.For anyone who dreads the thought of the work Christmas party, it will come as welcome news: this year’s office party vibe is intimate, more lavish, with no dancing – and it might not even be in December at all. But early indications are that despite – or maybe because of – almost two years working from home in elasticated waistbands and slippers, suppressed partygoers are preparing to ramp up the glamour: Very.co.uk has had a 937% increase in online searches for party dresses since last year, a 637% increase in scouting for sequinned dresses and a 212% increase in the perennial hunt for the perfect LBD (little black dress). The glamour will be offset, however, by an emphasis upon Covid-compliant celebrations, with some bosses asking partygoers to provide evidence of a lateral flow test before entry or to undergo a temperature check at the door. “Lots of companies are having smaller, seated parties either earlier or much later this year,” said Alex Hewitt, the chief executive of AOK Events. “They’re combining the Christmas knees-up with a late November ‘return to the office’ celebration or they’re having their winter parties in January so that employees don’t have to worry about catching Covid over the Christmas period, thereby running the risk of infecting elderly parents on Christmas Day or jeopardising any foreign holidays they’ve booked.” Rick Perry, the managing director of By Word Of Mouth caterers, agreed. “Some companies are talking about doing their Christmas parties in January because the event this year is all about reconnecting old employees who haven’t seen each other for 19 months and forging new bonds for new employees, hired during lockdown who have never met anyone,” he said. “Many of these companies still have a large proportion of their employees working from home and want to wait until they’re all back in the office next year to have their big reconnection shindig.” Perry said some companies were planning parties in January because they thought employees still working from home would not want to pay their train fare into town. “I’ve heard that because some employees are holding off buying their season tickets until next year, bosses reckon they won’t pay extra to come into town just for a party,” he said. Where parties are happening, they are smaller but more ritzy. Simon Cotton, the group managing director of the HRH hotel group, said that while bookings for big parties were down, the spend per head was up. “This year could actually be better than 2019 because the average spend is up: because companies are booking a number of smaller parties rather than one big party, they want to increase the quality of each party,” he said. “Companies are going from prosecco to champagne, or from a bottle of house white to something that is £30 to £35 on the wine list.” Dean Drury, business development manager at Party Ingredients event caterers, said the style of party this year was different too. For one thing, dancing is out. “Canapes, dinner, a small open bar and that’s an end to the evening,” he said. “The old-style, boogie and unlimited drinks-package are nowhere to be seen this year – no one wants a crowded bar area or a crushed dance floor. This year, it’s all about a quiet, spacious reconnection with people you haven’t seen for 19 months.” Henry Bonas, of the eponymous party planning company, said smaller and more luxurious was his own theme this year too. “We’re spending more on our Christmas party this year than we’ve ever done before,” he said. “There’s no dancing or crowds though: it’s a sit-down event in our own biggest marquee.” But for those whose companies have not set out plans for their festive office party yet, do not despair: this season, spontaneity is on-trend. Su Williams of Caiger &amp; Co caterers said: “It is so last-minute this year. We’ve had people who have been wavering for months and in the past week, have just decided to go for it.” Laura Rodriguez, head of reservations at the tapas chain Ibérica also reported a sharp rise in last-minute demand for group bookings this month. “It feels there is a sense of urgency to gather for a pre-Christmas celebration – in case there’s another lockdown,” she said.Long before delegates gathered in Glasgow, the scene for Cop26 was set by the starkest warning yet from the world’s scientists that human activity was unequivocally disrupting the climate, extreme weather was growing more intense, and urgent action was needed to prevent still worse chaos in the future. “Code red,” declared the UN secretary general, António Guterres, as evidence mounted this summer of ever fiercer heatwaves and increasingly deadly storms and floods. No pressure, then, on the climate diplomats who were told they represented the “last best chance” of holding global heating to 1.5C. Monday: the US is back (but where’s China?) In Cops past, world leaders would wait until the final few days before showing up and then roll up their sleeves, hypercaffeinate and thrash out a deal through the night and into the early morning. This was great for macho posturing, but not so good when things broke down and there was no time to fix them. Today’s statesmen and women are less hands on. They show up during the early phase of the Cop, which is all about handshakes, photo ops and mood-making rhetoric. Enter the host nation’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, who opened the event with references to James Bond and being 5-1 down at half-time in a football game, before finally getting to the point: “It’s one minute to midnight on that Doomsday Clock and we need to act now.” The good news at Glasgow was that the United States had emerged from its Trumpian sulk to claim centre stage. “Let this be the moment that we answer history’s call here in Glasgow,” proclaimed Joe Biden. This is important because nothing of substance can be done without the world’s greatest historical emitter, biggest economy and most powerful military, but the projection of potency was somewhat undermined by the squeeze that Joe Manchin, a fossil-fuel-loving senator from Biden’s own party, had on the president’s bold climate plans. Even with a stronger US presence, the global roll call remained incomplete. If this were a school register, the teacher would note that some the naughtiest kids in the climate class were all absent: Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro, president of the world’s biggest deforesting nation; Saudi Arabia’s Mohammed bin Salman, crown prince of the world’s second biggest oil pumper; and Russia’s Vladimir Putin, president of the world’s second biggest gas producer. China’s Xi Jinping, president of the biggest coal consumer and carbon emitter, was also missing, though at least he had a sicknote owing to the Covid crisis. India provided the biggest fillip of the high-level segment when its prime minister, Narendra Modi, announced that the country would get 50% of its electricity from renewables by 2030 and go net zero by 2070. That is three generations away, but still a big advance compared with previous plans. Along with the unveiling of Nigeria’s first carbon-neutral plan this week, countries representing more than 70% of the world’s emissions have now signed up to long-term goals. If Cops have any value, it is in forcing those who have profited from the climate crisis to look into the eyes of the victims. But are the leaders of the US, EU and China and the CEOs of Exxon, Shell and BP still able to see? This was the question posed by Mia Mottley, the prime minister of Barbados, in an opening-day speech that brought goosebumps to many of those watching. “Are we so blinded and hardened that we can no longer appreciate the cries of humanity?” she said, castigating those who had failed to act sooner and still hesitated to finance a transition to clean energy. She said the cost was now being measured in lives and livelihoods in small island nations. “This is immoral, and it is unjust,” she said. Tuesday: the world’s forests will be saved … again Whatever its other failings (chaotic entry delays, restricted access, etc), nobody could accuse this Cop of lacking a clear narrative arc. The rollout of announcements has been cunningly scripted to give the impression of progress – or as Johnson put it, pulling back goals to reduce the half-time deficit. The first was a declaration on ending deforestation by 2030. At first sight this sounded an awful lot like the 2014 New York declaration on forests to, er, end deforestation by 2030, which has so far failed to halve tree clearance, currently at a rate of 30 football pitches a minute, according to Zac Goldsmith. But there are some important differences. This time there is some serious money behind the plan – $19.2bn from governments and the private sector, most of the major forest nations are signed up, and there is an extra package of more than $1bn for indigenous communities, who are the most effective forest guardians. There are also long overdue steps towards the creation of sustainable supply chains and deforestation-free international trade, though a lot more detail and buy-in is needed in this area. There are bigger question marks about credibility. India has stayed away. Indonesia has already wobbled over its commitment. And can anyone trust Brazil under Bolsonaro, after he has spent the past three years smoking the Amazon? Wednesday: methane slashed By midweek the momentum-building “significant outcomes” were coming thick and fast. The highlight on Wednesday was an alliance of more than 90 nations, covering two-thirds of the global economy, committing to reduce methane emissions by at least 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade. This buys the world a little time because methane is a particularly potent greenhouse gas, though it should really have been done earlier. That it wasn’t probably has something to do with the powerful vested interests linked to the main sources – gas and oil wells, pipelines, livestock burps and farts, and municipal landfill sites. The US will lead the way by obliging companies to plug leaks in more than 3m miles of pipelines. China, India and Russia decided to sit out the methane pledge on the grounds that wealthier nations should be leading the way. Brazil, though, is in, seemingly now signing up to everything. It was not just the mood that was lifted by this and other announcements: several climate models projected that the extra ambition unveiled in the first few days of Glasgow had the potential to restrain global heating to less than 2C for the first time. Hurrah! But before getting too excited, bear in mind that the calculation is based on the heroic assumption that every government in the world will keep their promises. Thursday: even Poland promises an end to coal Another day, another outcome. More than 40 countries agreed to phase out coal-fired power. Canada, South Korea, Ukraine, Indonesia and Vietnam said they would quit this dirtiest form of fossil fuels between 2030 and 2040. Even Poland signed up, which is remarkable given its devotion to coal was so great as recently as 2018 that it staged the Cop of that year in the colliery city of Katowice and treated climate delegates to an exhibition on the beauty and importance of this fuel. Other nations promised to halve financing of coal plants overseas. Killing off Old King Coal is essential for 1.5C, but Glasgow will not be the site of assassination. The US, China, Australia and India keep coal alive outside this agreement, but the alliance will try to wear them down. Meanwhile, progress was being made, according to the IEA, which announced that the extra commitments made so far could take warming down to 1.8C. One UN special adviser was having none of this: the world remained on “a 2.7 degree pathway, a catastrophic pathway”, he said. Friday: step it up, activists demand Thousand of young protesters marched through Glasgow to demand urgent climate action. Civil society organisations have been largely kept away from the main conference centre all week. Many of their activities are staged on the other side of the Clyde. But Saturday is expected to see tens of thousands arrive in the city for the biggest demonstration yet. Frustrations at the lack of action are evident. Greta Thunberg has accused Cop attenders of “greenwashing”. Inside the main conference centre, the mood is cautious. The UK organisers are relieved that major slip-ups have been avoided. The African group of nations is optimistic that progress has been made. Everyone is aware that there is still a big credibility gap between the more ambitious long-term promises and short-term actions. What next? The second week will be crucial in closing that gap as Cop switches from show-and-tell mode to technical and political negotiations over detail. The big battles lie ahead – on the climate rulebook, on carbon credit trading systems, on questions of loss and damage, and most of all on climate finance – whether the rich nations largely responsible for the climate crisis will provide sufficient funds for poor, vulnerable and developing nations to switch to renewable energy and cope with the rising storm to come. There has been progress this week, but not nearly enough. The success or failure of this Cop will decided by emissions cuts, not outcomes. More pressure needed.“Type your favourite crunchiness of peanut butter into the chat thread,” says Matthew Shribman to a global classroom of children, as the scientist and teacher kicks off the Great Big Lesson for Nature at Cop26 in Glasgow. Thousands of schoolchildren from across the world have joined the virtual lesson broadcast live from the nature pavilion in the blue zone, right next to where world leaders make decisions that affect these young people’s future. At the classroom entrance, a sign reads: “Chairs have been fashioned for kings and queens and leaders for millennia. The chairs you are sitting on today have been used by schoolchildren. It’s time to put yourself in their shoes – as well as their seats.” Four thousand schools from countries including the UK, Ukraine, Brazil and Peru, registered for the one-hour lesson broadcast on YouTube. It is hosted by AimHi Earth, a climate education organisation, and backed by the Potsdam Institute in Germany and Cambridge University in England. Educators from India, Peru, Malaysia, Indonesia and Qatar all contribute to the lesson, which is delivered in partnership with World’s Largest Lesson, Nature4Climate and Youthtopia. There are the usual glitches – the internet drops out, teachers forget they are on mute – but it doesn’t stop the message getting across. Shribman, the lead teacher, says: “I think it’s really important we’re making rock stars out of these young change makers, getting them in front of thousands of people telling the truth in a way that is engaging and powerful. To have these people from around the world teaching young people through this stage of Cop26 is so powerful.” After the peanut butter ice-breaker question, the young crowd discuss a range of environmental issues including how the sex of sea turtles is determined by heat – the hotter the temperatures, the more likely they are to be female; in some parts of the world the ratio of male to female turtles is one to 100. Teachers talk about geoengineering, carbon capture and storage, “sponge cities”, what healthy soils look like, as well as offsetting and why we should eat less meat. Friday’s youth day event is for young people over the age of 11. “It’s amazing to think of hundreds of thousands of kids watching this live from Cop26,” says Sarah Humphrys, co-founder of AimHi Earth. “It’s about us bringing the conversation to them. The blue zone feels very exclusive, especially for young people, so this was a chance to bring them into this space.” The team also runs adult classes, and has been working with members from the UK’s House of Lords. “The response has been fantastic. It has enabled people to link these ideas together. People at the top of the leadership don’t understand the crisis, through no fault of their own. It’s because the education system is not giving people the information they need,” says Shribman. Organisers hope that the population will be better able to drive change if they understand the issues, and they are campaigning for more education on the environment in schools. The government is considering whether to introduce a GCSE in natural history. “Cop26 is sadly not a meeting of people coming together to try to work to stop the climate and nature crisis,” says Shribman. “It’s a meeting of people coming together trying to hold on to as much as they possibly can. And in some ways there are many inspiring people here doing all they can to build a healthy, more verdant future that we all want, but there is a lot of work to do while leaders still make selfish decisions.” The online lesson focuses on nature, because Shribman believes it is at the centre of the climate crisis. “The scariest thing about Cop26 is that people think we can control the climate crisis just thinking about carbon. Imagine the world we will get to if that’s all we think about? There will be no nature, and the world will be an unhealthy place, but at least we’ve got to net zero,” he says. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresMore than a million people facing the first climate-induced famine in Madagascar are paying the price for cheap flights in Europe and appliances such as gas heaters, the country’s environment minister has said. For several years now, the south of Madagascar has suffered successive droughts of increasing severity, and the situation has deteriorated sharply over the last few months. In August, the UN said the country was facing the world’s first climate change famine. On Tuesday, a World Food Programme representative spoke of a “heartbreaking” visit to the country. Speaking to the Guardian at Cop26, Baomiavotse Vahinala Raharinirina, Madagascar’s minister for the environment and sustainable development, said the failure of rich countries to meet a $100bn climate finance target means her country cannot afford to build a water pipeline to alleviate the island’s worst drought in 40 years. Developed countries have been promising to deliver the $100bn in climate finance to help countries such as Madagascar adapt since 2009, but last week that target was delayed yet again. Raharinirina said a pipeline that would bring water from the north of the island to the drought-stricken south would cost $900m, and the country could not afford it. “I was wondering three days ago during a negotiation session why it is so difficult for rich countries to pay this money. It’s not aid. It’s accountability,” she said. “My opinion is that in the north, there is a psychological distance to the problem. People see documentary and pictures but do not feel it like we feel it when I go to the southern part of my country.” She added there was a dissonance between the behaviour of Europeans and Americans and the consequences for people in the global south such as Malagasies enduring 45-degree temperatures all year round with little rainfall, calling for the global north to reflect on how countries such as Madagascar can live “with dignity”. “People from the deep south of Madagascar are victims of something that they didn’t do,” she said. “They move to the west of Madagascar and it’s a real risk to the biodiversity. When they move, they directly go to the protected areas where they can find resources like wood and medicinal plants – things that are normally forbidden,” she said. Madagascar is the fifth largest island in the world and is home to many animals and plants found nowhere else on Earth. More than 600 new species were discovered between 1999 and 2010. Raharinirina argued that cheap flights in the global north should be banned and asked Britons not to fly to popular holiday destinations such as Spain. “We should forbid the low-cost flights where you sometimes have two people go from Paris to Madrid or from Edinburgh to Vienna. It’s a high-cost flight for people in my country. They pay the price of that. “In September, I was attending the IUCN congress in Marseille, and I was totally shocked to see people dining outside restaurants that they are heating [with gas]. This should be illegal,” she said. “There are many things that should be changed in the way of life of many European or North American or Chinese people. You have to make a choice or have to make a sacrifice.” This article was edited on Monday 8 November 2021 to correct a figure given in error. The pipeline under discussion would cost $900m, not the $9m originally stated.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe questions 1 In Tokyo, Eddy Alvarez became the sixth Olympian to do what? 2 Which French “saint” died in Kent in 1943? 3 What unit is equal to about 5.88 trillion miles? 4 Which promontory was built by Finn McCool? 5 What is thought to be the world’s oldest alcoholic drink? 6 Which 2003 song has spent more than five years in the UK Top 100? 7 What condition was known as woolsorters’ disease? 8 Oprah’s stylist Andre Walker designed a system to categorise what? What links: 9 UK; Ireland; Malta; Cyprus (on the road)? 10 Rapper Cheryl James; chef Nusret Gökçe; cold war arms talks? 11 Roman deities (6); Greek deities (1); neither (1)? 12 War on the Shore; Battle of Brookline; Miracle at Medinah? 13 Barwick Green; Sailing By; By the Sleepy Lagoon? 14 Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame; JFK Library; Louvre pyramid? 15 Ivory-billed woodpecker; Bachman’s warbler; Molokai creeper? The answers 1 Win medals at both summer and winter games. 2 Simone Weil. 3 Light year. 4 Giant’s Causeway (in legend). 5 Mead. 6 Mr Brightside (The Killers). 7 Anthrax (pulmonary). 8 Hair types. 9 European countries that drive on the left. 10 Salts: Salt from Salt-N-Pepa; nicknamed Salt Bae; SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks). 11 Name origins of the eight planets. 12 Ryder Cup nicknames. 13 Long-running Radio 4 theme music: The Archers; before shipping forecast; Desert Island Discs. 14 Designed by IM Pei. 15 Birds declared extinct in 2021.Both these recipes use one of my favourite pantry staples: chickpeas. In trying to eat more vegetarian meals, I’ve found them to be one of the few ingredients that gives the same satisfying sense of fullness as meat. I usually prefer the taste of dried chickpeas, especially in salads or hummus, but I’m rarely organised enough to remember to soak and cook them ahead of time, so today’s recipes use canned. With the rich sauces that coat them, though, you’ll hardly notice a difference. Chickpea and tahini pie (pictured top) I’ve taken inspiration for this pie from Honey &amp; Co’s lamb siniya, an alternative to shepherd’s pie with a filling of minced lamb and a distinctive topping of yoghurt and tahini. This version pairs that unique topping with a vegetarian filling of chickpeas, browned onions and spinach. If you’re struggling to find za’atar, use a mix of thyme and oregano instead. Prep 10 min Cook 25 min Serves 4-6 For the filling 4 tbsp olive oil 3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 2½ tsp ground cumin 600g brown onions, peeled and sliced 1 tsp table salt 2 x 400g cans chickpeas, drained (or 500g cooked chickpeas) 100g baby spinach 100g greek yoghurt Juice of 1 lemon 2 tbsp za’atar ½ tsp cayenne pepper For the topping 50g whole skin-on almonds 2 large eggs 150g tahini 200g Greek yoghurt ½ tsp salt Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6, then toast the almonds on a tray for six minutes, remove and set aside to cool. Warm two tablespoons of the oil in a 25cm-wide cast-iron skillet or ovenproof pan, add the garlic and cumin, and fry for 30 seconds, until aromatic. Add the onions and a teaspoon of salt and cook, stirring regularly, over a high heat for six to eight minutes, until the onions have softened and started to brown. Tip the chickpeas into a large bowl, then crush them briefly with a potato masher. Tear up the spinach, then stir it into the bowl with the yoghurt, lemon juice, za’atar, cayenne pepper and two tablespoons of olive oil. Stir the chickpea mix into the onion skillet and press down with a spatula to level out the surface. Whisk the eggs, tahini, yoghurt and salt, pour all over the filling, then bake for 15 minutes, until browned at the edges. Just before serving, roughly chop the roast almonds and scatter over the top. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Chicken thighs, chickpeas and harissa Roasting tin recipes make perfect midweek meals – a few minutes of prep, then 25 or so minutes in the oven while you unwind. The sauce for this one is particularly moreish, with the juices from the chicken melding into the tomatoes and harissa. You’ll need some good bread to mop it all up. Prep 5 min Cook 25 min Serves 4-6 2 x 400g cans chopped tomatoes 100g harissa paste (I use Belazu rose harissa) 1 tbsp brown sugar ¾ tsp table salt, plus extra for the chicken 3 tsp ground cinnamon Juice of 1 lemon 1 bunch spring onions, trimmed and sliced 3 x 400g cans chickpeas, drained (750g) 25 prunes (about 175g), halved 6 skin-on chicken thighs (about 1kg), at room temperature Olive oil, to glaze Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7 and take the chicken out of the fridge. In a bowl, stir the chopped tomatoes, harissa, sugar, salt, cinnamon, lemon juice and spring onions. Scatter the chickpeas into a large roasting dish, followed by the prunes and the tomato mixture. Lay the chicken thighs on top, then brush each one with a little olive oil and a dusting of salt. Roast for 25 minutes, until the chicken is browned on top, and serve straight from the roasting dish. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to clarify that the second recipe should use harissa paste and that the chicken thighs should be at room temperature.We’ll leave our rolling coverage there for the day. Here’s what’s happened today: Australia has reached its 80% double-dosed target, with 80.16% of people over the age of 16 now fully vaccinated. A man is missing, feared dead, following a reported shark attack at a popular beach in Fremantle, Western Australia. Police in Tasmania have referred a double fatality shooting in Devonport to the state’s coroner. The Northern Territory reported one new case of Covid-19, bringing the outbreak which prompted a three-day snap lockdown of Darwin and Katherine to three. All cases are linked and fully isolating but authorities still don’t know where the infection came from, with anyone who was at popular bar Monsoons on 29 October urged to get tested. New Zealand has hit a new daily record for coronavirus cases, reporting 206 cases overnight. New South Wales reported 270 cases and three deaths. Victoria recorded 1,268 new cases and seven deaths. Queensland reported one new case, and health authorities were on alert following the news that the woman who tested positive to Covid-19 in Darwin had recently flown out of Cairns. Thousands of people marched at an anti-vaccination rally in Melbourne, and thousands more marched in rallies for climate action around the country. Thanks for your company. We’ll see you tomorrow. Western Australia has recorded no new cases of Covid-19. The WA government has declared this weekend to be “super vax weekend”, with pop-up vaccine clinics all over Perth and regional areas. Some of those clinics are at Bunnings, prompting this interesting bit of government communication on premier Mark McGowan’s TikTok account. South Australia has been hit by a severe storm, with the Bureau of Meteorology warning of damaging winds in the Flinders and Riverland districts and parts of the Eastern Eyre Peninsula, Mid North, Murraylands and North East Pastoral districts. Port Augusta, at the top of the Eyre Peninsula, recorded 15mm of rainfall in 15 minutes and wind gusts of 82km/h. The ABC reporter Eliza Berlage, who is based in the Riverland, says Renmark – which is 20km from the Victorian border, level with Mildura – had 14.6mm of rain in 30 minutes, with winds gusting up to 104km/h. The McDonald’s sign fell down in the wind. That system is now heading east, over northern Victoria and southern NSW. Four children are trapped on a stuck carnival ride in Geelong, with two of them suspended up to 35 metres in the air, AAP reports. Emergency services were called to the family carnival being held at Waurn Ponds shopping centre in southern Geelong about 2pm on Saturday. Fire Rescue Victoria says two children are suspended around 35 metres in the air, with another two trapped on the ride “though significantly closer to ground level”. Crews have raised a ladder and are working to free them. There are no reports of injuries so far and rescuers are expected to remain on the scene “for some time”. A possible thunderstorm and gusty winds are forecast for the Geelong area on Saturday afternoon. From AAP: Two men have been charged over the murder of David King in the NSW Hunter region earlier this year. The 45-year-old was found shot dead inside his Ford Ranger that had crashed into a tree at Salt Ash in Port Stephens on 29 August. Police believed the shooting was a targeted attack, with a man allegedly seen running from the ute to a Hyundai Santa Fe SUV that was later found burnt out in nearby Heatherbrae. On Friday police arrested Tyson Stamp, 27, following a traffic stop at Raymond Terrace. A few hours later Adam Garvey, 39, was arrested at a Charlestown shopping centre. Stamp has been charged with murder, kidnapping, property damage and weapons offences, with Garvey charged with being an accessory after the fact to murder and kidnapping. Both men appeared at Newcastle local court on Saturday and were formally refused bail. They are due to face Raymond Terrace local court on Monday. Yes, Halloween was last weekend and no, you haven’t fallen through a time slip – this faintly terrifying koala is from the climate justice rally in Sydney today. I’d just like to take a moment to point out the seamless incorporation of the mask. Covid-safe, climate-aware, and looks like they’re ready to drop on unsuspecting backpackers. 10/10 Almost $40m worth of Sydney’s seven-year-old trams have been taken out of service to fix cracking, in a situation the state’s opposition transport spokeswoman has called a “total mess”, AAP reports. Transport minister Rob Stokes announced on Friday all 12 trams on the city’s inner west line would be decommissioned for up to 18 months to fix cracks in the train cars. NSW Labor transport spokeswoman Jo Haylen has described the move as a “light rail fail”. The government needs to guarantee alternative work for employees and clarify whether the time the trams spend off the tracks will crossover with the conversion of the Bankstown train line to Sydney Metro, leaving commuters with “inferior” replacement buses instead of two types of rail transport, Haylen said. Transport for NSW chief operations officer Howard Collins has said he wants the tram fixes “to be done and dusted” by the time the Bankstown line is closed down, and the 18 months the trams could spend off the tracks leaves “a small amount of headroom”. “We want to fill a workshop with these trams with very competent engineers from Australia who can retrofit, strengthen and sort out these cracks permanently,” Collins said. Haylen said the government “should have been reaching out to add domestic manufacturers here in Australia to build these in the first place”. Stokes said the 18-month timeline is the “worst-case scenario” and replacement services were being provided for customers who “won’t be expected to pay anything more” for them. “People from the inner west and across Sydney are furious they are going to be forced onto slower replacement buses for up to a year and a half,” Haylen said. She is calling on the government to make the replacement service completely free instead. Customers “shouldn’t have to pay for the government’s procurement mistakes”, she said. More than 1,000 Pacific Islander farm workers attempted to run away from their employers last financial year, according to a report by Cait Kelly. Cait writes that 1,181 workers attempted to run away, mainly from labor hire companies in 2020-2021, up from 225 the previous financial year. The figures were provided by the department of education, skills and employment, which said that the number was not as large as it appeared as some may have returned to work, or been “redeployed to another placement”. And while you’re digesting those figures, chew on this: the Australian government has just launched a campaign to prevent workers from fleeing by warning they may “bring shame to their families” and risk having their visa cancelled if they run away from a job. It comes as Australia’s seasonal worker program is hit with claims it has subjected people to “inhumane conditions”, with a class action being built against the government. You can read her full story here: Western Bulldogs AFLW players and staff have been sent into isolation after a member of the program tested positive to Covid-19. The club said the individual, who is fully vaccinated, attended training free of symptoms on Thursday but later returned a positive test. The individual has not been named. Saturday’s planned training session was cancelled after the club was made aware of the positive case on Friday night. “[The individual] received a negative result from a rapid antigen test on arrival [at Thursday’s training session],” the Bulldogs confirmed in a statement on Saturday. “PCR Covid tests were also administered at the training session for all staff and players, in line with regular AFL testing protocols, with one test returning a positive result on Friday. “All other members of the AFLW program received negative results from both their rapid antigen test and PCR test.” The Bulldogs are working with the AFL and the Victorian Department of Health to determine the period of isolation required. It is unclear when the AFLW team will be allowed to resume training. The sixth season of the AFLW competition will begin on January 6. More on the Fremantle shark attack, from reporter Justine Landis-Hanley. Water police in Western Australia are coordinating a marine search for a person who is missing following a reported shark attack off Port Beach, North Fremantle. WA police said they were alerted to the incident at 10.10am local time. A spokesperson for the St John Ambulance service in WA said they received a call at 10.03am to help a man who had allegedly been involved in a shark bite incident. They have not been able to locate the man. The water police, police air wing, surf lifesavers, the surf rescue helicopter and two government departments with search boats are looking for the man. As we reported earlier, local councils have closed a 4km stretch of the beach, from Leighton dog beach down to Sand Tracks. It’s Calla Wahlquist back again, thank you to Justine for taking you through the last hour. We’ll continue to bring you details of the apparent shark incident in Western Australia as they unfold. The ABC has reported that authorities are searching for a person who was swimming in the area and has not been seen since the shark was sighted. Surf Life Saving Western Australia has closed Leighton and Cottesloe beaches in response to the reported shark bite incident. Western Australia’s Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development has confirmed it is investigating a reported shark bite incident at Port Beach in North Fremantle. The shark bite incident was reported at 10.06am local time today. Our friends at AAP have more information about the climate protests in Melbourne, including that giant burning koala puppet. A giant koala emitting plumes of smoke and dozens of skeletons on bicycles have converged on a beachside suburb of Melbourne as part of a climate protest. Dozens of Extinction Rebellion activists marched through Catani Gardens in St Kilda on Saturday, holding a mock funeral with several people dressed in red walking ahead of the burning koala. Blinky the koala, which is part-skeleton and stands about four metres high, let out groaning and crying noises as the protest went by. About 21 people dressed as skeletons on bikes rode from Melbourne’s Princes Bridge to St Kilda earlier in the day, carrying briefcases full of money. A similar protest was held in Ballarat on Saturday as part of an international day of action. “Koalas and humans face a risk of extinction given the failure of governments to take the emergency action that is so desperately needed,” Extinction Rebellion Australia said in a statement. The protest comes as the Cop26 Climate Change Conference continues in Scotland. “UN secretary general Antonio Guterres has said that it’s code red for humanity. But Australia has gone to the last-ditch Cop26 climate negotiations as a laggard and a wrecker,” Extinction Rebellion spokeswoman Jane Morton said. “We are approaching the point of no return for out of control warming and billions of deaths. Today we are conducting a funeral.” The climate protest is one of two demonstrations in Melbourne on Saturday, with thousands of people also rallying outside the state’s parliament to protest the Andrews government’s proposed pandemic legislation. Climate activists had made their way back to the CBD and were protesting outside the State Library on Saturday afternoon, around the corner from the pandemic protest. There are reports of a shark attack at Port Beach in Fremantle. We are chasing further information about the incident. As previously reported, thousands of protesters opposing vaccination mandates and government lockdown restrictions have marched through Melbourne’s CBD today. But climate activists have also taken to the streets today in Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne to protest the government’s inaction on climate change. In Sydney, two protesters have dressed up as Barnaby Joyce and Scott Morrison with a lump of coal. Indigenous activists have spoken about the impact climate change will continue to have on First Nations communities. Protesters in St Kilda, Melbourne, have marched with a puppet of a burning koala. New Zealand has passed 200 daily cases of Covid-19 for the first time in the pandemic, placing it on a worrying trajectory for the summer and raising expert concerns that the growing outbreak could overwhelm the health system. On Saturday there were 206 cases announced – 200 in Auckland, the city at the centre of the outbreak. There were 73 people in hospital with the virus, seven in intensive care. The record case numbers arrived as the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, gave a speech promising the country better times ahead. “To all of New Zealand, but especially Auckland, I say: he rā ki tua, better times are coming,” she said on Saturday at the Labour party conference. “Over the coming weeks, we will see the level of protection in our communities increase as more people are vaccinated. In fact, we’re on track to have amongst the highest vaccination rates in the world, already having overtaken the likes of Australia, the US, the UK, France, Germany and Ireland.” The NSW opposition plans to introduce a private member’s bill to legislate the state government’s net zero by 2050 target, which the Coalition government is yet to write into law. More from AAP: Labor leader Chris Minns says the move will provide certainty for business and industry, and his party’s “very reasonable” bill “mirrors similar approaches already taken in Victoria and the ACT”. The NSW government is targeting a 50% reduction in 2005-level emissions by 2030, and net zero by 2050. The Labor bill seeks to make the targets law and establish a commission to ensure they are met, while seeking bipartisan support from premier Dominic Perrottet’s government to get through. Minns announced the legislation on Saturday morning, although not before environment minister Matt Kean issued a release to say the state’s National Parks and Wildlife Service would become Australia’s first to commit to being carbon positive. Kean said the plan would ensure the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by national parks would exceed the emissions they generated by 2028. “This is a visionary plan that highlights the importance of the national parks in combating climate change alongside the critical role they already play in the conservation of biodiversity providing home to 85% of threatened species in the state,” he said. “It’s all designed to position NPWS at the forefront of global environmental efforts.” NPWS will switch to 100% renewable energy, electric passenger vehicles and onsite solar PV, as well as reducing waste and updating refrigeration and air conditioning assets. It will also trial electric vehicle charging stations in key park areas. Opposition energy and climate spokesman Jihad Dib meanwhile insisted Labor’s bill was needed for the government’s net zero and interim targets because “meaningful action on climate change is too important to open up to changes in government ... we have to go beyond aspiration”. Kean is credited with pushing the government to make aspirational commitments to emissions reduction but Labor is concerned he will soon be leaving the environment portfolio. Asked on Sky News this week why the parliament had not been committed to a net zero target, he said the government had “in regulation”. He dismissed the question as an attempt to play “word games”. He last week told a budget estimates hearing the state would need new policies to hit the 2050 net zero target but technologies and opportunities would arrive to help. Speaking of anti-vaccination protests, there is one happening in Melbourne at the moment and protesters have, without irony, chosen to sing Strange Fruit. According to the Age’s Rachael Dexter, it was a crowd of thousands. The Northern Territory police commissioner, Jamie Chalker, says police may consider using roadblocks to stop a planned ‘freedom rally’ from taking place in Darwin later today. The organisers of the “march against the mandates” plan to hold the protest every Saturday at 3pm. Today’s plan involves a car convoy through the city, culminating at Parliament House. Chalker says that attending a protest is not one of the five permitted reasons to leave home in a lockdown. We’ll go through our roadblock methodology, which is part and parcel of our compliance sheet to be able to engage with people there and then. If there are any large gatherings that occur we have got commensurate resources to respond. Chalker says police are talking to the rally organisers in an attempt to get people to “apply commonsense”. He says the response from organisers has been “quite positive”. Again, we know within these types of groups there might be a very small minority within that don’t necessarily seek to accord to the generalist view of what the movement is all about. So we are conscious of that and we have appropriate plans in place if we need to respond in that regard. Gunner says it is still not clear how the virus came into the NT and officials have not yet found the source of the outbreak. While the three cases reported so far are all “linked and locked”, he says that does not mean there is no risk to the broader community. In particular he asks anyone who attended Monsoons party bar and restaurant during the exposure period to get tested. If you were at Monnies on 29 October, please get tested. We know 793 people checked in there. Please get tested. Just get tested if you were there. We will keep doing that contact tracing and see if there were other potential sites where it may have come from. Having said that, there may be still, upon investigations, you know, as you do, with police and the contact tracers, it might be that one of these three is the missing link. Territorians who are outside the lockdown area will not be allowed to travel into Darwin or Katherine until the lockdown lifts, and people subject to the lockdown will also not be allowed to leave, Gunner says. We don’t want you leaving to go to other parts of the territory and potentially carry Covid with you. Double-vaccinated essential workers will be allowed to leave to deliver crucial repairs or food supplies, and people who live interstate will be allowed to return home provided that their home state is prepared to accept them. I can confirm that while you cannot move about the territory and leave the lockout or lockdown areas, you can leave the territory to go to another jurisdiction that is happy to receive your. We let that jurisdiction make the choice. There is one important caveat on this: you can only leave by plane. The reason for this is obvious. If you want to fly direct to Melbourne you present no risk to the Territory but if you are to drive through the Territory en route to Victoria you present a clear risk to the Territory on your way out because you will be stopping at roadhouses. Gunner also says people will not be required to show a vaccine certificate to access essential services, such as the grocery store or supermarket, during the lockdown. But unvaccinated people will not be allowed to dine in at a restaurant. Yesterday was the second-busiest day for vaccine appointments in the Territory since the rollout began. Gunner says more vaccine appointments have been made available to meet demand. I understand there are booking slots available now, both today and tomorrow, in response to demand. Thank you to every Territorian who has been vaccinated over the last few days, it’s great to have you on board. Every person vaccinated adds a layer of protection to the Territory – one less person likely to catch Covid, one more person less likely to get seriously sick, one more person less likely to die from Covid. The Northern Territory has reported one new case of Covid-19 on the second day of a three-day snap lockdown of Darwin and Katherine. The chief minister, Michael Gunner, says the new case is a 21-year-old woman who arrived in the NT from Cairns on Friday 29 October. She is a close contact of the original case and has received one dose of a vaccine. The original case is an unvaccinated man in his 20s. An unvaccinated man in his 50s who lives with the first man has also tested positive. Gunner says the woman became symptomatic today: She is being interviewed right now and contact tracing has commenced. There may be more exposure sites for Darwin so it is critical that everybody in the Top End pays very careful attention to these and looks for updates throughout the day. We will communicate these as soon as we can. We are further doing genomic sequencing [which] is likely to reveal the origin of the virus over the weekend but it will not reveal the missing link. At this stage though we still cannot be certain of the source of the outbreak. I am reassured that we have fresh wastewater results back for Katherine and greater Darwin areas and we have all negative results after November 3, except where we had expected to see them in the catchment. We cannot rely exclusively on wastewater testing, but this is a good sign. Gunner says more exposure sites have been added to the NT health department website, and the location of one site has been changed to the correct address. He quips: Getting hotels wrong is a longstanding Darwin tradition but we now have the correct site. There are 100 close contacts identified, Gunner says, of which 80 have been contacted and are isolating. Nineteen of those 80 have returned negative tests so far, and authorities are still tracking down the remaining 20. The number of close contacts is expected to grow. The Victorian chief health officer has released the detailed daily Covid update. As reported earlier, Victoria reported 1,268 new cases overnight and seven deaths. There are currently 651 people in hospital with Covid, of which 106 are in intensive care and 70 are on a ventilator. The update says that 84% of those in hospital were not fully vaccinated, and 96% of those in intensive care were not fully vaccinated. In terms of the spread of cases, the 10 local governments with the highest number of cases reported yesterday were Casey, Wyndham, Brimbank, Hume, Greater Dandenong, Latrobe, Melbourne, Whittlesea, Melton and Greater Shepparton. Virus fragments were detected in sewage at Stawell, Lorne, Mansfield, Aireys Inlet and Apollo Bay. There are 16,662 active cases in Victoria. Back in Melbourne, refugee advocates are planning to hold a rally tomorrow in support of refugees held inside the Park Hotel in Carlton. There are 46 men held in the hotel, and 22 have tested positive to Covid-19 since 17 October. Refugee Action Coalition spokesman David Glanz said: The men trapped in the Park Hotel prison, who have been detained by the Australian government for more than eight years, should have been freed long before this outbreak occurred. More than 100 fellow refugees brought to Australia from offshore detention for medical treatment are now living and working in the community on bridging visas. It is nothing more than government cruelty that the men in the Park are still locked up in a building that almost could have been designed to spread Covid. The advocates are calling for the men who are Covid-positive to be moved to a proper facility for treatment, and those who are negative to be moved to proper quarantine facilities. And once they are no longer at immediate risk from the virus, they need to be freed from detention and given permanent visas so they can rebuild their lives. One of the men being held in the hotel, Mustafa Salah, spoke to Guardian Australia’s Full Story podcast this week. You can listen here: New Zealand has reported 206 new cases overnight, a daily record since the pandemic began. Two hundred of the new cases are in Auckland, four in Waikato and two in Northland. There are currently 73 people in hospital, 51 in ICU. About 78% of New Zealanders are now fully vaccinated, and 89% have received their first dose, with the number of vaccine doses administered in New Zealand passing seven million. In a statement, the NZ ministry of health said: The 206 community cases reported today are a reminder of the infectiousness of Covid-19, and particularly the Delta variant, and the importance of vaccination as the number one protection against the virus ... We urge anyone over 12 who hasn’t yet been vaccinated or have received their first dose at least three weeks ago to roll up their sleeves and get vaccinated – it’s never been easier. The NZ Herald reports that the government made an in-principle agreement to reduce lockdown restrictions in Auckland this week, but the move has yet to be signed off by cabinet. Let’s break down the NSW case numbers a bit. Of the 270 cases reported last night, 73 were recorded in the Hunter and New England local health district. A further 37 were from the Mid North Coast local health district, 21 in the Murrumbidgee local health district, 10 from Western NSW, six from the Central Coast, five from the Illawarra Shoalhaven area, four from Southern NSW, three from Northern NSW, and one in the far west. That’s about 60% of cases recorded outside of Sydney. Sewage surveillance also detected fragments of the virus at Uralla, Dungog, Byron Bay and Denman, where there are no known cases. Anyone in those areas is urged to get tested and isolate at the slightest sign of symptoms. NSW has reached 89.4% fully vaccinated, and 93.8% of people aged 16 and over have received their first dose. In the 12- to 15-year-old age group, 67.4% are fully vaccinated and 79.9% have had at least one dose. A woman in her 30s is one of three people to have died with Covid-19 in NSW yesterday. As reported earlier, NSW recorded 270 new cases and, sadly, three deaths. The young woman from western Sydney died at Westmead hospital. A man in his 50s, also from western Sydney, died at Liverpool hospital, and a man in his 60s from Wollongong died at Wollongong hospital. None of the three were fully vaccinated and all, according to NSW health, had underlying health conditions. We join NSW Health in expressing our sincerest condolences to their families. It brings the death toll in NSW since the pandemic began to 592. Queensland has recorded a new locally-acquired case of Covid-19. The woman in her 20s from Goondiwindi tested positive while in quarantine, but authorities said she may have had one day out in the community while infectious. Speaking outside a Bunnings store, which is hosting a pop-up vaccination clinic, the Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said: The message remains clear, if you have any symptoms and if you have been in the town since the 30 October or anywhere in Brisbane please come out and get tested. We still have nine active cases. D’Ath said officials were also conducting contact tracing on a woman who flew from Cairns to the Northern Territory and later tested positive to Covid-19. Queensland is currently sitting on a first dose rate of 79.07% in people aged 16 and over. D’Ath: Whether you live in Cairns, Goondiwindi, or anywhere else, this virus is close on our doorstep and it could arrive at any time and we need to make sure we continue to come out and get tested, and we know the best thing all of us can be doing is getting vaccinated. Two young children were in a house in Devonport at the time of a double fatal shooting. Police in Tasmania provided an update to reporters a short time ago. Det Insp Kim Steven said it appears that one man has shot another man and a woman before taking his own life. Both men have died and the woman is in hospital in a serious condition, but without life-threatening injuries. The woman is due to go into surgery this morning. A report will be prepared for the coroner. Police said there were two children, a 12-month-old baby and a 10-year-old child, at home at the time of the shooting. They are uninjured but were taken to Burnie hospital for a medical examination. Steven told reporters that the children have “no physical injury”: ... but they have witnessed what has occurred. So they are seeing a psychologist and are in care of the grandmother at the moment. There are immediate concerns for the welfare of the children and the surviving lady who is at the hospital at the moment. We have a large police presence and forensic scientists present, continuing throughout the day. Our initial investigation, it appears one of the deceased males has committed the gunshot on the other deceased male and female and then appears to have taken his life. He said there was “pretty confronting” footage captured by police-worn body cameras, and the attending police officers were also being supported by welfare officers. There will be ongoing welfare for them and also the ambulance team that turned up as well. We are trained for this. But it is only a small amount of police that will attend the scene like that – basically an active person with shots being fired – so obviously concerns are with our members as well as the general community. We will work through that in the coming days. In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636, Lifeline on 13 11 14, and at MensLine on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and ChildLine on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255 The ACT has recorded 18 new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, taking the total numbner of active cases to 136. There are currently two people in hospital, including one person on a ventilator in intensive care. A whopping 94.4% of people aged 12 and over in the ACT are fully vaccinated. There have been 1,7165 cases recorded throughout this outbreak, which began in August. Sticking with bushfires, the Victorian environment minister, Lily D’Ambrosio, has given a run-through of the state’s firefighting capabilities as we move into the fire season. Which is a reminder to me, and to you, to clean out the gutters. Victoria will field 600 seasonal firefighters this summer, and has hired an extra 154 fire operations officers to Forest Fire Management Victoria. D’Ambrosio said there were 470 controlled burns conducted in the 2020-2021 financial year, covering 133,000ha of public land or about 0.5% of the state’s total landmass. Another 49 burns, covering 2,000 hectares, have been completed since 1 July this year. There have also been 15 cultural burns led by Traditional Owners. The strategy of conducting controlled burns over the last decade has transitioned from large scale burns to targeted asset protection, focused around protecting homes, catchments, power supplies, schools, hospitals and key transport routes. D’Ambrosio said: Victoria is one of the most bushfire prone regions in the world – the impacts of climate change and associated extreme weather events are changing the nature of bushfires. We’re constantly adapting to the challenges of climate change ensuring the risk from bushfires is minimised and we are prepared for the summer ahead. A woman whose house on the NSW south coast burned down in a bushfire in 2018 says the Australian government’s lack of action on climate change is an “absolute slap in the face”. Jan Harris told AAP: Platitudes, that’s all we get from [Scott Morrison]. That 2050 target is just an absolute slap in the face to everything that this community has gone through. Harris joined Bushfire Survivors for Climate Action, which in August won a court case in the NSW Land and Environment Court to determine that the NSW Environment Protection Authority had a duty to take serious action on greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. She is now living in her fourth rental home in three years and trying to rebuild. She told AAP she is frustrated by the impersonal, “mood oriented” language used by government to describe what she and other bushfire survivors are going through: ‘Rebuilding’, ‘we’re moving forward’, ‘you’re recovering’. You know what? I was never sick ... It’s pretty fucking personal when your house burns down. Australia has reached a double vaccination dose rate of 80.16% in people aged 16 and over, the prime minister’s office has said. We’re expecting more on this shortly. A final few words from that discussion between Nationals MP Darren Chester and Labor MP Amanda Rishworth earlier. When questioned on Morrison’s climate performance in Glasgow, Chester repeatedly said the Coalition’s position represented “the sensible centre”. Rishworth replied: I think a lot of people would have [had] a sense of disappointment that, in Glasgow, I think, the world saw through the glossy brochure that the prime minister kept holding up, because what we need in addition to a policy around net zero is actually a pathway to get there ... When the prime minister announced this agreement, [there] was no modelling. There was no economic modelling. There were no initiatives about how we might get there and that’s a real challenge. Let’s go back go Glasgow for a moment. Guardian Australia’s environment editor, Adam Moreton, has sifted through the first week of talks at Cop26 to bring you the five headline points. Crucially, there was a commitment for developed countries – but not Australia – to phase out the use of coal in the 2030s “as soon as possible thereafter”, and a commitment to halt and reverse deforestration by 2030 – but not by Australia, which claims, according to national accounting of these things, that’s already happening in practice. You can read more here: Good morning, it’s Calla Wahlquist here. Thanks for holding the fort, Stuart! I just wanted to re-share the statement released late yesterday by the parents of Cleo Smith, Ellie Smith and Jake Gliddon. We would like to take this opportunity to thank all those involved in the rescue of our daughter Cleo Smith. In particular, we would like to thank WA Police, all those involved in the initial search, the Carnarvon community, local businesses and of course our family and friends. We are humbled by the love and support that we have received from not only our local community but the whole of Western Australia and across the country. We are so thankful that our little girl is back within our arms and our family is whole again. As we try to get on with our lives, we ask that you respect our privacy. Nationals MP Darren Chester and Labor MP Amanda Rishworth were on ABC 24 earlier, being asked whether Scott Morrison had “shamed Australia on the global stage” at the Cop26 summit and worsened tensions with French president Emmanuel Macron. The following exchange took place. Chester: I know it’s a spring racing carnival and Labor wants an each-way bet on everything, but the Labor party has supported the Aukus deal. The Labor party has spoken in positive terms ... Rishworth: The Labor party has been very bipartisan on the Aukus deal but to say the prime minister has handled this anything but appallingly would be an understatement. There’s no doubt the French were upset, but even President Biden admitted that perhaps this whole thing was handled clumsily. Rather than the [Australian] prime minister work on his diplomatic relationships there, what he’s done is he’s doubled down and allegedly his office has leaked private text messages. And then we’ve had government ministers criticising the press for asking questions. This really goes to the character of our prime minister. The rescue of Cleo Smith made global headlines. The four-year-old vanished from a tent in the middle of the night on a family holiday, sparking an 18-day search involving more than 100 police officers and thousands of volunteers. She was recovered alive and well in the locked room of a house in the small coastal town of Carnarvon, just minutes from her home, on Wednesday. The Australian prime minister called it a miracle. Police officers, from the Western Australia police commissioner down, admitted to openly weeping. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, travelled 900km from Perth to see the four-year-old and her family, presenting her with two teddy bears in police uniform that he had named after two senior detectives who worked on the case. But most missing person cases do not run like this. And if the person who goes missing is Indigenous, sometimes there is no report at all, writes writes Calla Wahlquist. Victoria has recorded 1,268 new locally acquired Covid-19 cases and seven more people have died. The health department says the state is managing 16,662 active cases. There are 651 Victorians in hospital, of whom 106 are in intensive care including 70 on a ventilator. The seven-day average is now at 667. Another 65,410 tests were processed on Friday and 15,058 vaccines administered at state-run hubs. About 82% of people aged over 12 are fully vaccinated. NSW has added 270 new locally acquired infections to its Covid-19 caseload, while a further three deaths have been recorded. Some 270 patients with the virus also remain in the state’s hospitals, 55 of them in ICU. Health officials say there were more than 72,000 Covid-19 tests conducted statewide in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday. Almost 94% of people aged 16 or over have so far received one vaccine dose and 89.4% are fully immunised. Scott Morrison’s appearance at the G20 and Cop26 was supposed to be about consolidating the Coalition’s climate pivot before the next election. But the French president, Emmanuel Macron, had other ideas. Guardian Australia’s political editor, Katharine Murphy, travelled with Morrison to Rome and Glasgow this week. Here is how an extraordinary week unfolded behind the scenes. Sydney’s inner west light rail line could be out of action for up to 18 months in order to fix significant cracking found on all 12 trams. Transport for NSW chief operations officer Howard Collins said cracks up to 30cm long on the wheel arches had been discovered. NSW transport minister Rob Stokes said the 18 months is the “worst-case scenario” and he expects to have the problems rectified and the service back on track sooner than that. But until then “the safety advice has been for these vehicles to be withdrawn from service until they can be fixed”. A replacement service has been in place this week and is already transporting 5,000 passengers a day, Stokes said. About 1,000 similar trams are in use around the world, as well as in Newcastle and Canberra, and Stokes said the cracking that was found during routine maintenance by Transport for NSW is likely a design flaw that will have global implications. “A lot of countries will be looking at what happens here with keen interest,” Stokes said. He is advising global operators to “let them know this same design flaw is likely to be a challenge for their systems as well”. Collins said the trams were not unsafe but “if the cracks propagate further it could be an issue” for the seven-year-old trams, and it will be “no quick fix”. “We want to fill a workshop with these trams with very competent engineers from Australia who can retrofit, strengthen and sort out these cracks permanently,” he said. New data shows Aboriginal people in New South Wales and the ACT have been heavily and disproportionately affected by Covid-19 amid concerns that, even after two months of “surge” efforts in 30 Indigenous communities, vaccination rates will not be high enough to withstand further outbreaks. Ten per cent of all Covid cases in NSW and the ACT are Aboriginal and Islander people, meaning they have been affected at twice the rate of other Australians. In the past three months, there have been 7,000 cases, 700 hospitalisations, 80 people in ICU and 14 deaths among Aboriginal people, according to data from the National Aboriginal community controlled health organisation (NACCHO). Read Lorena Allam and Nick Evershed’s story here. The NSW Labor party has stepped into campaigning mode, announcing it would introduce a private member’s bill seeking to legislate a net zero emissions target by 2050. Announced in Bega, one of five NSW seats due to hold byelections in the next few months, by opposition leader Chris Minns, the announcement will seek to put pressure on a Coalition government which has trumpeted its own ambitious emissions targets. The Coalition government in NSW has already committed to halving its emissions by 2030, a target underpinned by clean energy legislation passed with multi-party support last year which will see the state build 12 gigawatts of clean energy and 2GW of energy storage in the next decade. The NSW energy and environment minister, Matt Kean, this week insisted the party would “get to net zero by 2050”, but declined to support legislation to commit to the target because, he said, the goal was already committed through “regulation”. “Well, what we will do is have the policies in place to ensure that we hit the target, but do so in a way that’s going to reduce our emissions and grow our economy,” he told Sky News. But Labor says the government’s target of net zero by 2050 is merely “aspirational”, and says it will introduce a bill to mirror legislation already in place in Victoria and the ACT. The party says it would also establish a net zero commission to develop the plan to reach the net zero by 2050 target, as well as monitoring its progress and trajectory “including impacts on jobs and industry, as well as energy prices”. “This legislation is an important step forward, but it should not be a big leap for Dominic Perrottet and Matt Kean to join with the opposition and support legislating these targets,” Minns said. “It will give business, industry, and the environment certainty that these targets will be law regardless of who is in power in New South Wales.” The announcement comes as the state prepares for five byelections brought on by a swathe of resignations. Following the departure of former premier Gladys Berejiklian last month amid the Icac scandal, the former deputy premier John Barilaro, transport minister Andrew Constance, Holsworthy MP Melanie Gibbons and former Labor leader Jodi McKay all announced they would quit state politics. Two men have died and a woman is in hospital after suffering gunshot wounds at a Tasmanian house with two children inside. Police were called to a property on William Street in Devonport after reports of shots fired about 1am on Saturday. One woman, two men and two children were found inside. Read more here. Good morning. Health workers are racing to find the source of the Northern Territory’s first outbreak of Covid-19 in the community after a second person was diagnosed with the virus. A three-day lockdown in Katherine is underway and a lockout in Greater Darwin is scheduled to last until midnight on Sunday, as contact tracers investigate a traveller from Queensland. The new case is housemate of an unvaccinated man in his 20s who was diagnosed in Katherine, 320km south of Darwin, on Thursday. This weekend is the first since restrictions have lifted on travel from Greater Sydney to regional NSW for fully vaccinated people. On Friday, the West Australian premier, Mark McGowan, announced the state’s border restrictions will remain in place until 90% of its 12-and-over population is fully vaccinated. Australia passed the 80% double-vaccinated mark yesterday. NSW recorded 249 new Covid cases and three deaths on Friday, while Victoria recorded 1,343 cases and 10 deaths. Among the cases were two Melbourne Cup attendees who subsequently tested positive. The ACT recorded six new cases and one death. Also on Friday, Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein announced people from low-risk areas will no longer need to provide a negative Covid-19 test before travelling to Tasmania from 15 December.China has said it will hold those who support “Taiwan independence” criminally liable for life, provoking anger and ridicule from the island at a time of heightened tension between the neighbours. For the first time, China has spelled out the punishment that awaits people deemed to back independence for Taiwan – top officials of the self-ruled island among them. China has not ruled out using force to bring Taiwan under its control, despite the island operating as an independent country, and its government vowing to defend its freedom and democracy. China’s Taiwan Affairs office has named the island’s premier, Su Tseng-chang, the parliamentary speaker, You Si-kun, and the foreign minister, Joseph Wu, as being “stubbornly pro-Taiwan independence“, as it made public for the first time that it had drawn up a list of those falling into the category. China would enforce punishment for those on the list by not letting them enter the mainland and special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau, spokeswoman Zhu Fenglian said on Friday. Such blacklisted individuals would not be allowed to cooperate with entities or people from the mainland, nor their companies or entities that fund them be allowed to profit from the mainland. Taiwan’s Mainland Affairs Council admonished China, saying Taiwan was a democratic society with rule of law and not ruled by Beijing. “We do not accept intimidation and threats from an autocratic and authoritarian region,” the council said, adding that it would take the “necessary countermeasures to safeguard the safety and wellbeing of the people”. In a Twitter post on Saturday, Wu wrote: “I’ve received countless notes of congratulations after being blacklisted and sanctioned, for life, by the #CCP”, referring to the Chinese Communist party. “Many are jealous for not being recognised; some ask where they can apply for it. To deserve the rare honour, I’ll keep fighting for #Taiwan’s freedom and democracy.” China says Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, is a separatist bent on declaring formal independence. Tsai says Taiwan is already an independent country called the Republic of China.The first page of Howard Markel’s comprehensive history The Secret of Life reads like the opening scene of a movie. “On February 28, 1953, shortly after the chapel bells struck noon, two men hurtled down a stairwell of Cambridge University’s Cavendish Physics Laboratory. Bursting with exhilaration, they had just made the scientific discovery of a lifetime … ” Delving into the human lives and relationships behind “the race to unravel DNA’s structure”, the book frequently zooms in on such visual details, from the “crusty yellow remains” of fried egg at Francis Crick’s breakfast table to the “clickety clack” of Rosalind Franklin’s heels echoing “on the slick, wet marble floor” of King’s College London. A movie needs a hero and a villain, and in this story they are Franklin – brilliant, female, Jewish, misunderstood – and James Watson, whose “mean-spirited” 1968 memoir “commandeered the historical record with boundless guile and cunning”. This is the story of how Watson and Crick were memorialised for their work and Franklin’s contribution was minimised, complete with accounts of the academic politics, really quite personal character sketches (“Watson was a razor-thin, shy, odd-looking, and unathletic boy with bulging eyes and peculiar facial mannerisms”) and admirably clear explanations of the science: X-ray crystallography, molecular biology, mathematics and more. Markel has drawn on many sources in his attempt to set the record straight: memoirs and biographies of the main players; Franklin’s painstaking notebooks, as well as other papers from Cambridge and King’s; the closely guarded archives of the Nobel prize committees; and interviews with the original sources, or their survivors. Among the most fascinating of these is a series of conversations with the 90-year-old Watson, conducted in 2018. He “did not refrain from articulating his repugnant views on Africans, African Americans, Asians, and … Eastern European Jews”. He turned red with anger at the suggestion that Franklin might have shared the Nobel prize. And he conceded that, with regards to Franklin: “You wouldn’t say I was exactly honorable.” After all these years, this admission is remarkable, but it refers to one specific incident only: the moment on 30 January 1953 when Franklin’s colleague Maurice Wilkins handed Watson Franklin’s famous “Photograph 51” without her consent or knowledge. This was a eureka moment for Watson, one he later described in his memoir: “The instant I saw the picture my mouth fell open and my pulse began to race.” The image revealed the double helix pattern in the B-form of DNA, sending Watson back to his 3D modelling with a new perspective. A different penny dropped for Crick in mid-February 1953 when another piece of Franklin’s work came into his hands, again without her knowledge. “[We] needed a clue … ” he later wrote, “and the clue was Rosalind Franklin’s data.” Markel is clear in his condemnation of all the men involved, but especially Crick and Watson. Their “lack of a formal citation [in their historic paper for Nature] of Rosalind Franklin’s contribution to their work is the most egregious example of their negligence,” he writes. The story that leads to this point is a sad and frustrating one. Markel paints a picture of a culture of misogyny and egotism that punished Franklin for personality flaws her male colleagues were allowed. She was spiky and superior. Watson was arrogant. Crick’s conceit was “superhuman”. Wilkins’ toxic relationship with Franklin led to her being “frozen out” of King’s College completely. It’s also notable that this one huge discovery required many different scientific disciplines and distinct personality types: “one soberly conscientious, with an unbending professional attitude to her work; the other a bright spark with a devil-may-care attitude”. In this hare and tortoise race for the secret of life, the hares won. But how much sooner might the secret of DNA have been cracked if scientists opposing teams had only been able to collaborate? Indeed, what important discoveries might we still be waiting for today because of a publish-or-perish culture that rewards only the first? Franklin seems to have harboured little bitterness about the accolades that never came her way. When she finally reviewed Crick and Watson’s model, she was pleased that it made sense of her research. “We all stand on each other’s shoulders,” she said. Watson called her “a loser”. Franklin died of ovarian cancer in 1958, aged 37, with her enormous contributions to science largely unacknowledged. She probably would have hated being the heroine of a movie, but we’re fortunate to have books such as this to put her back in the picture. • The Secret of Life is published by Norton (£21.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A small bird once so abundant it was called “the Pennine finch” is teetering on the brink of extinction in England after just 12 pairs bred this summer. The twite, an inconspicuous, seed-eating bird that nests in the uplands and spends winters on coastal marshes, has suffered a precipitous decline this century, with the breeding population falling by 75% between 1999 and 2013. Despite a rescue effort led by Natural England and the RSPB, in which hill farmers have been paid to plant “twite meadows” filled with wildflowers that produce the bird’s favourite foods, the bird has continued to decline, falling by another 75% since 2016. “The way we’re going, we think it will be locally extinct within the next three to five years,” said Katie Aspin, the RSPB’s twite recovery project officer. Reasons for the bird’s disappearance include less wild seed in upland meadows, climate change and the loss of tall heather in uplands, resulting in twite nesting in bracken where they appear to be more easily preyed on by stoats and weasels. The genetic diversity and resilience of English twites may also have lessened because the population is now so small it no longer flies overseas in winter and mixes with birds from other countries, such as Norway. “The key reason for this decline is the poor availability of food during the breeding season because of the loss of species-rich hay meadows and pasture in upland England because of agricultural intensification,” said Aspin. The twite recovery project has concentrated efforts on the remaining birds breeding in a triangle of uplands between Manchester, Leeds and Halifax. Farmers have been paid through agri-environment schemes to cut hay later in the year, allowing flowers to seed and provide more food for the birds. More than 250 hectares (618 acres) of twite meadows have also been planted with dandelion, common sorrel and autumn hawkbit to provide food in the breeding season. This summer, 15 supplementary feeding stations also supplied the twite with niger seed. The twite is one of only two birds in Britain that feed on seeds all year round. Most seed-eating species resort to feeding on protein-rich insects when they are rearing young. Each surviving English twite is given a colour ring so it can be individually identified and monitored in a project led by Jamie Dunning, a conservation scientist at Imperial College London. “The age-old story of massive changes to the way we farm the land is probably the main cause but we suspect there’s some aspect of climate change going on here as well,” said Dunning. The bird is at the southern edge of its range in England. According to Dunning, a few twite have nested on the cliffs of limestone quarries but have then been disturbed by the quarrying. In their core area of the south Pennines, large areas of grouse moor are also unsuitable for the birds because the moors are burnt and the heather is not allowed to grow tall enough for twite to nest in it. Researchers also fear that twite may be further hit by lower food availability in the winter, which English twite usually spend on salt marshes along the east coast. While there is a small Scottish population of twite, conservation scientists are warning that it is experiencing similar declines, and Britain’s unique subspecies of twite could be at risk of complete extinction. “Scotland is our last chance to protect the population here which is a unique subspecies,” said Dunning. “It’s about learning lessons now to protect the populations that exist further north.” But the twite, whose scientific name, Linaria flavirostris, means “resembling linen”, may also have suffered because it is a species that has slipped from collective consciousness and even birdwatchers don’t really know about it. “You talk to people and they say, what on earth is a twite?” said Aspin. “Raising awareness is important so people know what it is and know what is happening. In the past it was called the Pennine finch. Everybody knew what it was back then.”Tom Morrison, the Liberal Democrat candidate for the marginal Conservative seat of Cheadle, only realised this week’s Westminster sleaze crisis would be picked up by constituents when he was buttonholed by a former Tory voter in Aldi. “There was a real air of disappointment: ‘Why is he [Boris Johnson] doing this?’ And then he said: ‘It’s just not fair,’” Morrison says. The Lib Dems, who came second to the Tories in 90 seats in December 2019, are targeting voters they call “soft Conservatives” who backed Johnson at the last general election but may have reservations about him now – not least because of the perception of sleaze. Canvassers in Chesham and Amersham, where the Lib Dems overturned a 16,000 majority to take the seat in June, also said they heard repeatedly from former Tory voters who felt let down by Johnson’s government. It is a fear of this cut-through to voters that will be causing jitters among ministers, and which helped contribute to a screeching U-turn after a 48-hour shambles over lobbying this week. “There’s almost a drumbeat of sleaze that’s happening all the time now, and that’s why it’s cutting through,” said Morrison. “I think previously people have voted Conservative because there’s a sense of responsibility, and this just flies in the face of that – and that’s what really disappoints people.” Johnson’s kamikaze attempt to protect the longstanding MP Owen Paterson from a 30-day suspension after he was found by the independent sleaze watchdog to have lobbied on behalf of two companies, was the latest example of this government pushing the boundaries of probity. But the boldness of the move – with the Conservatives whipping their MPs to protect a colleague who was paid more than £100,000 a year and had approached ministers and officials more than a dozen times, underlined a view in No 10 that voters barely notice such issues. But the opposition parties certainly noticed. The Lib Dems highlight Conservative MPs in their target seats, including Steve Brine in Winchester, Alex Chalk in Cheltenham and Bim Afolami in Hitchin and Harpenden, who voted for the amendment to save Paterson on Wednesday. Both they and Labour believe Johnson’s amorality is a chink in the government’s armour that they hope to exploit. Certainly the latest YouGov poll, carried out after the Paterson debacle, showed the Conservatives’ lead fall to just one point – 36% to Labour’s 35%. Elections experts say it is also important to watch the “don’t knows”. Many may have voted Conservative in 2019 and have concerns about the Johnson regime, but have not yet alighted on an alternative. Keir Starmer’s noticeably punchier approach this week – calling Johnson’s behaviour “corrupt” and accusing him of “leading his troops through the sewer” – reflected Labour’s belief that voters are beginning to notice a pattern of behaviour. The Labour leader laid a heavy focus on questions over the financing of Johnson’s No 10 flat during the disastrous Hartlepool byelection campaign in May, which Labour lost, with analysts subsequently raising questions about whether sleaze matters at the ballot box. But Hartlepool’s new MP, Jill Mortimer, was among the 13 Conservatives who defied a vigorous whipping operation to vote against the save-Paterson amendment on Wednesday. Paula Surridge, an elections expert and deputy director of the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank, points to some evidence that new Conservative voters – those who backed Labour in 2015 but supported Johnson in 2019 – are more concerned about issues of fairness and corruption than longtime Tory voters. When asked in the British Election Study whether they agreed that “there is one law for the rich and one for the poor”, for example, 48% of loyal Conservative voters agreed, compared with 76% of Labour-to-Conservative switchers. Similarly, 26% of loyal Conservatives disagreed against just 9% of “new” Conservatives. After the parliamentary battles of the Brexit process, Johnson was able to paint himself as being on the side of the leave-voting public against the Westminster elite – making the point visually during the December 2019 election by literally driving a bulldozer through a wall of polystyrene bricks. Surridge says: “For the Conservatives, a concern must be that being seen by voters as protecting those with wealth and power could undermine the connection with their new voters. While currently the Labour party seems to struggle to capitalise on this, there is a danger of voters tuning out and staying home. In close contests, who votes might be the difference between winning and losing.” The Lib Dems believe Rishi Sunak’s tax-raising budgets will also play badly with potential Tory switchers. Recent internal polling showed 61% of 2019 Conservative voters think Sunak will raise their taxes. Johnson faces a series of tests in the coming weeks with byelections looming not just in Paterson’s seat of North Shropshire, but in Old Bexley and Sidcup after the death of James Brokenshire, and also Southend West – though the latter will not be contested, out of respect for David Amess, who was killed last month. Both Paterson’s and Brokenshire’s seats are regarded as super-safe – but Chesham and Amersham was also seen as an impossible target before the Lib Dems took it in June. One senior Tory who knows Johnson well says sleaze will not dent the prime minister’s popularity until it does. “I think it is a key risk for him,” he said. “At some stage, there could be a scandal that totally undoes him – and all these things that have gone before, Barnard Castle, the flat, this – builds up into a rich tapestry in people’s minds.”Rupert Murdoch’s costly gamble that radio might fortify his UK empire received a boost last week when the first listening figures for Times Radio revealed that it is proving more popular than management had dared hope. The reportedly heavily loss-making digital-only station, launched at the height of the pandemic last summer with a roster of high-profile and expensive presenters, is one of a string of strategic bets that News UK has made as the once-formidable commercial power of assets like the Sun wanes. From paywalls to Piers Morgan, Murdoch has committed hundreds of millions of pounds trying to equip News UK, which includes the Times and the Sunday Times, to compete in the era of the Silicon Valley giants. But a chequered history of investments has dogged efforts to break with its traditional print roots and create a digitally led powerhouse. “For much of the last decade, News UK had a reputation [within News Corporation] for this wild acquisition strategy,” says one former executive. “It was like an opportunistic bankers’ list of targets – not strategic – if it was tech and digital, it got an overly enthusiastic reception.” The 2015 acquisition of the London-based digital ad tech company Unruly in a deal potentially worth as much as £114m, announced 10 days after Rebekah Brooks returned as chief executive of Murdoch’s British newspaper business, marked the biggest UK acquisition since the phone-hacking scandal. A little over four years later, it was offloaded to the London-listed video ad business Tremor International for £1, with News UK recording an overall loss of £33.6m loss on the business. “It wasn’t a good fit,” says one source. “We didn’t really understand what they did, I don’t think. The teams got on well, the cultural fit was OK, but no one quite got how to get the best out of it.” While ultimately the big strategic decisions at the UK operation are made by News Corporation’s chief executive, Robert Thomson, a fellow Australian and long-serving Murdoch lieutenant, Brook’s close relationship with the nonagenarian means she also has significant autonomy. The tension in the power dynamic was highlighted following the rollout of Times Radio, when Thomson was reportedly critical of the venture and said it should be shut. “It’s News Corp, there is no open warfare, but behind the scenes it’s like Game of Thrones,” says one source. “Rebekah is like this proxy sibling. Officially Thomson of course has control, everything has to go through New York, on a factual level they are his deals. On a practical level, they are her acquisitions.” While owning Unruly didn’t work out, News Corp may at least get some of its money back. As part of the sale, the publisher received a 7% stake in Tremor. Since then the digital ad boom has led Tremor’s share price to more than triple, cracking £1bn in market value, with News Corp’s stake surging to £74m. There has been no such lucky exit on Storyful, the Irish-founded “social news agency” turned corporate brand management business, which was acquired for €18m in 2013. The company, which is still owned by News Corp, remains in the red, having run up losses of well over €40m since it was acquired. “In the end the total mindset was driven by wanting the business to be more digital, to be able to say at every results meeting the proportion of revenues that were digital had increased,” says another former executive. “If you pitched any idea that didn’t advance that, it was dead in the water.” One target became something of an obsession among the UK top brass, but unlike its parent company, it would never come to fruition: property. “A lot of time was spent looking – an obsessive amount – on the [property] aggregator/portal market,” said a former executive. “Rightmove was too expensive, but Zoopla, specifically its uSwitch subsidiary, was a very tricky, but constant, conversation at one point.” At the end of the noughties, Eric Schmidt, then Google’s chief executive, warned Murdoch that his plan to take the Times and Sunday Times down the paywall route that had worked for stablemate the Wall Street Journal was a doomed model for a more general news product. Newspaper sales tumbled from 508,000 copies a day at the launch of the paywall in 2010 to 365,000 last March, when News UK stopped having circulation figures for its titles publicly audited. There has been digital growth: the titles hit a digital subscriber base of 380,000 by the end of September this year. They went from a £70m loss in 2009 to profitability by 2014. But it appears to be losing the subscriber race with The Telegraph, which said recently that it had passed the 500,000 mark, having transitioned to a subscriber-focused model only in 2018. The jury is out on whether Times Radio, said to be losing millions of pounds a year, will deliver a big hike in digital subscriptions. “At the time there were so many threats to the overall business and many thought there wouldn’t be a print title within five years,” says one former executive. “It’s played out as well as anyone could have hoped at the time. That business is now more profitable than it has been in living memory.” The same cannot be said of its stablemate, the Sun, which has become Murdoch’s biggest casualty of the digital era. A paywall was erected in 2013, backed by a £30m splurge on exclusive Premier League internet and mobile rights to pull in paying punters, only to be dismantled within two years. “The pitch was to do the same for the Sun,” said a former executive, “until Rupert lost his nerve and abandoned it. He got spooked by Mail Online and the stories about its reach and revenues. He wanted to chase those numbers.” The Sun has been in freefall ever since, with revenues halving between 2011 and 2021. Profits of £80m to £100m annually a decade ago have turned into operating losses north of £60m. The Sun’s global monthly unique user base was 133m in September, down seven million on the same month last year. Mail Online claims more than a third more, at over 183m, as of July. In June, it emerged that Murdoch had written down the value of the Sun newspapers to zero. And last year, in a piece of Fleet Street symbolism, the Sun lost its title of UK’s bestselling newspaper to the Daily Mail; it had been the nation’s most popular paper since 1978. Strategic attempts to boost the business have largely failed. The most high-profile of these was the collapse of its gambling venture, Sun Bets, three years ago, with its joint venture partner Tabcorp saying the tie-up performed below expectations and paying £39.5m to end the relationship. “The Sun is a challenged business and the company doesn’t yet have its arms around what to do with it strategically,” says Douglas McCabe, chief executive at Enders Analysis. “The brand’s confidence has been hit for sure, but it remains relevant and there are always opportunities: what might it merge with or acquire? The Sun can be a huge network play.” Broadcast is its latest attempt to turn the tide. The biggest UK acquisition in recent years was NewsCorp’s £220m deal in 2016 to buy Wireless Group, owner of radio stations including Virgin Radio, TalkRADIO and TalkSport, which owned valuable audio rights including Premier League football. Star signings include Chris Evans, Jeremy Kyle and Trisha Goddard. Building on the expansion of Wireless, Murdoch’s next big bet is TalkTV, a linear TV station and streaming service that aims to challenge the ailing rightwing channel GB News, with Piers Morgan its first star signing. Andrew Neil, scarred from his acrimonious departure from GB News, recently suggested that Morgan might want to rethink his decision and “drive in the opposite direction”. While News UK’s video ambitions will be much lower-cost than a full 24-hour channel, there will still be significant investment required, not least to secure slots on platforms including Freeview, Virgin Media and Sky. It could turn out to be News UK’s costliest foray yet. “News UK is building an overall scale platform; ‘We aren’t just newspapers, we are a conglomerate’. You need to innovate to fly and you can’t criticise them for experimenting and looking at different models,” says McCabe. “News Corporation has always had a swagger, an extraordinary confidence, but in recent times I’m not sure News UK has quite had it. This is about getting that swagger back.”When the ambitious plan to allow sea water to flood over the Steart peninsula in Somerset was completed in 2014, critics called it a waste of money. Floods had recently blighted the nearby area, and some local people argued the £20m spent on creating a new 250-hectare (617-acre) salt marsh would have been better spent on other flood-prevention projects. Seven years ago, the concept of “blue carbon” – how marine ecosystems store carbon – was in its infancy. Some research had looked at how mangrove forests absorb carbon, but little was known about how effective seagrass and salt marshes also were at absorbing greenhouse gas emissions. The two groups behind the salt marsh – the Environment Agency and the Wildfowl &amp; Wetlands Trust (WWT) – barely mentioned the climate. They said the purpose of the marsh was to protect the coast from erosion and create a new valuable habitat for birdlife. Ian Liddell-Grainger, MP for Bridgwater and West Somerset, called the marsh an “extravagant, ridiculous scheme” that put birds ahead of humans. Less than eight years later, however, everything has changed. Blue carbon is at the forefront of the fight against the climate crisis – and as world leaders gather at Cop26, evidence has emerged that the Steart marsh could be a more powerful carbon sink than anybody imagined. Scientists at Manchester Metropolitan University found that Steart marshes absorbed 19 tonnes of organic carbon a hectare every year, or 18,000 tonnes in four years – the equivalent of eliminating the greenhouse gas emissions of 32,900 cars. Their work is part of a growing body of research suggesting blue carbon is an order of magnitude more efficient than its terrestrial equivalent. “The carbon storage at Steart is phenomenal,” says Tim McGrath, head of project development at WWT, which manages the salt marsh. “These exceptional findings could indicate that the carbon storage potential of restoring salt marsh around the UK coast has been underestimated.” It would take 100 years for a woodland to sequester and store as much carbon as Steart can store in six years, McGrath says. “Trees and peat can take us so far, but blue carbon ecosystems, such as salt marshes, can take us further. It’s time governments seized this opportunity.” But as world leaders at Cop26 earlier pledge to end deforestation by 2030, campaigners and marine conservationists say the powerful carbon sinks in the ocean are being overlooked. Only 43 out of 113 countries to submit greenhouse gas inventories, or nationally determined contributions (NDCs), have included blue carbon ecosystems as part of their mitigation measures. The UK, despite being a coastal nation with vast reserves of potential blue carbon, is one of those to failing to do so. “If we are not protecting and counting the blue carbon in our seas, this leaves a dangerous blindspot” for UK policy, says Ailsa McLellan, coordinator for Our Seas, a coalition of Scottish businesses, communities and environmental groups. “It’s time we counted blue carbon, reinstated a limit on damaging methods of fishing, and put future generations first.” One study suggests bottom trawling could release as much carbon as global aviation emissions. Our Seas is calling on Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, to establish an accounting system for blue carbon, so that marine and coastal ecosystems, including salt marshes, can be protected as part of the UK’s efforts to meet its climate goals. “Blue carbon habitats are some of the most effective carbon sequestration habitats, area for area, on the planet,” says Bill Austin, professor in ocean science at St Andrews University and chair of the Scottish government’s blue carbon forum. He is working on a government-funded “salt marsh code” that could allow companies to invest in restoration schemes. For now, blue carbon remains a bit of an outlier when it comes to carbon credits. Out of the big three coastal wetlands, says Austin, mangroves are the best studied, followed by salt marshes and then seagrass. “There is definitely scope for us to raise our ambition” by including blue carbon in the UK’s NDCs, he says. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs says the UK recognises the important role blue carbon habitats can play in carbon sequestration, as well as preventing biodiversity loss and building resilience to climate crises: “The ocean plays a vital role in climate mitigation, and we continue to build the evidence base on blue carbon habitats as we strive towards net zero.” That is a coded way of saying that the science of blue carbon is relatively young. The term was coined in 2009. Recent research estimates that conserving and restoring blue carbon ecosystems could remove the equivalent of 3% of annual global greenhouse emissions. But the future is another country – and one leading expert predicts that, over time, the ocean’s contribution towards mitigating climate emissions could soar. Carlos Duarte, a professor of marine science at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia and one of the paper’s authors, says 3% was a “conservative estimate” because the scope for restoration of some ecosystems could be larger than previously believed. “It is very well understood for mangroves, not well understood for salt marshes and very poorly understood for seagrass,” says Duarte. “We have huge gaps in our knowledge of the amount of seagrass in the ocean. The scope for restoring seagrass could be as much as five or 10 times larger than what we thought.” The contribution of blue carbon to mitigating climate emissions could be as high as 10% to 15%, he predicts, if “all blue carbon strategies are activated”, including as yet unexplored possibilities such as more seaweed farming, avoiding disturbing sediments on continental shelves, restoring kelp forests and protecting whales. Other scientists caution that uncertainty in some areas, such as seaweed farms and kelp – neither of which are included in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s greenhouse gas emission inventory – makes accurate predictions difficult. That’s why Duarte wants to study these areas. He is working with Oceans 2050, an organisation run by Alexandra Cousteau, the granddaughter of the oceanographer Jacques, to sample sediments from seaweed farms in 12 countries to find out how much carbon they really soak up. “I would be hard-pressed to find a climate-mitigation solution that has been proven to be as effective as blue carbon,” says Duarte. “Some people worry that 3% is too little to worry about. To these people in search of solutions that are going to magically deliver many petagrams of emission, I tell them there are no low-hanging petagrams.” There is no time to waste arguing over exactly how much blue carbon can help us cut emissions; all options must be pursued, Duarte says. Blue carbon ecosystems do not just reduce emissions: they help fight the other crisis, such as biodiversity loss and preventing natural disasters. Blue carbon, he says, has been overlooked for too long. “By the time we find these solutions that can deliver 5% of the job, we will be in 2050 – and we will be burning.” • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to correct a reference to “betagrammes” to petagrams.“Old-fashioned” is generally not a term you want to hear applied to science fiction, a genre from which one tends to expect the futuristic and unfamiliar. But old-fashioned is very much how Finch (Apple TV+) feels, and not just because of the reassuring elder-statesman presence of Tom Hanks in the title role: a post-apocalyptic drama built from the scraps of a thousand others before it, it’s about as nostalgically cuddly as a vision of a barren, desolate future can be. Hanks is seemingly the last surviving human on the planet; an inventor, he assembles an AI robot (voiced by Caleb Landry Jones) to mind his adorable dog when he’s gone. Awww. The narrative direction of the film, previously a more downbeat enterprise, was altered to be more optimistic when the global pandemic struck. Perhaps Finch’s creation, a throwback to the rickety robot aesthetics of 1980s kids’ favourite Short Circuit, was always intended to be a hi-tech pet-sitter: either way, in the long history of cinema’s fascination with artificial intelligence (AI), rarely has the technology been used to such wholesome ends. No matter how many technological boundaries we break, the concept of AI remains as intriguing and disorienting as it was when Fritz Lang’s still-dazzling expressionist spectacle Metropolis (Mubi) – in which a female robot initially created as a romantic proxy becomes a dystopian overlord – was made almost a century ago. On screen, the idea has consistently adapted to the fears of the age. In the 60s, sentient computer systems weighed heavily on filmmakers’ minds: in Jean-Luc Godard’s sleek sci-fi noir Alphaville (BFI Player), the computer Alpha 60 dictates human behaviour in Orwellian fashion; in 2001: A Space Odyssey (Amazon), HAL 9000’s murderous preying on his human underlings seems less clinically power-driven and more plain psychotic. By the time a malevolent computer impregnated Julie Christie in 1977’s compellingly seamy Demon Seed (free on Plex), that wave of sinister technophobia reached its zenith. By the Reagan era, the idea of humanoid robots controlling the peace was a little more palatable, even if Paul Verhoeven’s wickedly funny RoboCop (Apple TV) and James Cameron’s The Terminator (Rakuten TV) retained a sly anti-authoritarian streak. The more solemnly sinister view of human-replicant blurring in Blade Runner (Apple TV) was less immediately popular. By the turn of the millennium, meanwhile, AI took on a sweeter glow: both Brad Bird’s lovely animation The Iron Giant (Netflix), in which a robot is a boy’s best friend, and Steven Spielberg’s ravishing A.I. Artificial Intelligence (Apple TV), which gave us androids as yearning Pinocchio figures, did some image clean-up for the idea. Lately, sci-fi has been doing its best to normalise human-robot relationships. Platonically so, in the case of the amiable, oddball heist romp Robot &amp; Frank (Now TV), though AI romance has become its own evolving sub-genre – see the eerily persuasive bond between Joaquin Phoenix’s loner and Scarlett Johansson’s disembodied, Siri-style virtual PA in Her (Amazon) or, most recently, the delightful German romcom I’m Your Man (Curzon), where Dan Stevens’ customised android dreamboat isn’t too good to be true, just too perfect to be practical. Still, Alex Garland’s sinuous, brilliant Ex Machina (Amazon), built around Alicia Vikander’s seemingly vulnerable robo-woman, strikes a cautionary note, echoed by the false-memory meditations of the controversial Austro-German parable The Trouble With Being Born (more on that in a few weeks, when Mubi releases it), and the fascinating, expansive and decidedly anxious Norwegian documentary iHuman (Google Play). The future, hopefully, is some way off yet. Also new on streaming and DVD Rose Plays Julie (New Wave Films) Still among the most interesting voices in British independent film, directors Christine Lawlor and Joe Molloy serve up an inspired twist on an age-old melodramatic premise – an adoptee’s sense of self shifts upon seeking her birth parents – in this whispery, cracked-glass psychodrama. The Last Letter from Your Lover (Studiocanal) Augustine Frizzell, the director behind 2018’s spiky girls-gone-wild comedy Never Goin’ Back, is an unlikely fit for a Jojo Moyes adaptation, but she makes this timeline-crossing romance a sticky-schmaltzy pleasure – exquisitely shot and costumed, with real chemistry between Shailene Woodley and Callum Turner. The Outsiders: The Complete Novel (Studiocanal) Francis Ford Coppola’s longer director’s cut of his earnestly affecting 1983 coming-of-age drama is restored for DVD and Blu-ray, with the original cut included: not altogether embraced on release, it’s aged rather well, with an honest depiction of social inequality and prejudice balancing its period nostalgia.My experiments with Instagram-sold beauty products have been almost entirely disastrous. Once in a while, adverts for some miraculous face mask, magic hair tool or unfeasibly easy-to-apply false lashes chase me so aggressively around my feed that I end up reaching for my debit card in the name of professional research. Invariably, when the product arrives many weeks later, it is at best underwhelming, at worst bin-worthy tat. Consequently, my hopes for Shrine temporary hair colourant were low, but when my own hairdresser asked what I thought of them, I felt it my job to have an answer, and bought several bottles. It was, though, genuine devotion that made me place another order this week. The British brand’s unique selling point is its easy, “lo-plastic” hair dye concept. Instead of mixing bottles, disposable gloves, brushes and other wasteful paraphernalia, Shrine Drop It consists of a tiny glass dropper bottle containing what is essentially food colouring for hair. You fill the little reusable silicone bowl (included in the starter pack, £12.99) with any conditioner: for this column, I tried a £1 generic supermarket conditioner, a £30 designer equivalent and lots in between, which all worked equally well. Then you add the desired number of drops and mix. One or two drops is subtle, the instructions say, while four to six is extreme. You then apply the conditioner mix to shampooed hair, from root to tip, and after 10 minutes, rinse out as normal. On bleached, highlighted or grey hair, the effects are the most even and noticeable of any temporary toning product I’ve tried (and I’ve tested more than 50 this year). And because Shrine is mixed into your favourite conditioner, your hair isn’t left feeling straw-like. The effect is temporary, with the colour fading over around four washes (your mileage may vary). I rotate between Shrine’s White (my favourite), Silver and Ash varieties, but those with a more daring disposition will enjoy the Peach, Rose, Lilac or Aqua. Shrine is not without the usual limitations of temporary and semi-permanent colourant: friends with brown, black and red hair reported little significant change to their natural colour. But as someone with lightened locks who is wholly reliant on wash-out toners to eliminate yellow tones and switch up my hair colour, I am amazed to report that Shrine is some of the best cash I’ve ever spent.There were times in the last century when boxing was the dominant and most popular sport in America. During those lost decades, in the 1920s and 1930s, only eight boxers at a time could call themselves world champions. There were eight weight divisions, compared with 17 today, and each was ruled by one world champion known across the sporting globe. Such select purity made boxing compelling and easy to follow. This year the venerable British trade publication, Boxing News, made a principled stand against today’s contrasting plethora of world champions. Their editor, Matt Christie, wrote: “It’s impossible to think of another sport in which there are so many ‘world champions’ who have achieved this status without proving themselves to be the best in the world. By my calculations, 74 of the 81 active ‘world champions’ have not won a contest that could have resulted in them being universally declared the best in their division.” Boxing News now insist, admirably, that the only fighters they will classify as world champions are “those who have proven themselves to be the best in the world, regardless of the belts they own”. That will be the case after Saturday night’s fight in Las Vegas between Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez and Caleb Plant – unless there is an unlikely draw in this world super-middleweight title contest. Álvarez is the WBA, WBC and WBO champion while Plant holds the IBF belt and their intriguing showdown is made all the more interesting because of its novelty unification value. Álvarez is, by wide consensus, the best boxer in the world when the imaginary pound-for-pound list is drawn up by pundits and fans who love comparing fighters across the weight categories. He has lost only once in 59 bouts since his professional debut at the age of 15, and he is also a throwback to boxing’s illustrious past. This is his fourth title fight in 11 months and three of those opponents have been serious champions in their own right – Callum Smith, Billy Joe Saunders and now Plant. The 31-year-old Mexican is driven by his desire to establish himself as the undisputed world champion and, in Las Vegas, he suggested that beating Plant would be the most significant moment of his career so far. “Only five [male] fighters in the history of boxing have accomplished being undisputed [in the four-belt era] and I will be the sixth,” Álvarez said. “This fight is going to be history. You’re going to be witnessing something you’ll remember for a long time.” This seems to place undue emphasis on modern boxing’s own rather hollow history but Álvarez remained emphatic. “Being the undisputed champion is huge for my legacy and it will be an honour to be the first Latin American fighter to do it. Eddy Reynoso [his trainer] and I said in the beginning that the goal was to be undisputed, and now we’re one fight away.” Bernard Hopkins, Jermain Taylor, Terence Crawford, Oleksandr Usyk and Josh Taylor have completed the feat over the past 20 years. Teófimo López matched them in May 2020 when he stunned Vasiliy Lomachenko to become the undisputed lightweight champion – only for the WBC to muddy the waters by claiming that Devin Haney was actually their interim champion as they had previously given Lomachenko a meaningless new bauble as “franchise champion”. Beyond such alphabet absurdity, Álvarez believes that joining the undisputed gang will be a notable milestone as “the goal is to be an all-time great”. Plant has won all 21 of his fights and he has been the IBF champion since January 2019. But, unlike Álvarez, Plant is an obscure figure outside the boxing hardcore. Having grown up in poverty near Nashville, and suffering tragedy following the death of his baby daughter in 2015 and the police shooting his troubled mother dead four years later, Plant knows his life would be transformed if he could beat Álvarez. The 29-year-old American has also underlined the historical magnitude of the fight because the super-middleweight division – bridging the divide between middleweights and light-heavyweights – only came into official existence in 1984. In the subsequent 37 years it has not been able to claim one unequivocal world champion. “When you tune into this fight you’re not just watching a boxing match,” Plant said. “You’re going to be witnessing history. There’s never been an undisputed super-middleweight champion before. So this is going down in the history books for ever.” It would be wrong to dismiss Plant entirely. He is the much taller man, with a longer reach, who is fighting at his natural weight. He is also an excellent technical fighter, with fast hands and feet, and the way in which he has dealt with adversity in his personal life suggests he has great heart. He is hungry for success but he has never faced a boxer anywhere near as complete nor as experienced as Álvarez. The Mexican is at the height of his powers and, alongside his highly sophisticated ringcraft and strategic patience, he hits venomously hard. Plant shrugged when asked this week if we might have seen the best of Álvarez. “I can’t answer questions about Canelo because I don’t know jack-shit about him. But you haven’t seen the best Caleb Plant. You’ve seen some good performances out of me but you’ve yet to see the best of me yet. So that’s why I’m excited about this fight. “All great fighters have been in this position where they are the underdog and they’re expected to lose. But then they go in there, do the job they’re supposed to do and then they become the big dog. This is my moment. I feel like this is my destiny. I’ve just got to go out there and execute the gameplan.” Álvarez was calmer as he told me: “It is personal and it is history. I want to be seen like the greatest fighters of the past. They fought the toughest opponents and made sure that everyone knew they were the best in the world. Now it is more complicated because we have all these titles and all these champions. But this is different. It is a big moment and I am going to make history as the undisputed champion.” It will be a considerable shock if Plant somehow manages to win. The ferocious logic of Álvarez, and the weight of history he is determined to carry on his shoulders, should make it another landmark night for the great Mexican champion. He is likely to seal his undisputed status with an authoritative display that echoes the most authentic boxing history.Allie Young believed in Kyrsten Sinema. Her vote helped elect the seemingly progressive Democrat from Arizona to the Senate in 2018. But she wonders what happened to Sinema when she got to Washington. Young, a voting rights activist and citizen of the Diné, or Navajo Nation, is appalled by Sinema’s refusal to reform or abolish the filibuster. “She has betrayed her constituents,” Young, 31, said by phone this week. “The sort of inaction that she’s taking right now is an action and it’s making the BIPOC community, especially in Arizona, distrust her more and more as the days go by.” Republicans have deployed the filibuster to block legislation brought by Democrats to safeguard voting rights four times this year. On Wednesday they thwarted debate on the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, named after the civil rights hero and congressman. It is an issue that hits home for Young, who last year organized a second “Ride to the Polls” campaign in Arizona that led Indigenous people more than 20 miles on horseback to polling places so they could cast their votes. “Her campaign was something that attracted us because back then she seemed to be a little more progressive than she is now. That’s the part that we’re all having trouble understanding. What happened?” The bewilderment deepened late last year when Sinema nominated Young for the Congressional Medal of Honor Society’s Citizen Honors Award for her contribution to increasing voter registration and turnout. Young reflected: “The fact that nomination came from her and her office tells me that she knows the importance of the Native vote.” “[But] she’s not protecting our right to vote and, if she doesn’t end the filibuster and these voting rights acts don’t get passed, that will affect us. We’re already seeing some of these voter suppression laws that have been passed earlier this year and how they will affect the Native vote.” This has led to the oft-asked question: what does Sinema really want? “A lot of folks are talking about how she’s trying to stay bipartisan. She thinks that’s the key to everything that’s happening in the divisiveness that we’ve seen,” Young says. “It’s very devastating to all of us Arizonans and those who trusted in her. That’s the point of this election process. We vote in and we elect leaders that should be held accountable and that’s what we’re doing now. We put faith in a leader that’s going to show up for us and protect us and fight for us and we’re not seeing that right now.” Earlier this year the US supreme court upheld Arizona laws that ban the collection of absentee ballots by anyone other than a relative or caregiver, and reject any ballots cast in the wrong precinct. Republicans, who control the governorship and both chambers of the state legislature in Arizona, are also pushing to end same-day voter registration, a move that would hurt the Navajo Nation, with 170,000 people and 110 communities spread over 27,000 square miles, mostly in Arizona. Young explained: “Sometimes it’s incredibly difficult to get to the poll. It’s difficult to get anywhere, to even get to a hospital or a clinic or a grocery store, so making multiple trips to ensure that our vote is counted is nearly impossible for a lot of people.” Young argued the case for protecting voting rights with Kamala Harris at a White House meeting and is collecting signatures of Navajo leaders to register their discontent with Sinema. She welcomes the prospect of another Democrat challenging her in a primary election one day. The filibuster, which is not in the US constitution, enables the Senate minority to block debate on legislation. Barack Obama has called it “a Jim Crow relic”, a reference to its long history of thwarting civil rights legislation. Apart from blocking voting rights legislations, Republicans have used it to block the creation of a 9/11-style commission to investigate the 6 January insurrection at the US this year. Activists regard eliminating the procedure as crucial to other issues including immigration reform and reproductive rights. In a CNN town hall last month, Biden indicated willingness to “fundamentally alter the filibuster”, adding that it “remains to be seen exactly what that means in terms of fundamentally – on whether or not we just end the filibuster straight up”. But just as on his economic agenda, senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Sinema stand in his way. Both have repeatedly defended the filibuster, with Sinema arguing that it “protects the democracy of our nation rather than allowing our country to ricochet wildly every two to four years”. Just Democracy, a coalition led by Black and brown organizers, is coordinating with Arizona groups to step up the pressure on her to reconsider. This includes a psychological thriller-style parody movie trailer, The Betrayal, about Sinema turning her back on people of color in Arizona, ending with: “Now playing in Sinemas near you.” It will be backed by an advertising campaign in Arizona and run alongside horror content on the streaming service Hulu. Channel Powe, 40, a local organizer, former Arizona school board member and spokesperson for Just Democracy, said: “We’re going to make it politically impossible for Senator Sinema to continue to stand by the filibuster. In this week of action we are creating a surround sound effect that pushes Senator Sinema on the filibuster. We wanted to share the terrifying consequences of the world that Sinema is enabling.” Powe added: “Once upon a time, she was a mentor of mine in a 2011 political fellowship that I participated in. I looked up to her. Kyrsten used to be a fierce fighter for the people. But once she got to Congress, she turned her back on the very same people who helped her get her in office.”One of the key negotiating issues for Cop26 remains unresolved at this late stage: transparency. Under the 2015 Paris climate agreement, nations set targets on their future greenhouse gas emissions, but we don’t yet know how we will ensure that the ways they report and account for those targets and emissions are transparent and fair. The discussions on transparency to finalise the nuts and bolts of the framework set up in Paris are stalled. Discussions should have been finalised in 2020 but were postponed owing to the pandemic. We are a year behind in the mandate and with most talks happening in a challenging virtual format throughout last year and this one, there is still no clear path toward agreement. If we do not get this right it threatens to undermine any agreement to close the gap between the targets countries set and the emissions cuts needed to keep warming to 1.5C. Unlike the pre-Paris system, this one does not categorise countries developed or developing with different rules for each. The new rules apply to all countries regardless of level of development with (i) specific exceptions for small island developing countries and least developed countries and (ii) provisions allowing for flexibility in the reporting standards, in key areas, for developing countries that need it. Countries do not have to show internationally that they have implemented climate pledges. They must rather demonstrate progress in implementation. It is a fine distinction, but a necessary one to get the Paris agreement finalised. This activity to report on “progress” is therefore the only means of keeping track of whether countries do what they said they were going to do. It also encompasses reporting on climate finance, so it supports the trust element needed for the entire system of global cooperation to work. There is a complex array of issues involved. The question of capacity and the provision of financial and other support to assist countries that need it; the question of the relationship with the carbon market arrangements that are also still being negotiated (called article 6); how the outcome of those discussions will be reflected in the reporting arrangements; and lastly, perhaps the largest elephant in the room, the question of how the worsening relationship between the US and China is going to affect the discussions. It should be a secret to no one that transparent reporting has always been a high priority for the US, especially as it relates to being able to scrutinise Chinese reporting. Although these two superpowers were able to cooperate and shepherd in the new transparency arrangements, now that we are in the final stages of making those arrangements workable their less than desirable bilateral relationship is a potential complicating factor. For negotiators from small countries who desperately need the system to work in support of 1.5C ambitions, and who also will need support to be able to implement it themselves, the question becomes one of whether mice dare to walk where elephants tread? How do we delicately dance ourselves towards an agreement on a very technical issue without getting blown off track by the strong political winds that threaten? Every week we’ll hear from negotiators from a developing country that is involved in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change negotiations and is attending the Cop26 climate conference.On Xavi Hernández’s last night as a Barcelona player, he walked out of the Olimpiastadion in Berlin carrying the European Cup in his right hand. It was the 25th trophy he had won with the club and it was over, but only for a little while. He had arrived aged 12 from Terrassa, where the square he played in now has a sign up banning football, and although he was leaving 23 years on he was already planning his return, eventually made on Friday. At Xavi’s farewell, Andrés Iniesta gave a speech in which he thanked him for “everything you have given this club … and everything you have left to give”. After all, Iniesta said: “Those of us who know you know you’ll be back.” Xavi too was clear: “My objective is to return to this ‘house’, as coach or sporting director. I hope this isn’t a goodbye but a ‘see you later’.” Six years later, as it turned out. Few managerial appointments have been as preordained, to the extent that although Xavi is only 41 and has no European experience, many feel his return should have happened sooner. Right down to this week: Barcelona had hoped he would be on Thursday’s flight to Catalonia, only to encounter tougher resistance from his club, Qatar’s Al Sadd, than they anticipated, agreement not reached until the following day and until the full release clause was paid. On Saturday morning the club were finally able to announce him as their new manager on a two-and-a-half-year deal. It is not the only point at which his arrival felt delayed. In January last year, Barcelona’s then CEO, Óscar Grau, and sporting director, Eric Abidal, very publicly flew to Qatar to persuade Xavi to occupy the job he had been preparing himself for. To their surprise, he turned down the chance to be Barcelona manager then, and again in August. Xavi later said he felt he wasn’t ready yet, which was true but was also the polite version. There was little faith in the administration led by Josep Maria Bartomeu, who would be forced to resign as president that October. On Tuesday night, almost two years on, the new vice-president, Rafael Yuste, and the CEO, Mateu Alemany, made the same trip. This time, it wasn’t so much about convincing Xavi as being seen to do the right thing by his club, Al Sadd, whom he coached for the 97th and, he hopes, final time the following evening, having won seven trophies. Convincing Al Sadd proved unexpectedly complicated but Xavi believes he is ready and Joan Laporta, Barcelona’s new president, says he does now too, the absence of alternatives helping overcome doubts. If Xavi is the only real candidate, he is also one around whom there is consensus. Xavi is not just the man who played 767 games for Barcelona, nor is he just a coach. He is not even just a symbol, nor is this about nostalgia, although that hangs heavy. He is an ideologue, a defender of the faith. He had to be: “I was extinct; footballers like me were in danger of dying out. It was all: two metres tall, powerful, in the middle, knockdowns, second balls, rebounds …” If it was about survival, the shift was real. The architect of the greatest era Spanish football has had, he won two trebles and the biggest trophy in the world every year for five years – Euros, Champions League, World Cup, Champions League, Euros – and it was not just about what they won but how they won it. If there is a line that runs from Johan Cruyff to Pep Guardiola, it continues to him. When he left Barcelona the last time, he said he hoped to be remembered as someone who was “football to the bone”, a man who would watch every game in every league and always find something to capture his attention. Talk to him and never mind Barcelona, conversation can go from Portsmouth to Oviedo and back again, a footballing manifesto emerging. “Some teams can’t or don’t pass the ball. What are you playing for? What’s the point? That’s not football. Combine, pass, play. That’s football – for me, at least.” Jorge Valdano once said: “If football was a science, Xavi would have discovered the formula. With a ball at his feet, no one else has ever communicated so intelligently with every player on the pitch.” He is still searching for that formula, the same ideals driving his coaching as his playing, the same search for spaces, the same pursuit of some idea of perfection. The philosophy is non-negotiable, but it’s not just a theory and he is not just a former player, a face to whom opportunity is gifted. It is six years preparing – “He has more experience than I had when I took over,” Pep Guardiola insists – putting it all into practice. It is drilled, driven, analysed repeatedly. He is “obsessed with possession”, to use his own words. “He always shows us the possession stats and it’s never enough,” Santi Cazorla, the former Arsenal midfielder now at Al Sadd, told Cadena Ser radio. “His ideas are very clear, always have been. He wants the ball for us, and the opponents not to even touch it.” Xavi tells players: “The ball is not a bomb; it is a treasure.” Last week Laporta conceded: “Maybe we have to recover the essence of our football, which is non-negotiable.” No one represents that like Xavi and for all the doubts – inevitable given the state the club are in, a preparation carried out in Qatar – no one else could arrive with such universal goodwill. That matters, even if Laporta hasn’t always been sure and there is something a little improvised in this decision, or at least in the timing of it. “I have always said that he would end up being coach of Barcelona; what I didn’t know was when,” the president said this week. Yet in February he had suggested he didn’t think Xavi was ready, later saying he was “unproven”, and that reticence remained. “I understand that people say I am not prepared but I am,” Xavi had insisted when he was back in Catalonia in the summer. A clause in his contract with Al Sadd always contemplated a return, facilitating his ability to answer the call when it came. “I am on the market,” he said, yet he also insisted he was “not in a hurry”, that he did not want “a constant debate about whether I could be going to Barcelona”, and had not spoken to Laporta. This week Laporta was quick to insist that their relationship had not gone “cold” but some distance was probably inevitable, for reasons of politics as much as football. By the time Laporta announced his intention to run for the presidency, Xavi had aligned himself with the candidacy of Víctor Font, for whom he would be a kind of general manager, overseeing an overhaul. That put both men in a difficult position, kept at arm’s length. Once Laporta threw his hat into the ring, Xavi’s public profile reduced, his role in the campaign largely silent, less active than anyone had anticipated and Font probably needed. He was the central figure in Font’s project but he did not want actively to oppose Laporta, his president in the golden years and a man with whom his relationship had been close. Laporta would make mischievous remarks appropriating him but Xavi was off limits for now and always someone else’s man. Ronald Koeman was someone else’s man, too, inherited from the Bartomeu administration, but Laporta was stuck with him. He had said the return of Pep Guardiola was his “wet dream” but his candidates were German: Flick, Nagelsmann, Klopp, Tuchel. They were also out of reach. Koeman continued then, and again after the defeat against Benfica when Laporta had wanted to sack him. Again, only the cost and lack of alternatives kept the Dutchman in the job. When Barcelona were beaten by Rayo Vallecano, they decided they had to sack him anyway before the damage got even worse. “Maybe I should have done it sooner,” Laporta admitted. They didn’t have a replacement ready, Sergi Barjuan becoming the interim manager, but there was a ready replacement: the man who had been there all along. And so at last everything fitted into place. “All” they had to do was re-establish contact, wait until the Qatari season stopped, reach an agreement with Al Sadd and make him theirs again, bringing him home. “Xavi pl ays in the future,” Dani Alves once said. The future was foreseen and it starts now.Walk of shame, huh? I’ll take it,” says Huma Abedin, reading the name of the lipstick on the makeup artist’s table. It is a bright, cool day in Manhattan and we are at a photographer’s studio, where Abedin is having her photo taken for this interview. Having watched her from afar for so long, first as Hillary Clinton’s elegant, silent assistant, then as the mostly silent and increasingly unhappy spouse of the former congressman Anthony Weiner, I had expected her to be quiet, anxious and guarded, but Abedin, 45, is none of those things. Someone so beautiful could come across as imperious, but with her big, open-mouthed laugh and “Oh gosh, you know better than me!” air, she veers closer to goofy. After 25 years of working for Clinton, she has a politician’s knack for making those around her feel comfortable. She leans forward keenly when spoken to, and makes sure to use everyone’s name when talking to them. She tells us, twice, that she ate “so much comfort food over the weekend at the hospital”, where she waited while Bill Clinton was being treated for a urological infection; he was discharged the day before our interview. “Just burgers and fries, burgers and fries. Food is my weakness,” she says rolling her eyes at herself. Everyone is instantly disarmed. But then she picks up that lipstick and at the word “shame” the makeup artist and I look down awkwardly and Abedin becomes – as she has been for so long, she tells me later over lunch – “the elephant in the room again”. “I lived with shame for a very, very long time,” as she puts it. The question Abedin hears most is: why? Why did she stay with Weiner after he accidentally tweeted a photo of his crotch while sexting women online in 2011, leading to his resignation from Congress? Why, when he ran for New York City mayor in 2013, did she assure voters that she had “forgiven him”? And why did she stay with him when it then emerged he was still sending women photos of the contents of his trousers? Why did she only separate from him but not divorce him when, in 2016, he sent a woman a photo of himself aroused while lying in bed next to his and Abedin’s toddler son, Jordan? And why were there official emails between her and Hillary on Weiner’s laptop, thereby prompting the then director of the FBI, James Comey, to announce the fateful reopening of the investigation into Clinton’s emails days before the 2016 election? Well, her new memoir, Both/And: A Life in Many Worlds, makes a good fist of answering most, if not all, of these questions. Having started the book believing that Abedin’s choices were so unrelatable as to be incomprehensible, I finished it feeling as if I probably would have often done the same. This is the first interview she has given about her book: “And I’m glad it’s not a TV one, because that’s really not me, being in front of the camera,” she says. I ask why she decided to write the book at all, given that it would, inevitably, thrust her right back into the bright glare of public scrutiny. “I think if I’d written this book when people wanted me to write it, in the midst of all the heat and intensity, it would have been a much more bitter book. I needed the time. But I feel like I’m somebody who’s been in the public eye on and off for the past 20 years and someone else has been writing my story, and it felt like the right time for me to write it,” she says. In order to understand what she did, Abedin says, as she eats her omelette and chips in a downtown restaurant, you have to understand where she came from. People tend to start with her long relationship with Hillary Clinton, who she has worked for since she was 20 years old, and think that shaped how she handled her own husband’s very public betrayals of her. It’s true that it’s hard not to boggle at the symbolism that she was working at the White House when the president, after initial denials, finally admitted he’d had an affair with Monica Lewinsky. But Abedin loathes this line of thinking. “I know that people want to make this comparison” – between Bill Clinton’s scandal and Weiner’s – “because it seems to the outside world so similar, but to me it wasn’t,” she insists. Instead, she says, to really understand how she, a devout Muslim, was married to an American Jew who ended up in prison for sex offences, you have to go back to her beginnings. Abedin was born in Kalamazoo, Michigan, the daughter of two professors, both India-born Muslims. When she was two, her parents were offered jobs at the university in Jeddah and so the family moved to Saudi Arabia. Her parents raised her to be devout but also modern; she has no problem, she writes, with women who opt to wear the hijab as long as they have “the choice”. When she was 17, her father died from progressive renal failure, which her parents had kept hidden from the children for most of their childhood. I ask what she learned from her father and she says: “To make your own choices, but be thoughtful about them, not rash.” Her mother encouraged her to go to university in the US and she went to George Washington University in Washington DC. She’d spent her summers in the US, so the culture shock wasn’t too great, but because of her faith she doesn’t drink alcohol, which differentiated her from the other American students. There was something else, too: “As was expected of any girl with my background, I would lose my virginity to the man I would marry,” she writes, and that is exactly what she did, waiting until she married Weiner at the age of 33. She applied to be a White House intern while still at college, and was assigned to the first lady’s deputy chief of staff. She was offered a permanent position even before she graduated. “I officially became a member of a lifelong club known as Hillaryland,” she writes. From the moment she arrived, Abedin was in awe of the Clintons, Hillary especially, and it’s an impression that has not waned in the 25 years she has spent working alongside her. She tells me that one of the reasons she wrote her memoir “was to show the world that she’s this incredible person, and I wanted to present her as a human, away from the caricatures”. But it’s hard to see the human when so many of the descriptions of her in the book sound like a press release (“Diplomacy is about meeting the world with open eyes, attuned listening and small gestures of outreach. It was second nature to Hillary Clinton”). This is also how she talks about her in person. The only criticism Abedin allows of Hillary in the book is of her occasionally unfortunate taste in clothes (“the coat that looked like a carpet that HRC thought was colourful and fun”). Meanwhile, her attendance at Donald Trump’s wedding to Melania Knauss (“When the invitation came [Hillary] figured, why not? When someone is getting married, you go”) and even her vote for the war against Iraq (“she was clear about her reservations”), which Abedin advised against, are justified. From very early on, the two women developed a close relationship based on mutual respect, and it’s easy to see why Abedin – a young woman who lost her father and was living far away from her mother – would cleave to the Clintons. “I wasn’t necessarily politically motivated. It felt like [being part of] the cause, and every day you were doing something important,” she says, and that cause was the Clintons. Yet her devotion to the cause occasionally crashes up against historical fact, and in the case of the Clintons in the late 1990s, that means Lewinsky. Abedin does her best to get around this when recalling how rumours of the president’s affair with the intern began. “Given all the manufactured stories that had come before this one – that the Clintons were murderers, thieves – it seemed very likely that this one could be untrue,” she writes. Come on, I say. By the time Lewinsky came along, the president had already been accused of sexual impropriety by Gennifer Flowers and Paula Jones (the latter of which he still denies). There must have been some part of Abedin that thought Lewinsky was telling the truth. “No,” she replies before I finish the question. Why not? “For me, as an intern, it seemed not possible. We never saw [the president]! You would turn on the TV and it was Ken Starr this, Ken Starr that, Whitewater this, Whitewater that – but when you turned away from the TV and you looked at your desk, really important work was continuing. Northern Ireland, the Middle East peace process. The other stuff was just distractions on TV. Maybe if I hadn’t been an intern it would have been different, but I knew how it was [in the White House] and it seemed impossible,” she says. Throughout our time together, she never says Lewinsky’s name. I ask how the Clintons feel about Ryan Murphy’s recent dramatisation of the scandal in Impeachment: American Crime Story. “It’s not a conversation that we discussed internally,” she replies crisply. When the Democrats gained seats in the 1998 midterm elections, despite the impeachment, Abedin knew exactly who to credit. “It was Hillary Clinton’s effort, her struggle and her strategising, her broken and open heart that had saved the presidency … Hillary Clinton was the saviour, not the liability,” she writes, channelling her internal Barbara Cartland. As I read this sentence out loud to her, Abedin quotes it along with me. “Her broken heart, yeah,” she says smiling a little. This idea that Hillary had, through forgiveness and loyalty, fixed her husband’s transgression and saved his career seems to echo your later belief that you could fix your husband and rescue his political career, I say to her. “Yes, yes, yes!” she says excitedly, as if she’d never put those ideas together. So did seeing how Hillary handled her husband’s infidelity – silently, stoically – influence how Abedin later dealt with Weiner? “If it did, it was subconscious. I think what really drove me was I was desperately in love with my husband. I think all of the ugliness from the outside, it made us into a bubble. I didn’t know who I could trust, and so much of the conversation was so embarrassing, so we kind of receded into our corner,” she says. *** The first time Weiner asked Abedin on a date was in 2001. She declined, saying she was busy working for Hillary. So he loudly asked Hillary to give Abedin the night off, and Hillary, to Abedin’s horror, told her to go have fun. She managed to shake off the obnoxious congressman that night, but they bumped into one another frequently at political events. She was the quiet, well-liked aide who hid from the spotlight; he was the brash congressman who yelled about his political causes to any passing camera. And yet, by 2007, they were friendly, and she was falling for him. He was not fazed by her job, which was extremely demanding, given that Hillary was now a senator and also running for the presidency. “Other men would find this whole Clinton world really overwhelming and more than they could handle,” she says. Also, unlike other men, he had no problem with what she describes as her “limitations” – her decision not to have sex until she was married. The man who would soon be routinely described as a sex addict in the media didn’t even kiss her until a year into their relationship. “And he was fine with that,” she says. She’d always assumed she’d marry a Muslim, so he gave up alcohol and pork, and fasted during Ramadan alongside her. When he proposed, in 2009, she accepted. “It was a real journey for me to get to a place where I could allow myself to marry someone outside my faith. But he was my first love, and my greatest soulmate … Then everything exploded. He didn’t just break my heart, he ripped it out and stomped on it over and over again,” she says calmly. The first warning sign came as they were discussing their wedding plans and she handed him his BlackBerry to call his dad. Her eye was caught by an email from a woman. It was “fawning, flirtatious and very familiar”, she writes. He insisted it was “just a fan”. Because he was known for being a straight talker – to a fault – she believed him. But later, she would remember what he said to her right before she saw that email: “I’m broken and I need you to fix me.” Has she ever asked him what he meant? “Often I’ll raise things with Anthony, and I think there’s a lot he doesn’t remember. But I think, in hindsight, it really was a self-realisation that something didn’t feel right, and my guess is that committing to me, committing to being married, exposed those vulnerabilities: ‘Am I good enough to be in a relationship with somebody?’ That’s what a lot of people who have these insecurities feel,” she says. Soon after, they got married and their wedding was officiated by none other than … Bill Clinton. “Every wedding is a wonder,” intoned the man who, just over a decade earlier, had been impeached for lying about infidelity. I tell Abedin that often when she describes Weiner in the book – “charming, charismatic and clearly attractive to lots of women” – it sounds like she could be describing Bill. Was that part of his appeal? “No! Not at all!” she gasps. She was, she says, just deeply in love with him. Only 10 months into their marriage, Weiner texted Abedin to say his Twitter account had been hacked. This, of course, was a lie, and after a few days he had to admit, to his wife and then the public, that the person who had posted a photo of Anthony Weiner’s crotch to Anthony Weiner’s Twitter account was Anthony Weiner. The media cackled. Abedin cringed. Then the New York Times found out she was pregnant and, even though she was still in her first trimester, they printed it, and that’s how the Clintons and most of her friends found out. But she didn’t leave him. It was, Weiner told her, just an online thing, like a computer game, and he was sorry. It’s not like he had sex with someone else, she told herself. Abedin had barely dated at all before Weiner and he was, she writes in the book, her “first and only”. I ask if she thinks this inexperience caused her to be naive about her husband. “I don’t think I was naive – I think I wasn’t rash. Also, because I lost my father when I was young and that was such an important relationship in my life, I thought: ‘Am I going to deprive this child of a father, without giving him another chance?’ I feel I made a very thoughtful decision about it.” He resigned from Congress, they went into therapy, and six months later their son, Jordan, was born. A few months after that, it was Abedin who was in the spotlight when five Republican members of Congress, including former presidential candidate Michele Bachmann, wrote a letter saying Abedin should be investigated for possible terrorist “infiltration” of the state department. “Abedin has three family members – her late father, her mother and her brother – connected to Muslim Brotherhood operatives and/or organisations,” they wrote. This was complete nonsense: none of Abedin’s family had any connection to the Muslim Brotherhood. Looking back now, Abedin sees this episode as a precursor to the heightened Islamaphobia that would soon unfold in the US: “Michele Bachmann was the appetiser for what came next, and I was the experiment.” For so long, Abedin had been, she says, “the token Muslim in American politics”. Hillary trusted her expertise on the Middle East and she often acted as translator on trips to the region. But now American politicians and some foreign ones were questioning her loyalty. Senator John McCain gave a speech to the Senate defending her: “Huma represents what is best about America … I am proud to call her my friend.” More Republicans, including Lindsey Graham and the then House speaker John Boehner, spoke up for her, and the scandal faded. It was a testament to how well liked Abedin was in the American political world, whereas her husband was totally isolated. *** When Weiner mooted the idea of running for mayor of New York in 2013, Abedin was enthusiastic. He was such a good politician, and what had happened in 2011 had clearly been an aberration, she thought. “I couldn’t imagine Anthony would do anything to risk it all again,” she writes. Abedin, for the first time, made a public statement defending her husband. “I love him, I have forgiven him, I believe in him,” she said at a press conference to persuade voters. Hillary was horrified and I ask Abedin why. After all, Hillary had stood by her husband after his infidelities. “Hillary has always approached how she tried to help me from the perspective of a friend, and she felt that I didn’t need to do what I did,” she says. I ask if Hillary ever mentioned to Abedin their shared experience of being married to chronically unfaithful husbands. “No. No. I don’t think she – I don’t want to be talking about private conversations with her. But she has this incredible empathy, compassion and problem-solving gene that she can’t shake. There’s no, ‘This is what I did so you should do this.’ No. She didn’t have to. I’d seen what she’d gone through,” she says. Soon after Abedin made her public statement of forgiveness, it emerged Weiner was still sexting. Abedin doesn’t include this detail in the book – and who could blame her – but this time he was doing so under the unforgettable alias “Carlos Danger”. New Yorkers rejected the possibility of Mayor Danger. No one could understand why she stayed – not even the Clintons, although they never said so explicitly. But no one in her family was divorced, and she just couldn’t picture it for herself. She told Weiner in 2014 that she wanted a separation, but they still lived together. Outsiders tutted, but he made life easier for her. Abedin was extremely busy working for Clinton, now secretary of state and, imminently, presidential nominee. He was happy to stay home and look after their son while Abedin travelled the country. Anyone who has been married with kids will know that, for pragmatic purposes, you sometimes tolerate more than you should. A month after Hillary was named the Democratic nominee in the 2016 election, Weiner called Abedin. He told her the New York Post was publishing a picture of him and Jordan. She assumed it would be a paparazzi photo of the two of them in the park. It wasn’t. It was a photo taken by Weiner showing himself aroused and in bed, and next to him lay their sleeping toddler son, and he had sent it to a woman on the internet. Abedin threw him out of their apartment and publicly announced their separation. Strangers called Child Services saying they were concerned for Jordan’s safety, so now, while going through a very public scandal, and a separation, and helping to helm an especially fevered presidential campaign, she was also being investigated by Child Services. Just one of those things would drive most people to a nervous breakdown. How on earth did she not collapse? “God,” she replies. “My faith has carried me through this life and, when I was at my lowest moments, that’s where I went. I think the average American doesn’t know about Islam, but, no question, that is where I find my balance.” Things were about to get even worse for Abedin. A few weeks later, it was alleged that Weiner had been sexting a 15-year-old girl – a federal offence. “Each time I thought Anthony had reached a new nadir, he shocked me by going even lower,” Abedin writes. Maybe he was testing you to see how much you could take, I say. “I think the isolation and the shunning from society made him retreat more into these spaces and, as a result, it felt as though whatever it was Anthony was dealing with, it was not being treated properly and we both had to get to the bottom,” she says. He went into rehab and that was when doctors first told her that Weiner had an “addiction”. Does she think he’s a sex addict? “There are certain questions for him to answer, not me. What I do know is that somebody who intentionally loses everything and falls into the same pattern again, that’s not behaviour you can control,” she says. It’s an addict’s behaviour, but maybe not to sex, I say. Maybe he was addicted to self-destruction, or even public shame. She nods emphatically. Because Weiner’s alleged victim was underage, the FBI seized his laptop. When they found emails on it from Abedin to Hillary containing classified information, Comey announced he was reopening the investigation into Hillary’s emails and whether she used a private server for official communications. The election was less than two weeks away. Abedin’s two worlds – her Clinton world and her tattered marriage – had collided in the most spectacular fashion. Within days, Comey cleared Clinton, but the damage had been done. Abedin says she’s put all her anger behind her, but she still sounds pretty angry when talking about Comey. “Do I believe [the reopened investigation] was the singular factor in her loss? No. Do I believe it was a factor? Yes, I do,” she says. The first thing she heard after Clinton gave her concession speech on 9 November was reporters shouting, “Do you blame yourself, Huma?” She says she still has no idea why her emails were on her ex-husband’s computer. I ask how she felt when President Trump thanked Comey after winning the election. After a long pause she says: “I’m not sure I have a word you can print.” Almost exactly a year after that, Weiner was sentenced to 21 months in prison. Before he was incarcerated, the two of them attempted to file for divorce, but because of the enormous media interest, Abedin reluctantly withdrew the petition. (They are currently finalising details of their divorce.) She had expected to spend that year working as chief of staff to the first female president; instead, she was shuttling her son to prison for visits with his father in a country that was enacting a so-called Muslim ban, and she still laughs at the dystopian absurdity of it. Were she and Hillary bitter after the election? “Bitterness is not the word, but I was angry. There was also a lot of ‘I told you so’ [to the public and media]. Like, ‘I told you this Muslim ban was going to happen!’” Jordan is now nine and I ask if he has his father’s all-too-recognisable surname; she says he does. How has she explained that photo of him lying in bed next to his father? “That’s a conversation that, when he’s at an age when it’s appropriate, we’re going to have. He knows there are moments when there are [photographers] around and he’s had to deal with the gaggles,” she says. The first thing Jordan asked her when she told him she had written a book was: “Does that mean those men are coming back?” After Weiner was released, and registered as a sex offender, he got an apartment in the same building as Abedin, to make things easier for Jordan. This remains the status quo. In 2019, after he told Abedin he was dating again, she did the one thing she had always resisted: she looked through his old phone. It turned out that, after 2013, while they were still married, he hadn’t just been sexting women – he’d been having sex with them, sometimes in their family home. With a therapist, they then went through a disclosure process, in which he told her everything. Knowing the truth at last helped her to shake off the anger, the shame and the resentment, and to move on. These days she says they are “more than civil to each other” but when I ask what he’s doing now for a job, her voice hardens: “You’d have to ask him. I assume he’s doing stuff.” (According to a New Yorker interview in December 2020, he’s running a company that makes “countertops out of concrete and crushed Heineken bottles”.) Abedin, meanwhile, is still working for Hillary. “She’s doing a show for Apple TV, she and her daughter have set up a production company, and there’s all these amazing projects,” she says brightly. It was always about the cause. I ask her if she’s seeing anyone and she goes all fluttery: “Oh my goodness. This is a question I was not prepared for. No, I’m not seeing anyone. I don’t really go on dates. That’s kind of sad, now that I think of it. But if you have any leads, I’ll take them.” What is she looking for in a partner? She thinks for a moment: “Somebody not in politics, don’t you think?”Picking a quizshow host is an unknowable alchemy. Who ever put Jasper Carrott forward for Golden Balls? How did Anne Robinson end up a panto villain on The Weakest Link? If you really pull back the curtain, it doesn’t make sense that Chris Tarrant ended up fronting Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (though can you imagine anyone doing as good a job as he did now?). The throwback weirdness of Noel Edmonds, the showbiz-dazzled toughness of Danny Dyer, the primetime glam of Ben Shephard. And then, of course, the maestro, Bradley Walsh. Yes, it’s late autumn, which means it’s time for quizzes. This week we have three new offerings: Ian Wright’s Moneyball (Saturday, 6.30pm, ITV); Gary Lineker’s Sitting on a Fortune (Sunday, 7pm, ITV); and Craig Charles’s Moneybags (Monday to Friday, 3pm, Channel 4). You can see how all quizshows blend into one another. It doesn’t matter what channel you are on: at some point, a man in his 50s is going to ask you about flags. When you watch three quizshows in a week you gain the ability to see through space and time, which is to say: I think, now, I understand the quizshow host more than anyone on Earth. The rough formula for a successful quiz is this: Trivia (there must be enough trivia – and crucially it must be the right level of chewy, satisfying-to-answer trivia – for the watching contestant at home to yell at the TV); Tension (there must be something on the line for the contestant – you have to want them to win, and to want them to win you have to know enough about them to care, and for that to happen the host has to strike up some quick camaraderie); and Chatter (Chatter is divided into two forms: asking a contestant about themselves – crucial for Tension – but also rule exposition, which, depending on the complexity of the quiz, is vital). When these three are in harmony, quiz brilliance happens. When the numbers are off … you get Sitting on a Fortune. Gary Lineker seems like a nice man, but fundamentally he doesn’t care whether you’re buying a new kitchen or not, and that’s what makes him not a quizshow host. It doesn’t help that the format of Sitting is clunky: six contestants sit in various illuminated chairs, and if they get a question wrong from the golden chair at the front they are condemned to the doom-ridden red chair at the back. Now, while the final round – a three-way shootout where remaining contestants compete for the jackpot – threatens to be fun, in the end it isn’t, really. Sitting on a Fortune suffers from too much manufactured Tension (the lingofication of the modern quiz: Lineker is constantly trying to make the catchphrase “Lock it in!” happen) and not enough genuine Chatter, and that failure is almost entirely on Lineker’s shoulders. On the opposite side of that coin we have Ian Wright who is, frankly, quizshow dynamite. From the very first interaction, Wrighty is putting them at ease (a cheery “What are we doing?” before a Covid-aware fist bump), before the Moneyball format swings in. Contestants have to pair up soft trivia answers then roll a huge bowling ball across a digital screen in a bid to win money. Although Moneyball has more than enough Chatter and plenty of Tension, the lack of good Trivia lets this one down. Then there’s Craig Charles, who understands about 80% of what’s going on with Moneybags – and, frankly, good. You don’t care, but I’ll explain it anyway: a studio of contestants are paired up in front of a conveyor belt carrying bags of money, and they pick them up if they think it is one of the answers to a question Charles just asked. Chatter-wise, this is arguably the best of the bunch – we get to know every dental nurse, IT teacher and retiree who comes through the studio – and the mechanics of the game, allowing people to steal money from one another, ramps up the Tension. The Trivia is pitched at the right level, too: a left-field question about the size of things compared to a standard Shetland pony had me stumped. But there’s another element here, one only Craig Charles could bring to it: Chaos. I didn’t expect this – I didn’t even particularly think it while watching it – but you can’t argue with the science. Craig Charles is the perfect quizshow host. Moneybags is the perfect quiz. Moneyball, 6:30pm, 6 November, ITV; Sitting on a Fortune, 7pm, 7 November, ITV; Moneybags, 3pm, from 8 November, Channel 4Later … With Jools Holland 10.10pm, BBC Two Kylie Minogue – pop’s Chosen One – joins longtime pal Jools for the last episode in this run of Later. Post-punk band Yard Act bring a fresh sound with a live performance from their local Leeds haunt, while Ed Sheeran provides, err, his reliable brand of best-selling music and lyrics. Rising star Priya Ragu also makes her debut, using her mother tongue of Tamil to create a genre she calls “Ragu Wavy”. Not a bad way to sign off until the Hootenanny. Hollie Richardson Strictly Come Dancing 6.45pm, BBC One Following the frightfully good Halloween spectacular (well, not so good for poor Judi and Graziano), Strictly reaches its halfway point. The competition is really heating up with Rose and Giovanni topping the scoreboard – but who will hotfoot it through to the next stage? HR The 80s: Music’s Greatest Decade? With Dylan Jones 8.10pm, BBC Two Jones wraps up his compelling case for 80s music with a double bill. First, he provides recorded performances from some of the alternative voices of the decade – the Cure, the Specials, the Selector – while recalling the political and social context. In the second episode, hip-hop and house are honoured with more from the archive – proving to be the best way of doing it, really. HR Britain By Beach 8.10pm, Channel 4 In keeping with the channel’s favoured Saturday night history lessons, Anita Rani explores Britain’s beaches. Her trip begins in Devon where she learns the secrets of Agatha Christie, and discovers the story of a German attack on a D-day training exercise that left more than 700 people dead. HR The Chase Celebrity Special 8.30pm, ITV Time to place bets on which of four celebrities has the best general knowledge. Will TV presenter Amanda Byram or dancer Brendan Cole bring home the big bucks, or is Emmerdale star Adam Thomas a secret quizzer? Perhaps the smart money’s on BBC current affairs anchor Naga Munchetty. Jack Seale The Jonathan Ross Show 9.30pm, ITV A comedy-packed lineup joins the veteran chatshow host. Aisling Bea and Rob Delaney discuss their upcoming film, a (slightly controversial) reimagining of the Christmas classic Home Alone. Michael McIntyre also stops by and Ed Sheeran, a very busy man tonight, performs. Henry Wong Film choice Portrait of a Lady on Fire 9pm, BBC Four This sumptuous, sensuous drama from the great French film-maker Céline Sciamma follows Noémie Merlant’s late 18th-century artist Marianne to an island off the coast of Brittany. There, she is commissioned to create a portrait of a young lady, Héloïse (Adèle Haenel), for her intended husband – but in secret, as Héloïse refuses to marry or even sit for the painting. The ruse soon collapses and the two women begin a febrile love affair in an all-female environment free of the male gaze – with the act of seeing and being seen shifting from restrictive to liberating. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Man United v Man City 11.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. The derby from Old Trafford.I had a conversation with a teacher the other day. She asked me what she and other teachers could do to help children with the trauma of the pandemic. This pulled me up sharp. She explained that the children in her class had been deeply affected by what has happened over the last 18 months. She thought some of them were troubled, at times distressed, and that this was showing up in the way they were behaving towards each other. She wasn’t talking about whether the children were “behind” at school. This was about that very unfashionable idea “the whole child” – not the tested and measured child, evaluated purely on the basis of their performance in tasks set by people in offices far away. When we see children in a school playground or in a park, it’s easy to imagine that the past year and a half has washed over them. They run about, whooping and laughing. This teacher made me think about what might be going on under the surface. Let’s ask ourselves some hard questions: how many school-age children have had direct experience of losing a sibling, a parent, a grandparent, a close relative or carer? How many children are close friends with a child who has had that experience? How many schoolchildren have had direct experience of people suffering the long-term effects of Covid? A hundred thousand? Two hundred thousand? More? I ask myself and you: do we think that the effect of this can be ignored? We are, after all, talking about the psychological impact of widespread bereavement. I’ll be honest: I hadn’t thought of this before. Mea culpa, I guess I’ve been a bit obsessed with using poetry for myself as a way of dealing with Covid and indeed with how your government has – or has not – dealt with it. I felt guilty that I hadn’t thought about children. It threw me back to thinking about the school-age child I have. What effect did it have on him that for several weeks, day after day, he didn’t know whether he would wake up in the morning to hear that his dad had died? I can tell you, to have a conversation about such things with your own teenage son is not easy. One reason why we’re not talking about this stems perhaps from the media burble about Covid being a mostly mild illness for children. Somehow this has led us to imagine that what’s going on in children’s minds must be mild, too. And more: the landscape of loss and grief is obscured by happy talk about vaccinations, along with people in parts of the media constantly referring to “getting back to normality” – one sign of which is, after all, being in school. Are we in normality now? Popping up on my Twitter feed are accounts of many children being off school. What I’m talking about here is something that is both personal and social. It’s very easy to shunt personal problems off into the private sphere as if they are a matter for the individual or a matter of “personal choice”. With a pandemic, it becomes very clear – albeit hardly talked about – that there is social trauma going on. So loss might be felt personally and privately but the experience is translated and mediated again and again through the talk in families, between friends, and in the mass media chat. It can be translated by silence when that talk doesn’t even take place, in which case children are left on their own to try to process what has happened. What do five-, six-, seven- or eight-year-olds make of the idea of a virus? We’ve been asking young children to understand that someone can have the virus but then not show any outward signs of it. And yet, people you know and perhaps love, die of it. Trying to explain it can make it sound like evil magic: it can get into your cells, it can spread and multiply but it’s not actually alive. It can hang about in the air. You can breathe it in but you can’t see, hear, taste, smell or touch it. We’re expecting children to understand all this. Or to put it another way, we’re expecting children to deal with it, handle it and carry on in life and school while they’re being asked to “catch up”. The reason why this subject cropped up in my conversation with the teacher is because we had been talking about poetry. She knew I had written poems for children about the death of my son and the persecution and murder of my relatives in the Holocaust, so it was fair enough that she should ask me about what teachers could do about the trauma of the pandemic. Might poetry help? Reflecting on what the teacher had said, I imagined some kind, neutral, safe forum in which children and young people could share what they thought about what had happened to them and their relatives. More than that: they could talk about their general fears, panics and imagined scenarios about what might happen next or in five years’ time, and so on. I conjured up a situation in which children wrote down words or phrases on bits of paper, handed them in to be jumbled up so that anonymity could be preserved. Then the teacher (or convenor) could read some out and children could talk about what they had just heard in pairs or in groups or in circle-time. There’s a problem with this, though, which the teacher pointed out to me: is there time in the curriculum? This brought something into sharp focus. Your predecessor, Michael Gove, altered education in England so that it now pursues what he and others called the “knowledge-rich curriculum”. One casualty of this has been the arts. The arts have been squeezed in two ways: knowledge about the arts has been favoured over practising the arts, while the number of school hours actually spent on the arts as a whole has shrunk. But the arts are precisely the kind of arena that gives us the space to explore and reflect on matters like personal and social trauma. The arts point to possibilities of finding ways of coping or overcoming difficulty and distress. So let me put the question to you: if the curriculum is too busy to notice what’s happened to children, what are we going to do about it? Yours, Michael RosenAmericans can carry on eating meat while keeping the world within safe limits on global heating, the US secretary of agriculture has insisted. Thomas Vilsack said: “I do not think we have to reduce the amount of meat or livestock produced in the US. And a significant percentage is exported. It’s not a question of eating more or less or producing more or less. The question is making production more sustainable.” He told the Guardian in an interview at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow that livestock production could be made more efficient, and the amount of methane produced by farm animals reduced, which along with other measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture would be enough to reduce carbon from farming. Ruminants such as cattle and sheep produce methane, as does animal manure. The potent greenhouse gas has a heating effect about 80 times greater than carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, though it breaks down sooner. Meat accounts for about 60% of greenhouse gas production from agriculture, which itself is one of the highest carbon-producing sectors globally. The US, the EU and scores of other countries signed a deal at Cop26 to reduce global methane emissions by 30% by 2030, though none of the countries have taken on a firm national reduction goal under the deal. If the target is reached, global heating could be reduced by about 0.2C. Vilsack said: “If you reduce methane by livestock by 30%, by food additives or different feed, or you capture the methane to biogas – take the manure and use it as biofuel – then you have made livestock production more sustainable. I do not think you need to reduce meat consumption to get that.” He added: “If we are going to feed 9 billion people, you need meat protein. We will need plant, animal and fish protein.” He said the US was financing demonstration projects for new technology and farming methods that would reduce methane. Green campaigners have focused on meat eating as a key source of greenhouse gas emissions around the world, but particularly in the US where a meat-heavy diet has become the norm over decades. People in the US eat close to 100kg of meat a year, more than any other country, although there has been a trend towards healthier eating among younger people in recent years. Meat-eating is also a driver of deforestation around the world, as rainforest in countries such as Brazil is cleared for cattle ranches and to produce animal feed. John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace UK, said: “It’s time politicians stopped giving cover to the industrial meat industry. At the moment they get a free ride and we pay the price for their huge health and environmental impacts.” Vilsack said greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture could be substantially reduced by new technology and employing different methods, but that it was also vital to look at how agriculture must adapt to become more resilient against the impact of a changing climate. “The climate crisis threatens to disrupt food systems around the globe, exacerbate food insecurity and negatively impact farmers’ livelihoods. We must invest in innovative, science-based solutions to help agriculture mitigate and adapt to climate change,” he said. To that end, the US is one of the main investors, alongside the United Arab Emirates, in the $4bn Agriculture Innovation Mission. Backed by more than 30 countries and more than 40 civil society groups, the project will encompass new technology, including artificial intelligence programmes and research, to adapting growing techniques in the field, gathering data on weather impacts, ways to nurture soils better, and a “greener cattle initiative” to change the diets of cows to produce less methane.As a wind swept leaves past the steps of the Kenosha county courthouse last week, the streets were sparsely trafficked as another day of proceedings came to a close in the trial of Kyle Rittenhouse, who shot three people last year, wounding one and killing two. The muted scene around the courthouse stood in stark contrast to the chaotic scene that played out in the Wisconsin city on the night of 26 August 2020. And it belied the scale of what is at stake for Rittenhouse, his victims, and their family members, and for America as a whole, as it faces yet another legal reckoning over racism, rightwing politics and policing. “The past year has been a living hell for the family,” said Justin Blake, the uncle of Jacob Blake, who in August 2020 was shot seven times in the back by a Kenosha police officer and left paralyzed from the waist down. “To see your loved one, someone you helped raise and take to the ballpark and make a good young man out of, to see the video of him shot like that, it takes your breath away. I can’t even watch it any more,” Blake said from the steps of the courthouse. While Rittenhouse stands accused of six criminal counts, including homicide, much more is on trial in the court of public opinion: the police shooting that set off the protests, selective enforcement of laws, and a justice system that incarcerates Wisconsin’s Black residents at a higher rate than any other state in the nation. Racial justice advocates say any verdict will not resolve long-simmering racial tensions that boiled over last August. But Kenosha as a community must find a way to move forward regardless of the outcome. For Blake’s family, the past year has in some ways been framed by gunshots and two videos depicting two wildly divergent responses from police. In one video, Blake, who carried no gun, was shot multiple times in front of his children. In another, Kyle Rittenhouse, now 18, is seen trotting past police, assault rifle slung over his shoulder, as bystanders identified him as the shooter. Police did not intervene as Rittenhouse left the scene. Last month, the US Department of Justice announced that the officer who shot Blake, Rusten Sheskey, will not face any federal criminal civil rights violations. By then, Wisconsin prosecutors had already cleared Sheskey of state criminal charges. Adelana Akindes, a 26-year-old activist who grew up in Kenosha, said she was not surprised by the response from authorities in the wake of the police shooting and the ensuing protests. She described Kenosha, a majority-white rust belt city of 100,000 that sits between Milwaukee and Chicago on the shores of Lake Michigan, as the kind of place where drivers of color are profiled by police and the sheriff calls for lawbreakers to be “warehoused” for life so “so the rest of us can be better”. “It’s a racist place,” she said. “Not always outwardly so. But you can look at the people in power and see it,” pointing to the sheriff’s comments. The night of the deadly protest, former Kenosha city council member Kevin Mathewson put out a call on Facebook asking the Kenosha Guard rightwing militia group and other armed civilians to protect lives and property. Within minutes, the Kenosha Guard leapt into action. Akindes, who identifies as Black, said activists in Kenosha had historically been slow to mobilize, but when video emerged showing police shoot Blake in the wake of George Floyd’s death in Minneapolis, people took to the streets. “Everyone had a very visceral reaction,” she said. “This type of uprising doesn’t usually happen in Kenosha, but it was an escalation of the tensions that were already building. It was amazing to see how many people turned up to support Blake.” Akindes said the night of 26 August, she and several other activists were on their way to join a larger demonstration when two unmarked cars swerved into her path. Officers bound her hands, arrested her and took her to a detention center for violating curfew. She wasn’t released until the next day. Akindes is a named plaintiff in a lawsuit filed in federal court that alleges law enforcement targeted demonstrators protesting police brutality. More than 150 peaceful protesters were arrested over the nine days of demonstrations, according to the suit – not a single one of them pro-police or members of armed militias. “In Kenosha, there are two sets of laws,” reads the complaint. “One that applies to those who protest police brutality and racism, and another for those who support the police.” Videos that surfaced after the night of protests reinforced that perception. One video captured police on patrol the night of 26 August providing water and expressing support for armed militia members. “We appreciate you guys, we really do,” one officer said. Rittenhouse became a cause célèbre in some rightwing circles, with the Fox News host Tucker Carlson hailing him as someone who “had to maintain order when no one else would”. Fundraising generated hundreds of thousands of dollars to his defense fund. A data breach revealed a list of donors who contributed, including public officials and Wisconsin law enforcement officials. “Stay strong brother,” wrote one donor whose email account was connected to a law enforcement officer in Pleasant Prairie, seven miles west of Kenosha. Kim Motley, an international human rights and civil rights attorney, said she saw a disturbingly “cozy” relationship between police and armed militia groups that led to selective enforcement laws the night of 26 August. Motley is representing Akindes in a class-action lawsuit that accuses Kenosha law enforcement of constitutional violations. In asking the court to dismiss the lawsuit, the city said its enforcement helped curb “rioting, mayhem and attacks” during the uprising and were thereby justified. Separately, Motley is representing Gaige Grosskreutz, who Rittenhouse shot in the arm, in a suit that alleges law enforcement officials condoned the efforts of white nationalists to use violence against those protesting police brutality. The attorney representing Kenosha county and Sheriff David Beth said in a statement that the allegations against his clients were false and failed to “acknowledge that Grosskreutz was himself armed with a firearm when he was shot and Grosskreutz failed to file this lawsuit against the person who actually shot him.” Motley said she sees a real “us-versus-them mentality” from law enforcement in Kenosha. “I’m from this part of the world. And there has always been a real warrior mentality with the policing that I see in Kenosha county,” she said. “It seemed like police were giving a wink and a nod to militia members that night. I don’t think they wanted anyone to die, but certainly I think there was implicit support for people like [Rittenhouse] to act like law enforcement and to impose punishments as they saw fit.” Motley said the complicity that appeared to exist between police and militia members set the stage for what was to come. “Frankly, I feel like Kenosha was training for what happened at the US Capitol.” With so many issues converging in one case, the concept of justice depends on the perspective of victims. But at the very least, she said, it would include an accounting for the actions taken that night. And it would involve attempts from the city and police to reach out to the community to begin the healing process. “At the end of the day, there’s only so much police can do. And there’s only so much community members can do. But if neither side is willing to reach across the aisle, it’s just going to be worse,” she said. Kenosha councilman Jan Michalski, who represents the Uptown neighborhood that experienced much of the damage from the protests, said the city has taken steps toward healing through listening sessions the mayor has led and efforts to support activists that can serve as violence disruptors across the city. Many of the Uptown storefront windows are still boarded as the community worries over the reaction to the coming verdict. But Michalski said people have come together to rebuild the area and neighborhood development plans are under way. “The trial has divided folks, certainly. And it’s been hard to tamp down the anger with all the publicity we’ve gotten. But the city of Kenosha is full of good people. People want to feel safe from crime, and also safe from police. And I think that’s a reasonable position,” he said. For Bishop Tavis Grant II, who accompanied Justin Blake to the courthouse, the verdict in the Rittenhouse trial is only the beginning of a longer march toward justice. “When we talk about people who don’t have access to capital, access to healthcare, people who don’t have access to the American dream, this is just the tip of the iceberg,” he said. “In all reality, this is not an answer or panacea. No matter what the verdict is, we’ve still got a hell of a lot to fight for, and fight about.”In 2013, Dave Eggers’ techno-dystopian satire The Circle described a sinister social media company that aims to abolish privacy for good. Its devotees aspire to “go transparent” – allow every moment of their lives to be captured on camera and beamed to the world. After his debut memoir, it is probably his best-known book, spawning a Hollywood movie. Nearly 10 years on, Eggers has written a sequel. The Every returns to the world of The Circle and takes its premise even further. The titular social media/search company of the first novel has swallowed up a competitor – “an ecommerce behemoth named after a South American jungle” – and created the “richest company the world has ever known”. The company continues to believe that privacy is theft; and it adds to that a growing insistence that human decisions in practically every area of life can and should be outsourced to the firm’s proprietary algorithms. A few “trogs” still refuse to share their data, but the drift of society leaves them increasingly ghettoised. The book’s protagonist Delaney, rather like Mae in The Circle, starts out as a recruit to the company – but her notion is to destroy the Every from within. (Mae, readers of the first book will remember, had a potential shot at that. She returns in this book as the chief executive of the whole company, from which readers can draw what conclusions they will.) Eggers is admirably, well, transparent, when I ask what sent him back to the themes of that earlier novel: “I had, you know, a few hundred pages of notes that I didn’t put into The Circle. There were some ideas there that I couldn’t squeeze into the first book ... ” But there was also what he calls “a catalyst”: “I saw this really widespread change happening, where it seemed to me that nobody ever wanted to make a decision any more.” He adds, by way of example: “In California there’s a movement to get rid of human decision-making” – to dispense with umpires who call balls and strikes in baseball “because sometimes there’s the possibility of error”. Already, algorithms are being used to grade college essays. “Everybody is having the wool pulled over their eyes, collectively, and nobody really seems to care. [You’d think] we would raise the alarm that essays were being so devalued to the point where non-thinking machines were reading and determining the fate of the students – [but] you find a protest and it’s maybe six people, lunatics like me and a few old hippies … This is the water that everybody swims in now.” The world of The Every is heading rapidly towards a sort of voluntary totalitarianism, described by one character as a “species-level evolution”; Eggers endorses that. “I think it would qualify as radical speciation,” he says. “The vast majority of humanity is now tethered to a device. There’s never been anything remotely like that, in terms of how quickly we changed. The closest thing would be the advent of radio or TV, but in both of those cases, those were not with us. Most of the time we disconnected from them. Now, we’re always accompanied by one device. We direct most of our life’s experiences through that device. We’re willing to be surveilled, 24/7, without discomfort. And we’re willing to give up most of our power to a handful of monopolies.” Surveillance and sousveillance is woven into all manner of human interaction. Pre-Googling, or its equivalent in The Every’s post-Google world, is routine etiquette: if you meet someone at a job interview or a party and you don’t already know all about them, they regard you as quaint. “You didn’t pre-search me?” one character says to the protagonist. “Oh god. You’re worse off than I thought.” So it’s a bit disconcerting when, while we’re making small talk ahead of the interview, Eggers says: “I read about your car getting stolen. Did you ever get a new one?” He must have pre-Googled me and found me whingeing in print. As an adoptive Californian, Eggers has lived for three decades at the centre of this shift. He describes himself as having been “beyond an early adopter of the Apple stuff” – all those early products, making the power of computers available to the mathematically challenged, enabled his first career as a graphic designer and publisher. But having been in San Francisco since 1992, he says, “I saw the internet change from, you know, cool toys and tools – as dorky as so many of [the tech entrepreneurs] were, it was really just about gadgets, and access – and then the switch was flipped and it became about wealth, and control.” That change was the germ of The Circle. The 51-year-old Eggers of today is a late or non-adopter. He doesn’t have social media, he doesn’t use a smartphone – “if I did, I would be watching baseball highlights all day” – and talks to me down an audio line “from an old fishing boat on the San Francisco Bay, where I work because it has no wifi going in or out and no possibility of a signal”. He is also refusing to sell the hardback edition of his book through Amazon in the US, “to highlight the vital importance of independent bookstores”: “Amazon is a monopoly that uses unfair business practices to drive out competition. They do not play by the rules and they do not pay anywhere near their proper tax burden. Meanwhile, you can bet your local indie bookstore is paying taxes. Amazon loses money on book sales because they can make up those losses through other revenue streams. That’s the essence of predatory pricing, and it should be illegal under existing antitrust laws. Because The Every is about an all-powerful monopoly that seeks to eliminate competition, it seemed like a good time to remind book buyers that they still have a choice.” In the US Eggers’s stand was made possible because the book is published by his own McSweeney’s imprint – “while there was a vigorous debate, in the end I agreed with myself and we went ahead” – but he’s realistic about the unlikelihood of his sparking an Amazon spring. “I’ve heard from two authors just yesterday who said they’re going to try to do the same thing, so that’s good. But listen: not everyone can do this. Amazon’s tendrils are everywhere. It’s mainly because McSweeney’s is a small independent company that we could cut Amazon out of the loop.” It’s a different story with UK publication. “Most companies, and distributors, are locked into contractual obligations with Amazon that preclude them from having a choice. Which is part of the problem.” When I mention that Sally Rooney has also used the publication of her book to make a political stand, refusing an offer from an Israeli publisher to translate Beautiful World, Where Are You into Hebrew due to her position on the Israel-Palestine conflict, Eggers is positive: “I think it’s a very reasonable way to protest peacefully, and I’m always in favour of peaceful protest.” One of the things that adds shade to Eggers’s novel is that the creeping totalitarianism he describes is a totalitarianism, at least ostensibly, of the left rather than the right; or, at least, of mega-capitalism monetising progressive concerns. “Silicon Valley is liberal politically,” he says. “So you do have most innovation wrapped in the cloak of liberalism and progressivism, diversity, equity and inclusion: they know how to sell an innovation that to them is profitable, gives them more power and control.” The idea that governments and big companies should have access to our data – that privacy is not an unqualified good – runs through the novel as a counterargument. Eggers says he has no problem with the idea of vaccine passports. The question is where you draw the line. “The one that keeps me up at night is surveillance cameras in the home,” he says (touching on a late plot point). “I don’t think that there’s any possibility that in two years, we won’t have surveillance cameras in the home. It’ll start voluntarily – in hotels and Airbnbs, and other sorts of semi-private places – and then there will be community spread, like the Ring cameras that are in most homes now, and partnerships with police departments. “The justification will be: there’s 10m cases of domestic violence in the US each year. Surveillance cameras would put a dent in that. How do you justify not having it? You could make an argument, well, OK, sure, domestic violence is catastrophic but privacy is more important. I don’t think it’s a powerful argument for most people. The more compelling and emotional argument is: save some lives.” One driver of the plot is the way in which the power and potential of the Every tends to quietly co-opt resistance. That comes from life. The big tech people he knows socially, he says, “recognise some of the problems they face”: “They’re not blind; they’re usually fairly idealistic people, and they’re definitely smart. They feel like, on balance, the good that the company is doing outweighs the evil.” The climate crisis is an example much on his mind (our first conversation was delayed by a week because Eggers’s kids were at a summer camp in an area hit by wildfires and he had to go and rescue them). “When I was in the middle of writing it, the sky was red, we had to stay inside, our air was unbelievable. We’ve had fires again this summer, a little further north. And, well, what if, you know, what if one of these companies was given more powers – maybe climate change would be better addressed if it was more of a command economy on a worldwide scale … ” One of the book’s central themes is the seductiveness of moral purity. Eggers takes a swipe at millennial sensitivities – and in these sections, you might be surprised to be reminded of Bret Easton Ellis’s broadsides against Generation Snowflake. One character denounces the environmental and human cost of exotic fruits in the staff canteen, and soon they are banned; with the inevitable catastrophic consequences for growers and hauliers. When Delaney organises a company visit to the beach to see elephant seals, most of the employees are so triggered by exposure to dirty, smelly real creatures in a natural environment that they daren’t leave the bus (those few who weren’t already boycotting the trip because they’d discovered a photograph online of the packed-lunch supplier posing with an Israeli flag). Eggers says he doesn’t see that hypersensitivity as “a generational thing”, though; it’s rather that “across the board, people of every age are getting more expectant of perfection in their lives, partly because they spend less time interacting with people”. Is he worried about “cancel culture” affecting what novelists can and can’t write? “I don’t know if, you know, five people tweeting about something really has the power to change a publisher’s mind? I certainly hope not.” In The Every, even art is seen as a problem to be solved by big data. The idea that machines are more “objective” than humans induces the company to run a series of projects designed to judge painting, literature and music by algorithm. One of Delaney’s more purposefully outrageous suggestions – the running joke is that like all her outrageous suggestions, which she hopes will prompt the populace to rise up in revolt, it is promptly and enthusiastically taken up – is FictFix: The main thrust of FictFix was to take old novels and fix them. Unsympathetic protagonists were made likeable, chiefly through aggregating online complaints and implementing suggestions; problematic and outdated terminology was changed to reflect contemporary standards; and superfluous chapters, passages and anything preachy was removed. This could be done instantly in e-books, even those purchased long before. When FictFix rolled out, it was done gingerly, Alessandro assuming the blowback would be extreme. But there was not much, and it was confined to a few irrelevant academics, whose own back catalogs were soon fixed by their former graduate students. Eggers is, to my surprise, unaware that five years ago Stanford University’s Literary Lab’s “bestsellerometer” used “cutting-edge text-mining techniques” on 20,000 novels and declared The Circle “the single most paradigmatic bestseller of the past 30 years”. Since the researchers aimed to show that the elements of theme, plot, style and characterisation that appeal to readers are, essentially, formulaic and predictable, this is a distinctly qualified compliment. “It wasn’t a joke?” he says. “I’ve never seen anything [about that]. Like, I never know anything once a book comes out: I don’t read anything about it. So the starting point is that I’m just blissfully unaware. But it seems like something that I would have made up as a gag or somebody else could have done as a prank.”If reality can anticipate dystopian fiction, how much does he think that a satirical novel can put the brakes on? “I’m trying to present a fork in the road where we might still have a choice to take one path rather than the other,” he says. “If you present the darker, sillier path, you can illustrate it vividly. You might convince people that that’s not where we want to go. That’s the best we can do with dystopian fiction to some extent.” “If I had one hope that would be, well: you know what? There’s going to be things that we aren’t going to measure, we’ll never be able to measure. Somebody sent me an article about some type of imaging to measure awe. There’s a bunch of smart people that are trying to do this, Lord knows why. Putting a pin into a butterfly and sticking it in a box: it’s a strange human impulse. “I would hope that we get comfortable with a little bit of discomfort, and be OK with a little bit of uncertainty, and embrace a little bit of the remaining mystery.” The Every is published by Hamish Hamilton. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Despite Wednesday’s European win, Liverpool need a response after squandering a 2-0 lead and dropping two points at home to Brighton last weekend. Jürgen Klopp’s side cannot afford many slip-ups if they are to keep pace with Chelsea at the top of the league and they will probably have to be at their best when they visit fourth-placed West Ham, who will leapfrog Liverpool if they record a fourth consecutive league win. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham 1 Liverpool 3 Referee Craig Pawson This season G7 Y26 R1 3.86 cards/game Odds H 4-1 A 3-4 D 16-5 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Dawson, Fredericks, Diop, Masuaku, Coufal, Kral, Noble, Lanzini, Vlasic, Ashby, Chesters, Yarmolenko, Baptiste Doubtful Fredericks (groin), Vlasic (knock) Injured None Suspended None Discipline Y12 R1 Form LWLWWW Leading scorer Antonio 6 LIVERPOOL Subs from Adrián, Kelleher, N Williams, Phillips, Matip, Tsimikas, Thiago, Morton, Origi, Minamino Doubtful None Injured Gomez (calf, 20 Nov), Jones (eye, 20 Nov), Milner (hamstring, 20 Nov), Keïta (hamstring, 20 Nov), Firmino (hamstring, Dec), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y11 R0 Form WDDWWD Leading scorer Salah 10Homes account for more than a fifth of the UK’s total CO2 emissions, which may help explain why the government and others believe green mortgages could be a gamechanger for moving to a sustainable future. Although they have been around in one form or another for some time, environmentally friendly mortgages have yet to take off in a big way: a poll published this week found that 94% of brokers had never sold one. However, Nick Mendes, a mortgage technical manager at the broker John Charcol, believes there will be “a huge tidal change” in the home loans market next year in terms of what is available. For a long time it was pretty much only Ecology building society that was selling green mortgages but new products have been coming thick and fast lately. Many of the UK’s biggest financial players now offer products, although the financial incentives for some deals are pretty negligible. The basics Broadly speaking, a green mortgage is one that rewards someone for buying or owning an energy-efficient home by offering them more favourable terms than come as standard. At the moment that typically means either getting a slightly lower interest rate, or cashback when you take out the mortgage, or both. Some deals are restricted to people buying a new-build property. In addition, some lenders offer their existing mortgage customers additional borrowing at discounted rates to pay for green home improvements such as replacing draughty windows, upgrading an outdated heating system or adding solar panels. Last month the government said it was keen to support the development of a competitive market in this area and was exploring plans to link mortgages to green home improvements by imposing targets for banks and building societies. The background At the heart of all of this are energy performance certificates (EPCs). An EPC is needed whenever a property is built, sold or rented. It gives the building an energy efficiency rating from A (most efficient) to G (least efficient). Eligibility for many of the green mortgage deals is linked to the property’s EPC rating – for example, it might need to be A or B. However, properties that have not been sold or let out for a long time – of which there are several million – will not have one. A big problem is the fact that the UK’s housing stock is notoriously old and leaky, and that particularly applies to some of the properties most desired by buyers, such as many Victorian and Edwardian terraces with their draughty but coveted original floorboards and sash windows. Last month the government said that in England in 2019, about 15m homes – 60% of the total – were below EPC band C. It has committed to upgrading “as many homes as possible” to achieve EPC band C by 2035 “where cost-effective, practical and affordable”. However, Sarah Coles at the investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown says that while some homes can be upgraded at relatively little cost, other homeowners will find it prohibitively expensive. A recent study by Nationwide building society found that the average bill for improving a property to reach a band C rating was about £8,100. Installing all of the energy improvement measures recommended for homes currently rated F or G would attract the biggest cost, it said: an estimated £25,800. You would enjoy savings on your energy costs but the financial payback could take many years. Earlier this year the property website Rightmove said its research indicated that across England and Wales there were almost 1.7m homes currently rated between D and G that cannot be improved to reach a C rating. What’s on offer now? Currently, green mortgage borrowers tend to be rewarded with lower interest rates or cashback, according to Mark Harris, the chief executive of the mortgage broker SPF Private Clients. Lenders offering the former include NatWest and Barclays. For example, NatWest offers a reduced rate on a two-year or a five-year fixed-rate mortgage, with cashback as well in some cases. To qualify, the property you are buying or remortgaging must have an EPC rating of A or B. With some of the deals the rate reductions are very small. For example, at the time of writing, NatWest was offering a standard two-year fix with a rate of 1.08% for up to 60% loan-to-value (LTV) that came with £150 cashback. The green version of this mortgage had a rate of 1.07%, with £250 cashback. Some of the other NatWest deals did give you a bit more bang for your green buck: for those hoping to remortgage, it had a standard five-year fix up to 85% LTV at 2.58%, with no cashback. With the green version, you paid 2.49%, and it came with £350 cashback. However, Harris says that while NatWest’s green mortgages may be a bit more keenly priced than the lender’s core range, there may be cheaper deals elsewhere. For example, while NatWest was offering a green two-year fix at 1.17%, HSBC had a non-green two-year fix at 1.04% (both were available up to 75% LTV and carried almost identical fees). “Each lender has a slightly different approach to what constitutes a green property,” Harris says. With some, you need to be buying a new-build directly from the builder or developer. That is the case with Barclays, which requires an A or B EPC rating. In April, Nationwide launched its Green Reward scheme, which gives those buying a home with one of its mortgages £250 cashback if it has a high B rating or £500 if the property is A-rated. So far, about 1,000 payments have been made through the scheme, with 90% of recipients getting £250. Similarly, the Halifax offers £250 cashback where a property is rated A or B. Meanwhile, some lenders such as Nationwide and TSB offer their existing mortgage customers a discounted “green additional borrowing” rate if they are carrying out energy-efficient home improvements. Then there are specialist players such as the Ecology, offering mortgages for things such as self-build, renovation and conversion projects where energy efficiency is a central element. When it comes to buy-to-let mortgages, things are moving faster. “Landlords have a greater incentive to be green due to new regulations being introduced from 2025, with rented property needing to have a rating of C or above. The change is to be phased in, starting with new tenancies of six months or more, followed by all tenancies from 2028,” Harris says. The future Over the coming months we will start to see dramatic changes in terms of the mortgage market, reckons John Charcol’s Mendes. We could start to see fixed-rate deals emerge where, for example, the rate you pay within the fixed period comes down if you carry out certain green home improvements. Mendes believes there could also be changes around mortgage affordability, where someone with an energy-efficient property may be able to borrow more on the basis that their energy bills and costs will be lower.Leicester seem consistent only in their inconsistency this season and Brendan Rodgers has pinpointed the root of the trouble. “We have a problem at the moment with tracking runners,” said a manager whose side have not kept a clean sheet since beating Millwall in the League Cup in September. That statistic should offer a still stuttering Leeds hope as they continue to be without Patrick Bamford. Marcelo Bielsa’s side have scored only five goals in seven games since their England striker suffered an ankle injury. Last season’s top scorer is much missed at Elland Road but Bielsa has explained Bamford’s injury is complicated and still causing him pain, and there is no timescale for his return. Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Venue Elland Road Last season Leeds 1 Leicester 4 Referee Darren England This season G3 Y20 R1 7 cards/game Odds H 7-4 A 6-4 D 5-2 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Firpo, Forshaw, Roberts, Gelhardt, Hjelde, Cresswell, Drameh, Summerville, Klich Doubtful Shackleton (match fitness), Firpo (match fitness) Injured Bamford (ankle, unknown), Koch (pelvis, unknown), Ayling (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y23 R1 Form DLWLDW Leading scorer Raphinha 4 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Thomas, Soumaré, Dewsbury-Hall, Choudhury, Maddison, Barnes, Lookman, Daka, Vestergaard Doubtful Vestergaard (match fitness), Maddison (match fitness), Barnes (match fitness) Injured Albrighton (knock, 20 Nov), Justin (knee, 20 Nov), Fofana (ankle, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y13 R1 Form LDDWWL Leading scorer Vardy 7It has been a bruising time for Facebook. The company is still absurdly profitable – Meta, its renamed parent company, which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp, generated $86bn (£63bn) in revenues last year, while Facebook’s own revenues grew by 56% in the second quarter. But away from the lucre, there is diminishing lustre. It stands condemned by critics and a widely feted whistleblower. And now it finds its standing diminishing among its peers. I have been at the Web Summit in Portugal, a sort of Davos for the technology industry, which ended on Thursday with the sense that after years of talk about harm and regulation, the demands are increasing and change is finally in the air. While it is true that most of the 40,000 startup founders, investors and other attendees still yearn to be the next $7tn company like Meta, there was also genuine discussion about the kind of tech and the kind of society that discovers children are being harmed and democracies undermined and yet does little or nothing about it. The summit heard again from Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, who repeated her belief, already expressed to a US Senate subcommittee and backed up by leaked internal documents, that the company knew it was causing harm and carried on doing it anyway. She was unequivocal: Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg should stand down, and possibly face trial. Zuckerberg did not attend. Instead Nick Clegg, once Britain’s deputy prime minister, now Facebook and Zuckerberg’s mouthpiece, turned up virtually, his image beamed to delegates on a big screen. Even from this distance, it was unedifying. He said he has “worked at Meta for three years”. That set the tone. Meta is a new name unveiled just last month. Anything to avoid using the increasingly toxic F-word, it seems. Clegg spoke of content; risible again. It’s “babies, barbecues and barmitzvahs”, he said. The key was what he didn’t say – no mention of bulimia and Brexit. Roger McNamee, one of Facebook’s earliest investors and a former mentor to Zuckerberg turned vehement critic, said the stakes are high and warned that democracy “may never recover” if Facebook does not change. He said misuse of users’ data should be labelled as being unethical as child labour and compared the runaway trains of big tech to corporations controlling food and drugs at the turn of the century – essential industries that are out of control due to the lack of regulation. The answer, he said, was to make the buying and selling of data illegal – something that would crush the business model of all internet platforms. In contrast with previous years, the tech masters of the universe looked different, post-Covid. There was more diversity: women made up 50% of the 40,000 attendees, if only one-third of the speakers. There were more people from minority groups present. A different crowd, seemingly with different expectations. Martin Sorrell, the advertising guru, the sage of Soho whose economic forecasts are followed around the world, reported little sign yet of a consumer backlash but said the increasing pressure means companies such as Facebook (or Meta, as Zuckerberg would have us call it) may not be allowed to use their wealth – equal in some cases to the value of nation states – to snap up so many rivals as they have in the past. And so at the close, they all departed, and after rubbing shoulders with the tech masters of the universe, what did I learn? That in some ways they are as they have always been, relatively young, whip-smart, overwhelmingly white, overwhelmingly male. The tech bros still dominate. They shape our world, and as ever, they seek to shape it in their image. But there is also a sense that their grip is loosening, the landscape is changing, and my feeling is that the Zuckerberg generation of tech masters may lack the depth perception to navigate it. If the rising anxiety we feel about the web, social media and big tech is so evident among practitioners at their own place of reflection and worship, the Davos of tech in Europe, it will take more than a new branding metamorphosis to assuage it. Jane Martinson is a Guardian columnistAntonio Conte received a crash course in life at Tottenham during a chaotic home debut against Vitesse on Thursday but three goals, renewed vigour in the final third and a public endorsement from Harry Kane give him something to build on in his first Premier League game in charge. His new club have not lost a Premier League game at Goodison Park in nine years and, despite their recent form, will sense an opportunity to extend that run to a decade against an Everton team that have lost three successive matches and remain without their first-choice spine. Andy Hunter Sunday 2pm Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 2-2 Tottenham Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G4 Y16 R1 4.25 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 7-5 D 11-5 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Kenny, Holgate, Branthwaite, Gbamin, Davies, Iwobi, Rondón, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch Doubtful Digne (knock) Injured Doucouré (foot, Dec), Calvert-Lewin (thigh, Dec), Gomes (calf, unknown), Mina (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y18 R0 Form LWDLLL Leading scorer Calvert-Lewin, Gray, Townsend 3 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Austin, Tanganga, Ndombele, Roden, Davies, Winks, Lo Celso, Alli, Bergwijn, Clarke, Scarlett, Gil Doubtful Gil (thigh) Injured Sessegnon (match fitness, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R1 Form LLWWLL Leading scorer Son 4Arsenal’s world appears strangely serene and they can press their new-found claim for a top-four place if they defeat a patchy Watford. Kieran Tierney may sit out for one more match: the left-back is back in training but still experiencing pain in his ankle and Nuno Tavares has proved a capable deputy. Watford’s unexpected five-goal haul at Everton in their most recent away outing earned valuable credit in their survival bid, but given it sat in between disappointing home reverses to Liverpool and Southampton there is no telling which face Claudio Ranieri’s team will display this time. Nick Ames Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Emirates Stadium Last season n/a Referee Kevin Friend This season G3 Y17 R0 5.66 cards/game Odds H 2-5 A 7-1 D 4-1 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Marí, Holding, Soares, Tierney, Kolasinac, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Ødegaard, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketiah Doubtful Tierney (ankle) Injured Xhaka, (knee, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y13 R1 Form WWDDWW Leading scorer Aubameyang 4 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Fletcher, Baah, Pedro, Gosling, Louza, Bachmann, Femenía, Rose, Nkoulou, Tufan, Hernández, Sierralta Doubtful Femenía (hip), Sierralta (hamstring) Injured Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Kabasele (hamstring, unknown), Sema (knock, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R0 Form WDLLWL Leading scorer Sarr 4To think, Aaron Rodgers could be hosting Jeopardy! right now. Yes, the Green Bay Packers quarterback was at one point one of the leading candidates to host the iconic quiz show. He got rave reviews during his tenure as a guest host, even, becoming a sort of pop-intellectual figure in American life. Well, after Rodgers’ public-relations disaster of an interview on the Pat McAfee Show on Friday, they can consider themselves fortunate that they dodged at least one bullet on their star-crossed quest to replace the late Alex Trebek. Rodgers – who is currently unavailable to play with his team after testing positive for Covid-19 – went on the SiriusXM program after reports emerged revealing he was, at best, fudging the truth when he previously claimed he was “immunized” rather than fully vaccinated. The good news was that this time around, he was more direct. The bad news, was that he was probably way too honest for his own good. It could have been much easier for all involved. When given a chance to defend himself for not being vaccinated, Rodgers claimed he had “an allergy to an ingredient that’s in the mRNA vaccines”. Had he stuck with this line of defense, he could have deflected some of the criticism that was to come. Sure, after the “immunized” debacle, Rodgers would not have gotten the benefit of the doubt that he would have been given a week earlier, but it would have been far more prudent than the path he did take directly off the rails. Instead, Rodgers’ interview featured an avalanche of anti-vaxxer buzzwords and all-too-familiar phrases, each one laying bare the hollowness of his disclaimer that he was not “anti-vax”. You’ll never guess it, but Rodgers did his own research with the aid of none other than conspiracy theory-minded podcaster Joe Rogan. He confirmed that his personal “immunization protocol” included ivermectin and then proceeded to rail against (yawn) “the woke mob” and “cancel culture”. He even threw in a Martin Luther King Jr misquote, as if he were trying to pull off the Full Tucker Carlson. The interview, which inspired nonstop ridicule on social media, threatens to irrevocably hurt the reputation of someone who – just months ago – was one of the most beloved athletes in the country. Since replacing Brett Favre as Green Bay’s starter in 2008, Rodgers quickly became one of the NFL’s most bankable stars. He established himself as one of the most exciting and talented quarterbacks in the game and his charming off-the-field persona had, until recently, translated into a broad appeal that few other athletes could claim. How broad? A 2020 survey revealed that just 8% of respondents had a negative opinion of Rodgers. That’s quite impressive considering how little fun it is for non-Packers fans to watch the league’s reigning Most Valuable Player dismantle their team’s defenses on a regular basis. He even helped break down the stereotype that athletes couldn’t also be intellectually curious, a fact which ironically could be his undoing if it led him to take his current stance on Covid-19. His reputation will not survive this unscathed. As ESPN’s Mina Kimes points out, Rodgers’ irresponsible comments aren’t just harmless nonsense. Having already put others in danger with his decision, he added to the harm by going on record by spreading misinformation couched in the all-too-familiar language of the nation’s massive anti-vaccination movement. “My body, my choice” breaks down when we’re talking about infectious diseases. That point is key here. Rodgers isn’t the only NFL quarterback who has publicly pushed treatments of dubious medical value. One of the reasons that Tom Brady now plays for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers is that the New England Patriots didn’t approve of his closeness to controversial “nutrition advisor” Alex Guerrero. Meanwhile, the Seattle Seahawks’ Russell Wilson has been selling his fellow athletes on a type of water that supposedly helps treat concussions (there is no credible medical evidence that it does so). While both Brady and Wilson received some negative media attention for propping up what we will charitably call “unproven remedies”, they were smart enough to not escalate the bad press as Rodgers has. Also, to state something that should be obvious but clearly isn’t, there’s a difference in magnitude between making wild, untested claims about the benefits of drinking water and spreading proven disinformation during a pandemic. Rodgers isn’t heading towards a full-blown “cancellation”, however much as he seems to be itching for one. Conservative football fans – a significant portion of the NFL audience – will embrace him as one of their own. He’s already setting himself up for a profitable future in right-wing punditry circles. As his friend Rogan knows, there’s a lot of money to be made in calling out the so-called “woke mobs”. There will almost certainly be consequences, however. Rodgers might lose a few sponsorships and the NFL – probably more irritated at being criticized than the fact that Rodgers misled the public about his vaccination status – has already launched a media counterattack. The Packers also can’t be happy with any of this, but since Rodgers has already made it clear that he wants out of the organization that might be a feature rather than a bug. Rodgers’ pocketbook might take something of a hit, but as long as he’s one of the top quarterbacks in the league, he will be fine financially. Where the real damage will come will be in his public standing. Rodgers will never compete for the title of most-liked player in the league again and he has nobody but himself to blame. Not all defeats in the NFL happen on the field.Marília Mendonça, one of Brazil’s biggest singers and a Latin Grammy winner, has been killed in a plane crash on her way to a concert. The 26-year-old pop star died alongside her producer, her uncle – who worked as her adviser – and both the pilot and co-pilot of the plane. Her press office said their plane crashed between Mendonça’s home town of Goiânia and Caratinga, a small city 220 miles north of Rio de Janeiro. The aircraft was around seven miles from Caratinga, her destination for that evening’s gig. Mendonça posted a video to her 38 million Instagram followers showing her walking toward her plane while carrying a guitar case hours before her death. Photographs and videos show the wreckage of the plane laying beneath a waterfall. The rising star performed country music, in Brazil called sertanejo. She was known for tackling feminist issues in her songs, such as denouncing men who control their partners, and calling for female empowerment. Minas Gerais state’s civil police also confirmed Mendonça’s death, without providing details about the cause of the accident, which occurred shortly before arrival. An investigation has been launched to determine the cause of the crash. Politicians, sports stars and fans all made tributes to the singer. “I refuse to believe, I just refuse,” Brazil forward Neymar tweeted about the passing of his friend. The Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, also used social media to mourn the passing “of one of the greatest artists of her generation”. “The entire country receives the news in shock,” he said. Mendonça was the most listened to artist in Brazil on Spotify last year, and set a record during the pandemic as she moved her concerts online. One performance was the most-watched live stream in the world, peaking at 3.3 million viewers on YouTube. Dubbed Brazil’s “queen of suffering”, she first found fame in 2016 with a much-lauded live album. Her LP Todos os Cantos won her the 2019 Latin Grammy for best sertanejo album. She was nominated for the same award this year for “Patroas”. “You always make me cry, you’re unique and eternal,” said fan Michelle Wisla on Twitter. The singer’s staff initially announced she was alive and well after news of the accident emerged. Mendonça leaves behind a son, who will turn 2 years old next month.Paul Chan has tried hot tea, hot baths, hot-water bottles, a cold breeze from an open window, mental maths, brainteasers, very slow breathing in bed and very brisk walks around his bedroom. Now, on a random night in October, the 52-year-old from Liverpool tries to get to sleep by imagining that he is James Bond. Why not? Chan is among that enormous proportion of the British public – one in three, according to an NHS estimate – who suffer from routine bouts of sleeplessness. He has just been to the cinema to see No Time to Die and as he closes his eyes for the night, he decides to start at the beginning, mentally recreating the movie in as much detail as he can manage. Scene one. A frozen lake in Norway … A little way north, in Durham, Lucy Adlington is alert, awake, and stuck. The 36-year-old silversmith cannot fall asleep but is hesitant to clamber out of bed for fear of waking the rest of her household. Somewhere between 3am and 4am, she picks up her smartphone and, speaking softly, begins to dictate a voice message. What does it feel like, being awake, alone, out of options, in the smallest and quietest hours of the night? “Like being an animal in a cage,” Adlington says, murmuring into her phone. She is documenting her experience of a wakeful night because, a few months ago, I went in search of insomniacs. In particular, those who would be willing to further interrupt their nights to describe the sensations and frustrations of insomnia, helping to paint a picture of sleeplessness in Britain in 2021, one night-time voice note at a time. Some of those who respond to my request on the Guardian website are close to despair. Many are seeking treatment, trying tricks, open to wheezes, superstitions, suggestions. Quite a few have come to shrug and accept their condition. People find their insomnia stressful, ridiculous, useful, cruel. As Adlington can testify, one of the worst aspects of the condition is its self-sustaining nature. “So frustrating,” she tells me, “because anxiety causes the insomnia. But when you know you’re going to feel tired and terrible tomorrow, the insomnia causes the anxiety.” In Essex, Freddie Lewis, a 17-year-old college student, has been using his hours awake to do some homework. “Trigonometry,” he croaks, in a 2.40am voice note. Lewis was convinced that some difficult maths would help lull him to sleep. “Didn’t work,” he concedes, finally wandering downstairs to the family lounge to watch TV. In Manchester, marketing agent Joe Harper, 31, is refusing to abandon his bed just yet. “It’s 3.25am. I haven’t slept at all tonight,” he says, running through the list of questions he’s been lying awake asking himself. “Have I drunk too much caffeine? Have I spent too much time on my phone? What have I eaten? Am I drinking enough water? What am I worried about? What do I want to do at work? What do I want to do in my personal life? What do I want to buy my girlfriend for her birthday?” To counter this endless, nagging scroll of doubts, night after night, Harper has tried reading for hours in bed. He has tried herbal remedies. He has tried doing more sport during the day. He has tried doing less sport during the day. Every long-term insomniac with the ability to Google knows the listable reasons they may not be sleeping well. Anxiety. Depression. Guilt. Regrets. Late meals. Too much booze. Caffeine. Irregular bedtimes. Noise from the street. Porous curtains. Crap mattresses. Side-effects from prescription medication (or from recreational drugs). Overactive glands. Undiagnosed organ conditions. The menopause. The fear of tomorrow. The fear of death. As for possible cures, “I have tried literally hundreds of online and home remedies,” says a property lawyer in Bath, an insomniac for 15 years. “I have read just about every article ever written,” says a retired lecturer in Bolton, an insomniac for 65 years. As Katy Cowans, 48, a lawyer from Barnsley, puts it: “Us veterans? We’ve heard of every cure, trust me.” Try earmuffs, they’ve been told, or eye masks. Warmer milk or a cooler bedroom. Try meditation, mindfulness, acupuncture, or something from the therapy bucket (cognitive behavioural therapy, stimulus control therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapy). Bin your bedside clock! Deactivate your phone! Don’t catnap! Don’t smoke! Most of the insomniacs I speak to have tried sleeping pills at one time or another. There’s an A to Z of these pills: antihistamines and amitriptyline to zopiclones and zolpidems. Adlington in Durham has been prescribed some antihistamines by her GP, not that they are doing much for her tonight. Renny Whitehead, 47, a photographer from Brighton, used to take the stronger zolpidems, but that was when he was working topsy-turvy hours as a flight attendant. Tonight, he pops a milder zopiclone. While he waits for the drug to kick in, he records a voice note. Whitehead can’t actually remember responding to my request for insomniac volunteers, back in the summer. His sleep was terrible at the time, he says. His brain was mush. He figures he must have volunteered to take part during the middle of another restless night, forgetting about it by the morning. Tonight, when the zopiclone kicks in, Whitehead sleeps well, for about an hour. Then, abruptly, he wakes. It is about 1am. He tosses and turns. Around sleepless Britain, as pills are being swallowed, alternatives to medication are being trialled. A man in Warrington says he finds the BBC World Service helpful; he listens through a special under-the-pillow speaker. A grandmother in London reports that switching from the World Service to Radio 4 meant she avoided regular overnight news bulletins that tickled her curiosity and nudged her out of unconsciousness. Digby Cox, a retired civil servant in Derbyshire, has started writing long emails at night. “My family tell me they always know when I’m not sleeping,” Cox says, “because their inboxes fill up.” Fabio Sorbello, 44, from Cheltenham, uses an array of methods to get to sleep. Press-ups. Classical guitar practice. A microdose of alcohol, “less than a shot”. Meanwhile, the property lawyer from Bath prefers to stage imaginary football matches in his head. “Second by second in real time, possession-based tiki-taka, no goals.” The retired lecturer in Bolton favours novels, but only bland ones, she says. Hilary Yallop, 32, a doctor based in Sheffield and the mother of a 15-month-old baby, uses her time awake to catch up with a friend living in Hong Kong. Otherwise she tries to “complete” some item from the news, Yallop says, reading every article on it she can find; or counts the dots on the wall of her daughter’s room, “like counting sheep … Sleep deprivation does strange things.” Chan, meanwhile, is still out on Her Majesty’s Secret Service. By now, the Liverpudlian has made his way through a painstaking recreation of the first half of the Bond movie. He has choreographed fights. He has travelled between glam locations. But he isn’t asleep yet, and picks up his phone to record another groggy voice note. “I think I must have done 40-odd scenes,” he sighs. Will oblivion ever come? *** Chan’s trouble with insomnia started when he was a boy, living above his parents’ takeaway restaurant. “It never got quiet before midnight,” he says. For Adlington, the sleeplessness began about six years ago, with night terrors that jolted her awake and set her up for bad nights. It was the Covid lockdowns of 2020 that knocked Lewis out of his usual sleep routines, and he hasn’t found a way back yet. A lot of mothers are experiencing worse sleep due to pandemic-based anxieties, according to a 2020 study by the Centre for Population Change at Southampton University. The same researchers also found that sleeplessness among British people of colour rose steeply last year, again attributed to Covid worries. Cox, the retiree in Derbyshire, recalls that he rarely slept for more than four hours a night during the years he was caring for his wife, Jenny, in the final stage of her life. When Jenny died in March 2020, Cox slept comparatively well for a time, he says. Then something changed. He started going for weeks at a time on what felt like only an hour a night. “When I’m on this insomnia thing, it’s like there’s a wall I can’t penetrate,” Cox says. “All night, all my senses are alive.” Cowans, the Barnsley lawyer, is certain that her own trouble sleeping stems from traumatic experiences in her childhood. Cowans had lost two siblings to a genetic illness by the time she was 14. Before they died, she became accustomed to exhausting overnight vigils in the local hospital, “listening to Radio 1 with them until it stopped at 2am. Not much sleep, then straight off to school. Doesn’t take a specialist to figure out where the insomnia might have come from, right?” In her 20s Cowans was a music journalist, up all hours at gigs. “The insomnia actually came in handy.” However, she retrained as a lawyer and now has to be at her desk by 9am, come what may. She has two daughters who need to get off to school around 7am. On this night in October, her insomnia no longer any use, Cowans tries reading a thriller in bed. It gets later and later. Soon she is counting the hours remaining until her early start. This insomniac’s algebra – an incessant and despairing totting up of the maximum possible amount of sleep left to be squeezed from a night – is described in one way or another by many people. Cowans has five hours left. After her daughters are off to school, she figures, she might be able to sneak in a 30-minute doze at her desk before she logs in for her first Zoom meeting of the day. For many of the respondents who contribute to this story, the boundary between employment and rest has blurred. A 56-year-old public sector worker from Devon does housework at 3am. A 50-year-old tutor from Birmingham does the same, dabbling in a bit of poetry writing, too. “The best ideas come at night,” she reports. Sometimes, Chan finds himself designing bizarre items of furniture in his head (“A bookcase that also functions as a ladder? Made only of plywood?”). Cox has been known to garden in the dark. He once cut down a tree before sunrise. Zoe Jewell, 35, a London film-maker whose son is only a few weeks old, is among the hundreds of thousands of parents around the country who are up and awake in the night, feeding, changing nappies. So far, Jewell reports, “I’ve found being up in the small hours a strangely peaceful experience.” In Durham, Adlington has been trying to heed the advice of the philosopher Alan Watts, who believed that if you can’t sleep, you ought to make productive use of the time. At 4.20am, the silversmith takes the risk of rousing her household, clambers out of bed and opens her laptop to work. Forty minutes later, at 5am, Whitehead’s decision about sleeping or working is taken out of his hands. His alarm clock buzzes, letting him know it is time to get up and drive from Brighton to London for a photography job. Reluctantly, Whitehead begins his day. He records another voice note from the road, comparing his own disjointed night with that of his wife, who slept beside him. She seems able to approach bedtime with something like relish, he says, while for Whitehead there is only dread. “That lovely being-surrounded-by-pillows-and-blankets thing, I just don’t get that any more.” Cowans’ partner, who lives in another household, sometimes texts her in the evening, not to say “goodnight” but to say “good sleep”. Sorbello, in Cheltenham, says he is sleeping about as well as he has in 20 years, a fact that he puts down in large part to having found a new partner. *** The somnolent other halves of insomniacs play a funny role in all of this. I know because I am one. On my side of the bed, most nights, I can rely on regular blackouts. My wife is not so lucky. I sometimes become aware of a bedside lamp turning on. Maybe she’s reading. Maybe she has her big headphones on to listen to music. If I feel anything, through many layers of unconsciousness, it’s partly pity (that she should be suffering) and partly relief (that I can roll over and carry on with my zeds). In the morning, more than anything else, there’s guilt – that I should have enjoyed a night’s sleep that could not be shared. There are insomniacs who are, frankly, and fairly, jealous of their sleepier bedmates. A retired Samaritans worker in Leeds explains that her husband “can sleep on a brush”, which prompts long nights of envy that leave her feeling ashamed. A charity worker in West Yorkshire says she feels notably uncharitable towards her partner’s snoring, “the sound boring into my brain”. Sometimes insomniacs pity us sleepyheads, though. In 2019, The School of Life, a mindfulness organisation based in London, published a book that set out to exalt the benefits of insomnia, “so we may feel less persecuted by, and alone with, our sleepless nights”, as the anonymous authors wrote. Strange insomniac advantages were described in the book. What a chance, wrote the authors, to make all those excellent, imaginary speeches that eluded us during the day. What a chance to observe a loved one without their guard up. “We can see again the person we first got together with. We can focus on the details we found so endearing … ” One night last summer, awake again and fiercely missing his wife, Cox went out to the garden and grabbed some paint from his shed. He took himself off for a walk, eventually making it to an underpass near his home. What followed was out of character, Cox tells me. “I’m a retired civil servant. Graffiti would have been unthinkable for me, once. But with sleeplessness comes a different perspective. And I just had the urge to do something.” He found an empty piece of wall, and sprayed a heart. *** Chan has slept! A bit! Thinking back over his night, the next morning, he realises he got as far as Bond’s journey to the bad guy’s island before he conked out. Adlington, up at 4.20am, spends the whole of the next day feeling like a phone on 20% battery. “It’s something you end up living with,” she concludes. “And so you learn to live with it.” Lewis was still awake in front of the telly when his father woke up the next morning (Dad made them both a consoling breakfast). Cowans gets her kids to school, but then feels too guilty and conscientious to sneak that catnap at her desk. “When you don’t sleep well, you worry about it, and when you do sleep well, you overanalyse it,” says Harper, who passed a mixed night of his own. Harper says he has reached a sort of truce with his insomnia, learning to “kind of give it a nod of acknowledgment” and laying down his weapons against it. “The hours can sometimes feel like they drag by. But they can sometimes feel like they fly by, to be honest, and you can end up having some really interesting thoughts, some really clear views on life.” For Harper, a turning point came when he realised that, however often he felt like the only person in the land still awake, he cannot have been. Going by the NHS estimate, there would be many millions of others in Britain, on any given night, with their eyes wide open like lizards. A lot of respondents mention this – the solitude of insomnia, and their sense of being abandoned by the easy sleepers of the world. In her own tired murmurings, Cowans started to wonder about her neighbours. “So quiet,” she muttered in a 2am voice note. “I wonder if anyone else on my street is awake … I’d love to know.” Insomnia is that most contrary of afflictions, common as the common cold and a near universal human experience, yet one that leaves people feeling utterly alone. “But you’re not alone,” Harper says. A 31-year-old teacher in Manchester concurs. She reports the curative effects of reminding herself, every so often, that there are different time zones around the globe and at any time, fully half of the human population are wide awake, too. “Stopped me feeling quite so forsaken,” she says. If nothing else, there is always the promise of tomorrow night and that elusive perfect sleep. Cox has been through all sorts of eccentric nights in his time as an insomniac. Nights when he chopped down trees. Nights when he went out on impromptu memorial missions, paint pot in hand. Nights, he tells me, when he walked around his deserted village at 4am, headphones blasting Brahms and his arms conducting wildly, there being nobody around to see and snigger. This night in October is different. While a silversmith worked on her laptop at 4am, and a sixth-former watched TV, Cox slept through until morning. Eight hours. Bliss.The mold in Martha Leon’s home has been there as long as she has. It grows in thick mottled patterns up the wall and around the windows, clinging to baseboards, the curtains, furniture and clothing. But Leon and her family have struggled to leave their house in Fresno, California, even though she and her two children have developed asthma. There’s simply nowhere else they can afford. Fresno is the largest city in the agricultural Central Valley, and has historically been one of the most affordable places to live in California. But during the pandemic, rents began to rise dramatically, climbing by 26% over 12 months. Locals attribute the surge to people seeking to escape the high cost of living in Los Angeles and the Bay Area. But even as life returns to pre-pandemic norms, those who live here say the situation isn’t getting any better. Rents, which had been steadily climbing for years before the pandemic, are still rising and, coupled with a shortage of homes, that’s hitting low-income residents hardest. “During Covid, Fresno and Central Valley rents just kept increasing,” said Jovana Morales-Tilgren, a housing policy coordinator with the Leadership Counsel for Justice and Accountability. “Many people were struggling and are still struggling. Landlords keep raising rents and people have nowhere to go.” With a median cost of $1,141 for a one-bedroom and $1,421 for a two-bedroom, Fresno rents are still below those of San Francisco or Los Angeles. But Fresno is among the most diverse cities in the US, and also one of the poorest. About 50% of households make less than $50,000 a year, while a quarter of residents are in poverty, according to US Census data. Fifty per cent of Fresno’s population is Latino, and several residents told the Guardian they immigrated here decades ago from Mexico because of Fresno’s job opportunities and affordability – a reality that is quickly disappearing. “In places like Fresno you have really high rates of poverty and a significant share of people who have really low incomes,” said Carolina Reid, a faculty research adviser with the UC Berkeley Terner Center for Housing Innovation. “The labor market in Fresno is not catching up to the price of housing.” The situation has left families with few options, forcing them to stay in substandard housing, move in with other family members or even leave Fresno entirely, Morales-Tilgren said. The Leons have been looking for a new place to live for months. They currently pay $650 a month, but their landlord is planning to raise the rent by at least 45% to cover the cost of renovations to the building, meaning they could soon be paying $1,000 a month. Leon’s son, who works in fruit label manufacturing, is the primary breadwinner in the house, and there are few options the family can afford. The Leons have applied for at least eight apartments, paying fees of $30 each time, but in Fresno’s competitive rental market they have never heard back. “I have nowhere else to go,” Leon, 53, said in Spanish. “Since May I’ve been looking but I haven’t found anything.” Ashley Miranda, a mother of two who works at Starbucks, has spent six months trying to find a new place that’s safer and quieter for her children. It used to be easy to find two-bedrooms for around $900 a month, Miranda said, but now those same apartments go for $1,500. “My fingers are crossed,” she said. “I just want something better. I have two kids and I want their environment to be better. I just don’t understand why everything has gotten so expensive.” ‘Fresno is becoming very popular’ There isn’t enough data to determine how large a role migration from other parts of the state has played in Fresno’s housing prices, but it is believed to be significant. Fresno was the only one of California’s five largest cities to see a population gain last year, which could indicate an influx from more expensive parts of the state. “Fresno is becoming a very popular place,” said Karla Martinez, a policy advocate with the Leadership Counsel for Justice and Accountability who works with Fresno residents. “People see how cheap the housing market is here.” California’s high-speed rail project, which will connect Los Angeles to San Francisco via the Central Valley, is also a selling point, Martinez said. The city has traditionally had the most affordable housing in the state, said H Spees, Fresno’s housing and homeless initiatives director, but California’s population growth and lack of affordability has hit the area hard. “You’ve got folks from coastal areas that are finding it a very positive move to sell their one-story, 1,400 sq ft ranch house for $1m in San Jose and move to Fresno and buy a wonderfully large home for $400,000. That’s been fueled even more by working remotely through Covid but it was already beginning to happen.” That reality has left some longtime residents thinking about leaving entirely; residents such as Isabel Vargas, a 59-year-old who has lived in Fresno for 32 years. Vargas has spent more than half that time in the same three-bedroom rental, where she pays $550 a month. But a new landlord who recently bought the house has said she and her family must leave. Searching for a new home has now become her daughter’s full-time job, but Vargas says if they can’t find anything in their price range, they will probably leave the city. It’s something Morales-Tilgren and Martinez say they are hearing from others, too. Those who find housing within Fresno sometimes end up in units that are all but uninhabitable, Morales-Tilgren adds. “You’ll have folks that have rodent infestations, broken fixtures, mold, a lot of these extremely unhealthy environments because that’s all they can afford.” Francisca Alba lives in a tidy two-bedroom apartment with her husband and four children. They can afford the monthly rent of $710, but the unit has been deteriorating for years and the property manager has done little to help. The carpet hasn’t been replaced, or even cleaned, in the 15 years she’s lived there, nor has the unit received a fresh coat of paint. The floors are damaged from recent flooding and there’s been a hole in the wall for more than a year since workers fixed pipes near the sink. The property manager told her no one can make the repair due to Covid, so she’s carefully covered it with a poster board and tacks. “It lowers my self-esteem to see these things. Overall, it brings me sadness,” she said through a translator. “The managers think that we aren’t going to do anything about it, maybe because we’re low-income – so why would they do anything to fix it?” ‘California’s housing market is broken’ Fresno county is short more than 36,000 affordable housing units, according to the California Housing Partnership, a trend echoed throughout the state. It’s a crisis driven by a demand that far exceeds the supply and a lack of subsidies to build affordable housing. “Overall California’s housing market is broken,” Reid said. At the same time, the city is grappling with a 69% rise in homelessness between 2019-2020 after years of working to reduce it. Fresno has extended a local eviction moratorium through the end of the year, offered emergency rental housing assistance and expanded housing options for homeless residents, but Spees says the problem “is not something that’s going to go away soon”. Martinez and advocates with the Leadership Counsel for Justice hope to see the city council pass rent control, stronger protections against eviction and right to counsel, which they say are necessary to address the crisis. Without such changes and more affordable housing, experts warn the outcome will be grim. “Then Fresno is going to experience a lot of the same issues we’re seeing in the Bay Area: rising housing insecurity, potentially displacement and homelessness,” Reid said. Martha Leon says everyone she knows has been affected by rent increases. Friends are facing rent hikes every six months – her brother’s rent has gone up more than 50% – and loved ones are leaving. But she doesn’t know where she’ll go next. “There’s nowhere. It’s here or Mexico.”The schedulers have saved the weekend’s most intriguing contest for Sunday. All too often in recent years Scotland and Australia have presented as rugby’s equivalent of bridesmaids, but the Wallabies turn up to Murrayfield on a five-match winning streak, including a swaggering double over South Africa, the world champions. And Scotland will field seven British &amp; Irish Lions, which, by the standards of the rest of this century, must feel more than they know what to do with. Gregor Townsend, a returning Lions coach (alongside another in Steve Tandy), welcomes back his captain, Stuart Hogg, who is joined by other headliners in Finn Russell, Duhan van der Merwe and Chris Harris. Ali Price, Hamish Watson and Zander Fagerson were already in situ for the 60-14 win over Tonga last Saturday. If Rory Sutherland had been fit, there might have been eight. All of which should mean that the confidence developed by Scotland, which has grown in agonising fits and starts over what might be termed the Hogg-Russell era, is riding as high as ever. When a team are able to demote a player who scored four tries the week before, an air of confidence does naturally thicken. Kyle Steyn was player of the match against Tonga but must now make do with a place on the bench. He was far from the only star. His mate on the other wing, Rufus McLean, became the first player born this century to win a Scotland cap and marked the occasion with two dazzling tries in the first few minutes. How much we should read into the win over Tonga will remain a moot point for now. Scotland have made six changes for Australia, with those four returning Lions joining a fresh lock pairing of Sam Skinner and Grant Gilchrist. But Tonga were suffering from familiar availability problems, their best players – even more of them than Scotland’s – not released by their various clubs for an international outside the designated window. If only those problems were confined to last week. Australia have suffered a curious set of withdrawals of their own, even though the relevant window is now officially open. Quade Cooper, Samu Kerevi and Sean McMahon have chosen to remain with their generous employers in Japan. The thinking behind their decision not to tour remains opaque, with Cooper and Kerevi declaring their love for the Wallabies without quite explaining whether this was their decision, their clubs’ or possibly even Australia’s. The latter is the least likely explanation. Cooper and Kerevi have been instrumental in the renaissance over the past couple of months since their customary dismantling at the hands of the All Blacks. Their two subsequent victories over the Springboks were the latest to explode the cliche that the only way to prevail over South Africa is to beat them at their own game. The Lions notably failed to do that this year, but the Wallabies moved them around, All Blacks-style, with much success. How delicious, then, that Australia, with or without the Japan Three, descend upon Edinburgh to take on the team of the Lions attack coach. We can safely say Townsend will have Scotland playing rather more ambitious rugby than the Lions managed. Bridesmaids Scotland and Australia might often be, but they regularly prove more pleasing on the eye than some of those accustomed to the garlands. Australia, who are tying themselves in terrible knots over the latest tweaks to their eligibility criteria for overseas players, are rolling out some more exiles familiar from yesteryear. Rory Arnold, of Toulouse, with rather less than the stipulated 60 caps for an overseas player, will start in the second row, which should equip Australia well, should something less pretty be required. As might Will Skelton, lately of Saracens, now La Rochelle, who lurks on the bench alongside another exile, Kurtley Beale, whose 92 caps at least qualify him under the infamous terms of Giteau’s law. One suspects Australia will follow South Africa’s lead by giving up on all pretence at encouraging their players to stay at home. Scotland, interestingly, have never bothered with such rules. They may not enjoy the advantages in preparation of the Englands and Irelands of this world, but there is a settled look to their first team and it is high on quality. Dave Rennie, Australia’s coach, knows this well. His previous job was a successful three years in charge of Glasgow, taking over from Townsend. Just another little ingredient to spice up Sunday’s fare. The weekend’s rugby is far from over.Prince Gyasi saw letters and words as colours long before he realised he had synaesthesia. “I was in primary school before I heard the word, but the signs were there. My mum says that as a baby I tried to eat paint and chew fabrics, as if I wanted to taste colour.” Raised in Jamestown, a fishing district in Accra, Ghana, the photographer cites his gospel-singing fashion designer mother, Abena Serwaa Ophelia, as his inspiration. As with this photograph, much of his early work focuses on mothers and looks to “give flowers to the women who are breaking their backs for people like me to have a good life”. Shot on a military camp in Ghana, as with much of his work, the two subjects are personal friends, and the vibrant colours of the clothes and boxes are authentic. “The boxes on the women’s heads represent packages, like the gifts women give to the world. They’re small, but they could be carrying millions. Some think a woman is small and insignificant, but her worth is massive.” Prince Gyasi, who is showing at Paris Photo next week, won’t reveal how he uses his iPhone to shoot: “A chef doesn’t give away his recipe,” he says. “But it’s not about the tool for me. It’s about encouraging kids to use what they have.”Fifty years ago, Cancún was little more than a hurricane-battered fishing outpost, but it mushroomed into a tourist mecca thanks to massive government investment – and by the 1980s it was firmly established as the crown jewel of Mexico’s tourist industry. Millions of tourists from around the world descend annually on the destination and the Riviera Maya, which unfolds to the south. But success has brought other, less welcome visitors, too. Criminal groups run extortion rackets and peddle drugs. And its location on the eastern side of the Yucatán peninsula makes an ideal way station for drug runners moving cocaine out of Central and South America. This week, the two Cancúns collided in spectacular fashion when a dispute between drug dealers led to gunfire and murder on the beach outside a luxury hotel packed with foreign visitors. Officials say 10 or 11 masked men stormed the beach outside the Hyatt Ziva hotel south of Cancún, shooting dead one member of a rival faction. A second man attempted to hide in a hotel room but was dragged away with the assailants as they fled in a stolen boat. All the while, guests hid in their rooms and sent out SOS messages and pleas for intervention over social media. Four American citizens were injured in the assault, a US official told ABC news. Local officials described the violence as a fight over the local drug market. According Vicente Carrera, publisher of the news site Noticaribe in Quintana Roo, at least seven rival cartels are present in the region, where they control drug dealing and extortion rackets. “I’m certain all the narco groups in the country have a presence here due to the importance of the Quintana Roo drug sales territory and the value of tourism,” he said. “It’s the mutation of Mexican organised crime over the past 15 to 20 years,” Falko Ernst, senior Mexico analyst for the International Crisis Group. “We see groups increasingly drifting toward or complementing or substituting drugs trafficking for extortion markets … They don’t produce, ship or export anything any more.” Cancún’s economy crashed when the coronavirus pandemic arrived. It marked its 50th anniversary without celebration in 2020. But the destination has bounced back – partly because Mexico has not required Covid tests for entering the country or banned travellers from pandemic hotspots. Violence continues plaguing the region, however. Last month, a California travel blogger and a German tourist were killed at a restaurant in Tulum, 200km south of Cancún, during a shootout between suspected gang members. Carrera said there had been plenty of killings on the same tourist strip in Tulum, “but no tourists were caught up in them, so it seems like it was no big deal”. But violence involving foreign visitors threatens a major local industry: tourism represents 8% of Mexico’s GDP. Quintana Roo’s governor, Carlos Joaquín, told Mexican media the beach assault “put the image of the state at grave risk”. Local officials have long insisted that Cancún is safe for tourists – and have invested heavily in areas visited by foreigners – in stark contrast to the neglect shown the neighbourhoods housing the armies of poorly paid hospitality workers. “There is a sincere concern on the part of the government to protect more tourist areas than popular areas,” Carrera said. “But this strategy is no longer working: they can no longer guarantee the safety of tourists.”His songs provided the soundtrack to the Sandinista revolution; patriotic, nostalgia-filled odes to the rebels and rifles that saved Nicaragua from imperialist tyranny. “Mine are simple, brotherly, kind folk who sow and defend their revolución,” Luis Enrique Mejía Godoy sang in one of his most famous tributes to the 1979 armed insurrection that ended decades of US-backed dictatorship in the Latin American country. Fast-forward four decades, however, and Mejía is no longer singing the praises of Nicaragua’s Sandinista leaders who will seek to extend their rule in an election much of the world has condemned as a fraud on Sunday. “It was a failed revolution – unfulfilled dreams,” the 76-year-old composer lamented at his home overlooking Costa Rica’s capital, San José, last week as Nicaragua prepared to vote. Mejía has lived in exile since August 2018, when he fled Nicaragua after its increasingly authoritarian leaders, Daniel Ortega and his vice-president and wife, Rosario Murillo, crushed a student-led uprising with a crackdown that left hundreds dead. “The situation touched the deepest depths of my conscience and I said to myself: ‘I have to denounce this. I have to speak out,’” remembered the silver-haired troubadour who lived in Costa Rica during the final stages of the Somoza family dictatorship before returning home to join the revolution in 1979. Mejía’s brother Carlos, another cherished composer whose songs eulogised the Sandinista rebels, has also gone into exile in the US after denouncing Ortega’s “apocalyptic” regime. Mejía has written hundreds of tracks about his troubled homeland in a career spanning more than half a century. But the post-crackdown phase has proved one of his most prolific, with the artist recording dozens of politically charged songs championing the young protesters who tried to topple Ortega – and the hundreds of “martyrs” who died trying. One song salutes the Nicaraguans gunned down during the 2018 rebellion, “whose names have been engraved on the homeland’s shrine”. Another celebrates the courage of the mothers of slain demonstrators. In a third, Blues de la Patria (Homeland Blues), Mejía insists: “Killed, wounded, disappeared, arrested, kidnapped – but not defeated.” Other compositions target Nicaragua’s “tyrannical” presidential couple, whose security forces have jailed 39 political opponents in the run-up to this weekend’s election in an apparent effort to ensure victory. “Everyone knows it’s going to be a sham – a shameless robbery,” Mejía said, urging Nicaraguans to boycott a vote in which Ortega, in power since 2007, hopes to win another five-year term. One recent recording, Locos de Poder (Power Crazies), describes the authoritarian bubble within which many believe Nicaragua’s leaders live in the El Carmen compound in Managua. “They live in paranoia ... even their shadows have bodyguards,” Mejía sings. “They mistrust everyone, they have no friends, they struggle to sleep, they fear waking up at their own funeral.” In Este Pueblo Ya Votó (The People Have Already Voted), Mejía laments Nicaragua’s transformation into a police state but assures listeners: “There’s no evil that lasts a hundred years … The days of Ortega’s regime days are numbered.” Older songs, written in the 70s to denounce the Somoza dictatorship, have gained new life, with Mejía tweaking his lyrics to clarify they now allude to Ortega. “I’m the composer and I have the right to do whatever I want with my work,” he said with a laugh. More than 40 years after Sandinista guerrillas drove Anastasio Somoza Debayle from power, Mejía still has fond memories of that internationally celebrated triumph over authoritarianism. Despite the bloodshed, “it was a moment of certain joy … Nicaragua in the 1970s was Latin America’s hope,” recollects the musician, who was a member of Costa Rica’s Vanguardia Popular communist party at the time. But looking back, Mejía also believes there were early hints that Ortega and Murillo harboured anti-democratic instincts and dreams of “eternal” power. During the 1980s, the composer was a member of the Sandinista Association of Cultural Workers, where Murillo was secretary general, and remembers an ambitious, manipulative character “who always sought to impose her views”. “I don’t think they ever left the 80s. They never really accepted the idea of democratic change without guns– through free, honest, clean, observed and transparent elections,” he said of Ortega and Murillo, condemning the “madness and arrogance” of two leaders seemingly obsessed with clinging to power. As one of Central America’s best-known songwriters, Mejía felt a duty to protest with his six-string guitar. “It’s a risk but it’s also a privilege,” he said, pledging to be “the voice of the dead, the disappeared, the imprisoned, the tortured and the exiled”. After three years of repression, Mejía urged leftwing foreigners, who once flocked to Nicaragua to show solidarity with the Sandinistas, to consider times had changed. “This isn’t about left or right,” he said. “It is about violence and state terrorism against … democracy, peace and freedom.” Additional reporting Cindy RegidorOn October 6th, my collaborators and I mailed letters to over 20,000 people living in Mississippi and Florida. Each letter opened with the following: Jubilant Greetings! We are writing to you with good news: We just got rid of some of your private probation debt!… You no longer owe the balance of this particular debt. It is gone, a gift with no strings attached. All told, we erased over $3m dollars of probation debt, which we purchased for three cents on the dollar, or about $90,000. We did this through the Rolling Jubilee, a mechanism we developed to abolish debts that should not exist in the first place. We devised the Rolling Jubilee in 2012, during the aftershocks of the global financial crisis. Millions had lost their homes and savings and the economy was in shambles. Using crowdfunded donations, we abolished tens of millions of dollars of medical, tuition, and payday loan debt, belonging to tens of thousands of people across the country. From the start, we conceived of the Rolling Jubilee as a vehicle for political education – one that exposed how our debts are for sale on shadowy secondary markets. Debt brokers and collectors purchase portfolios of debt at a steep discount and try to collect the full amount. The Rolling Jubilee was hugely popular, but we always knew it wasn’t a solution to the social problems we were highlighting. You cannot buy and abolish all the predatory debt in the country – we need structural change. So, we put Rolling Jubilee to rest and founded the Debt Collective, a new kind of union that builds debtor power, and that has won billions of dollars of student debt abolition through a range of strategies including debt strikes. The traumatic events of the last year and a half inspired us to take the Rolling Jubilee out of hibernation. The Covid pandemic has exacerbated social inequities, deepening the crisis of household indebtedness while the rich get richer. As was the case in 2008, when the banks got bailed out and underwater homeowners were left to drown, corporations got extensive debt relief from the government last spring, without any comparable assistance for regular people. Meanwhile, the uprisings after the murder of George Floyd put the issue of racial justice and police violence front and center. It’s never been clearer that we need to abolish unjust debt and abolish our racist and predatory criminal punishment system, and that these systems are intimately connected. On average, incarcerated people are released owing $13,607 in court fines and fees, a figure that does not include bail debt. While men make up the majority of the incarcerated population in the US, it is often the women in their families who end up on the hook for these obligations. Entire communities suffer as a result. That’s why we are kicking off our revival of the Rolling Jubilee by extinguishing probation debt. Probation is often considered an alternative to incarceration; nationwide, an estimated 4.5 million people are under some kind of supervision. Probationers who owe money to the state can be forced into what is effectively involuntary servitude. In many cases the state contracts with private probation companies, which gouge people for services and often collect what’s due through ethically and legally suspect means. Whatever the precise arrangement, an inability to pay puts one at risk of rearrest. Probation debt is one component of a larger constellation of carceral debt. Consider the ways municipalities use the court system as a form of revenue collection, a problem exposed in Ferguson, Missouri, by the 2014 Black Lives Matter movement. To raise funds, city officials fine poor and working people for things like traffic tickets when they should be taxing affluent residents and corporations instead. Interest, surcharges, and penalties swiftly compound, and those who can’t pay are at risk of being locked up. Our system criminalizes people for not having cash on hand, forcing those who lack the money to post bail to languish in jail (even though they haven’t gone to trial or been convicted). Predictably, private companies profit from this unjust arrangement – charging incarcerated people and their families for phone calls, email, commissary, bail, probation, and more. We explained this dynamic in the letter we sent out to the people whose debts we erased: Across the country, courts have outsourced probation to private companies who charge fees for their “services.” With very little oversight, these companies often act like abusive debt collectors while those unable to pay run the risk of imprisonment. This system discriminates against low-income communities and communities of color and imposes the greatest financial burden on those who are the least able to afford to pay. No one should go to jail because they are unable to pay a private probation fee. The letter included a number for people to call if they wanted to hear more or share their story, and dozens have reached out. One person described the system in Mississippi as “wicked.” People spoke of fines and fees that had ballooned when they fell behind on payments because of the pandemic. Many were confused by how much they owed and to whom, and were angered by these unpayable debts still owed after serving time, and thus having paid their proverbial “debt to society.” These letters are only the start. This week, the Debt Collective announced the launch of our Abolish Bail Debt tool, an easy-to-use online app (what we call “legal mutual aid”). Across the state, it has the potential to abolish upwards of $500m of bail debt held by over one million co-signers, mainly women. Through the Rolling Jubilee’s act of solidarity with probation debtors and the Debt Collective’s legal mutual aid, we hope to contribute to longstanding abolitionist efforts by helping to build a carceral debtors’ union to help fight back against the cruel and extractive system currently in place. Across the country, our communities, overwhelmingly low income and people of color, lose billions of dollars a year to our financialized and ever-expanding criminal punishment system. The time has come to divest from systems of punishment and invest in people, and to outlaw businesses that profit from caging human beings and exploiting people’s poverty. Abolishing carceral debts is a critical part of repairing the intergenerational violence of racial capitalism, and imagining a future of true community safety and wellbeing. Debt abolition is urgently needed, and must be coupled with the abolition of our classist and racist system of punishment and policing. Astra Taylor is the author of Democracy May Not Exist, but We’ll Miss It When It’s Gone, and an organizer with the Debt CollectivePretty much anything that happens to the Democrats is a sign that they’re weak and losing and should be worried, according to the storylines into which mainstream media tend to stuff news. Pretty much nothing, including losing, seems to signify that the Republicans are losers. In so habitually and apparently unconsciously fitting a wide array of new and varied facts into familiar old frameworks, the media shape the political landscape at least as much as they report on it. It’s in the language. The New York Times editorial board thunders that “Democrats deny political reality at their own peril” and then insists that this election in which a moderate lost is a sign that the party needs to get more moderate. Bloomberg News found a way to make a victory sound like defeat: “Phil Murphy clung on to win a second term as New Jersey’s governor, surviving by a narrow margin.” It was about the same margin by which a Republican won the Virginia governorship, but the language around that was apocalyptic (though Virginia usually elects a governor who’s in the other party than the president, and New Jersey – which not long ago gave Republican Chris Christie two terms – re-elected its first Democratic governor in decades on Tuesday). According to the Washington Post, which seemed to believe that Virginia was a national referendum on the party: “Democrats scramble to deflect voter anger.” The verbiage that followed was stuffed with the emotive language of a pulp novel, though it was presented as news: “An off-year electoral wipeout highlighted the fragile state of the party’s electoral majorities in the House and Senate. But a new round of bitter recriminations threatened to dash Democratic hopes of quickly moving past the stinging defeats.” Fragile, bitter, stinging. Wipeout, dash, defeat. It is true that Terry McAuliffe lost, and also true that he was a corporate centrist who, reportedly, ran a lousy campaign; it’s also true that he is not the Democratic party, and the nation didn’t vote in Virginia’s election. As for this week’s election, it swept in a lot of progressive mayors of color. The most prominent was Michelle Wu, who won the Boston mayor’s seat as the first woman and first person of color. Elaine O’Neal will become Durham, North Carolina’s, first Black woman mayor, and Abdullah Hammoud will become Dearborn’s first Muslim and Arab American mayor. Aftab Pureval will become Cincinnati’s first Asian American mayor. Pittsburgh elected its first Black mayor, and so did Kansas City, Kansas. Cleveland’s new mayor is also Black. New York City elected its second Black Democratic mayor, and Shahana Hanif became the first Muslim woman elected to the city council (incidentally, New York City and Virginia have about the same population). In Seattle, a moderate defeated a progressive, which you could also phrase as a Black and Asian American man defeated a Latina. A lot of queer and trans people won elections, or in the case of Virginia’s Danica Roem, the first out trans person to win a seat in a state legislature, won re-election. In Philadelphia, Larry Krasner, who in 2017 was the first of a wave of ultra-progressive district attorneys to take office across the country, swept to a second term with 69% of the vote. “I want to congratulate him. He beat my pants off,” said his Republican rival. In Cleveland, Austin, Denver and Albany, citizens voted in police-reform measures, and while a more radical measure in Minneapolis lost, it got a good share of votes. 2021 wasn’t a great election year for Democrats but it’s not hard to argue that it wasn’t a terrible one, and either way it just wasn’t a big one, with a handful of special elections for congressional seats, some state and local stuff, and only two gubernatorial elections. It is true that the Democratic Party is large and chaotic with a wide array of political positions among its elected officials, which is what happens when you’re a coalition imperfectly representing a wide array of voters, by class, race, and position from moderate to radical on the political spectrum. It’s also true the US is a two-party system and the alternative at present is the Republican party, which is currently a venal and utterly corrupt cult bent on many kinds of destruction. It’s the party whose last leader, with the help of many Republicans still in Congress, produced a violent coup in an attempt to steal an election. A friend who is an independent Democratic party organizer remarked to me: “Democrats are analyzed completely differently from Republicans, mainly because Democrats try to govern and to enact policies that affect the entire country. The media don’t cover the fact that Republicans don’t govern and can’t seem to report on what a party doesn’t do and doesn’t talk about.” Looming in the background, of course, is the fact that Republicans themselves believe they are losers, because they’ve hitched their wagon to the shrinking demographic of angry white suburban and rural voters. Their efforts to suppress votes and undermine voting rights, control or replace election officials, gerrymander like crazy and overturn election results are the moves of a party that doesn’t believe Republicans can win fair elections. All this is treated as more or less ordinary and mostly not very newsworthy. We’re only a year out from the election that won back the White House and gave Democrats control – if by the slimmest of margins – of the House and Senate. Georgia elected two Democratic senators and Arizona sent in a Democratic senator to take a seat that had been held by Republicans for more than half a century. Which was, actually, quite a lot of winning, but you wouldn’t know it from the news. The New York Times editorial board, in one of those familiar “the party is doing it wrong” claims, declared Tuesday’s results “a sign that significant parts of the electorate are feeling leery of a sharp leftward push in the party, including on priorities like Build Back Better,” though Data for Progress reports that “With a +29-point margin, likely voters support the Build Back Better plan. The plan is very popular with both Democrats and Independents, who support the plan by respective margins of +83 and +19 percentage points.” Eric Levitz at New York Magazine has noted that, according to polls, “only a quarter of the public thinks the Build Back Better agenda is going to help ‘people like them’”, and he links to an ABC report that also says “Democrats are failing to sell the legislation to the public, who are broadly unaware of what is in the spending packages.” Though if the public is broadly unaware of what’s in the biggest and most transformative legislation in decades, that’s a huge failure by the media as well as the party. Reporting that people don’t see what’s in it for them instead of reporting on what is in it for them might be the problem in a nutshell. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesAmid calls for increasing dialogue with Pyongyang from both Washington and Seoul, the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, continues ratcheting up the pressure with missile tests. Diplomatic opportunities to de-escalate the situation on the peninsula should be pursued. Yet regardless of whether talks produce a breakthrough or not, the situation relative to US national security will remain the same: America is safe and North Korea is deterred. Last Sunday, US envoy to North Korea, Sung Kim, called on Pyongyang to stop “provocations and other destabilizing activities” and “engage in dialogue”. On Monday, the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, said he would redouble his efforts to establish a “new order for peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula … through dialogue and diplomacy”. Up to this point, the North Korean leadership has been cool to the overtures. It’s not hard to figure out why. While US envoy Kim called for dialogue on Sunday, he also reiterated one of Washington’s longstanding objectives that has obstructed any movement towards a diplomatic breakthrough. “Our goal,” the US envoy declared, “remains the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.” What remains to be explained, however, is how the Biden administration interprets that statement. The Obama administration and eventually the Trump administration defined the “full and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula” as meaning North Korea had to first give up its nuclear weapons and program before the US would grant any sanctions relief – a complete non-starter for Pyongyang. The North Koreans are assessed to have at least 60 deliverable nuclear warheads. Kim Jong-un regards his nuclear arsenal as being the best guarantee against a US military attack against his country and regime. It would be irrational, therefore, to expect the North Korean leader to willingly hand over his only strategic deterrent in exchange for mere promises from Washington. It’s not going to happen. The good news is US national security is assured regardless of what does or doesn’t happen diplomatically on the peninsula. The nuclear genie, so to speak, is out of the bottle, and we can never put it back: Kim has a credible nuclear option that effectively deters the US from launching any wars of choice or so-called “pre-emptive” wars. In an even stronger way, however, the United States – with its 4,571 to 60 advantage in nuclear weapons – can deter Kim Jong-un indefinitely from ever using his nuclear arsenal in a war of choice against us. Yet there are plenty of actions Washington can take to reduce even the chances for accidents or miscalculations that could inadvertently lead to military clashes between the US and North Korea. On Monday, South Korea’s chief nuclear envoy, Noh Kyu-duk, tried to breathe new life into the idea of declaring a formal end to the 1950-53 Korean war. Such an action – which is distinct from a peace treaty – could have the effect of serving “as a gateway for talks on achieving complete denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula”, Noh explained, “and the establishment of a permanent peace”. If the Biden administration follows the failed playbook of virtually every other administration since the early 1990s and holds out for a complete denuclearization by North Korea as a prerequisite for progress, Biden will come up short as all those before him did. But if he instead places denuclearization as an eventual aspiration – as, pointedly, both Moon and Kim Jong-un have done – featuring instead a step-by-step approach in which we make a number of progressively small steps matched by Pyongyang making steps of their own, the chances of even accidental war will continue to diminish and the prospects for peace rise. For example, the United States can offer limited (and reversable) sanctions-relief for major steps by North Korea, such as nuclear freezes, the dismantling of major nuclear production facilities, and other meaningful concessions. But it is important to acknowledge that in order to get a major concession from North Korea, we have to be mentally prepared to give them something of value as well; no party will every negotiate away something important for nothing in return. America’s overriding primary objective on the Korean peninsula is to avoid unnecessary war and preserve economic opportunity for our country. A maximalist policy that demands Pyongyang denuclearize before the US offers anything in return offers little maneuvering room for meaningful diplomacy. The US already has the military power to deter Pyongyang indefinitely. The administration should therefore do whatever it takes, in a diplomatic step-by-step process, to lower the tensions and increase the chances for peace. Daniel L Davis is a senior fellow for defense priorities and a former lieutenant colonel in the US army who deployed into combat zones four times. He is the author of The Eleventh Hour in 2020 America. Follow him @DanielLDavis1Science is clear: climate change is unequivocal, and a result of human activity. The planet is already 1.1C warmer than pre-industrial levels and on a route to reach 2.5C or more this century, which could be catastrophic. The poorest and the most vulnerable populations will suffer more and earlier. Climate change will bring droughts, floods, extreme temperatures and hurricanes that may become more intense and frequent overtime and impact billions of people. The rise of sea levels, lack of water and food, and regions becoming unfeasible to live may generate massive migrations in a planet already closing frontiers. That is the bad news. The good news is that we can mitigate such a catastrophic route and deliver a safe planet to our children and the next generations. We need to achieve it in the next three decades. Time is short, the challenge is huge, but it is attainable. The two major challenges will be ending the burning of fossil fuels and halting deforestation. If, for some countries, fighting climate change is a constraint, for others it is an opportunity. Brazil is among those that can contribute to the planet and foster its own development based on a green and sustainable economy. The country hosts two of the most important and diverse tropical forests in the world: the Amazon and the Atlantic forest. Almost 20% of the Amazon (73m hectares) was cut in the last decades, while 88% of the Atlantic forest (115m hectares) disappeared since the arrival of the Europeans in 1500. We must stop the deforestation of the Amazon before it reaches the tipping point to become a savanna. The 20% deforestation threshold could shift the largest tropical forest of the world into a source of carbon emission, rather than a sink, affecting the climate, the largest reservoir of freshwater, and one of the richest areas of biodiversity on the planet. It would also affect a high number of indigenous groups. Despite the increase in deforestation in the last years, Brazil has successfully controlled it in the past. From 2004 to 2012, deforestation in the Amazon decreased 80% due to coordinated public policies to reduce illegal foresting, create protected areas and restrict the expansion of soy and cattle. At the same, food production by large farmers increased and smallholder farming was strengthened; it was a win-win situation that was then abandoned by the current Brazilian federal government. Getting back towards zero deforestation of the Amazon is one of the greatest contributions Brazil may offer to the world, in addition to guaranteeing resilience to remain a global food producer. However, the climate emergency asks more. Restoring the Atlantic forest, sequestrating large amounts of carbon from the atmosphere, could be a second major contribution. Doing so would protect biodiversity, conserve water and mitigate climate change, and at a low cost compared to other regions of the planet. Restoring 5m hectares of native trees to protect the springs and streams of the Atlantic forest does not compete with food production. It will also contribute to water supply and hydroelectricity generation, ameliorating potential water crises and risks of electricity shortage for a biome that hosts 70% of Brazilians and generates 80% of the national GDP. Planting 10m hectares of trees to replace degraded pastures would create a dynamic forest economy with timber and ecosystem services, and create many new jobs. Public policies, a sustainable value chain of commodities like sugar, orange juice, pulp, cocoa and coffee, and the carbon market may attract investments at the speed and scale demanded by the climate emergency. The success of such a foresting project could be a benchmark to the world during the decade on ecosystem restoration declared by the UN. Some places in the world are uniquely positioned to fight climate change, protect nature, and foster economic growth at the same time. Brazil should not, and cannot, miss this opportunity. Luís Fernando Guedes Pinto is the knowledge director of SOS Mata AtlânticaPeople on almost every continent were gathering for marches and rallies on Saturday to mark a Global Day for Climate Justice, halfway through the Glasgow climate change summit. Activists in the Philippines, eight hours ahead of the UK, had already finished their rally as protesters gathered in Scotland. There were also rallies in South Korea, Indonesia, the Netherlands and France. The Belgian arm of Extinction Rebellion occupied a street in Brussels. The Scottish morning saw heavy rain, but the early mood was one of cheerful acceptance. “What do you expect protesting in Glasgow?” asked Lucy Bell, who works for the Vegan Kind, an online vegan supermarket based in Rutherglen. “There are so many people here from different backgrounds. It’s easy to get discouraged by the negotiations going on behind closed doors but I’m feeling optimistic this morning despite the rain.” In Glasgow city centre, direct action group Scientist Rebellion blocked the King George V bridge, one of the main routes to the south side, at about 11.30am. More than 20 scientists, from students to a retired professor, all wearing lab coats stood chained together by the neck. The coalition of activist academics believes non-violent civil disobedience is the only remaining option to draw attention to the extremity of the climate crisis. “There have been 25 previous Cops with no measurable impact on GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions,” said Tim Hewlett, co-founder and one of those on the bridge. “In fact, about half of the GHG emissions have been released since COP1 in 1995. So we’re not here to speak truth to power – they already know – but to the powerless, and to raise their voices in turn.” Hewlett added that the lab coats they were wearing were at least offering some protection from the rain. The bridge was blocked until just before 4pm, and the group said that 21 people had been arrested. Later on Saturday, Gary Ritchie, Police Scotland assistant chief constable, said: “Glasgow has today hosted a public protest the size and scale of which was beyond anything many of us … can ever remember.” The day had “passed largely without incident”, he said, but “a group of people was contained by officers after their conduct deteriorated, pyrotechnic devices were used and they brought the procession to a halt”. One person was arrested after the march. This is in addition to the 21 arrests already noted on the bridge. The march got under way at about midday, and was headed by a small group of First Nation people from Kahnawake Mohawk territory located in Quebec, Canada. “It’s so evident that indigenous people hold the answers – they have to start listening and start thinking seven generations ahead, not just the immediate need,” said Karahkwintha, 23. Ohontsakahte, 26, added: “Inside the Cop venue, unfortunately, it’s corporate interests at the front of the line, so here today indigenous people are leading the movement – and that’s how it should be inside the Cop venue too. We’re here to put indigenous voices at the forefront of the climate crisis.” Cop delegates were also scattered among the huge crowds. Tracy Sonny, 37, a Cop negotiator from Botswana focused on climate adaptation and capacity building, was at the march to show solidarity and call for more unity. “We need to see more political will and a change in mindset … we’re already feeling the impact of climate change; we need to respond now, people are drowning.” Despite the dreich weather, the atmosphere was electric as each bloc made itself heard with live music and chants such as “system change not climate change” and “world leaders at Cop26 … your inaction makes us sick.” Grainne McGinn, 22, a wheelchair user from Glasgow, attended Friday’s youth protest and Saturday’s with a sign that read “sustainability requires accessibility”. “Climate change is so important but youth voices, especially disabled youth voices, are not being heard. We’ve seen in the news how inaccessible Cop has been for delegates. That’s the day-to-day experience for all disabled people and it’s so important that our voices are heard in the conversation on climate change. I’m here to represent.” Vegan activists fought strong gales to make their point with four giant inflatable animals tethered on ropes above their heads or strapped to the ground. Each symbolised a different problem with the livestock industry: a cow for methane, a chicken for Covid and health, a fish for microplastics, and a pig for obesity. “The cow in the room is being ignored at this Cop,” said Carl Le Blanc of Climate Healers. “Animal agriculture has been taken off the agenda and put on the menu.” Roisin Greaney, 28, a postgrad student from Dublin said: “I’m here today because, I would say a small group of people but in this case it’s a very large group of people, wants to put a sustained pressure on the people inside the blue zone. “I’ve seen it in the past, I’ve seen small groups of people come together and scare governments, scare companies, and make them do things. So I think this kind of direct action works, and it’s amazing to see people from so many different organisations and parts of society.” There was also despair; Chris Cornroy, 37, who works for Oxfam, said: “The world is probably going to end within our lifetime, so any difference you can make counts. But I don’t think anything will be achieved from this if I’m being honest. I don’t think anything will make a positive difference today.” By the afternoon the rain clouds had parted and the sky had begun to brighten as crowds of marchers spilled across the expanse of Glasgow Green, still singing, chanting and playing music. The mood was “celebratory, positive and punchy” said Mary Martin from Coatbridge, who had marched from Kelvingrove. “Walking the walk,” she laughed as she shivered against a strong gust of wind. As for the progress of the climate talks, “I’m holding my breath.” The lack of inclusivity at the negotiations concerns her, the opposite of her experience on this march where she notes the rapport between different groups. In London thousands of protesters, including trade unionists, refugee rights groups, students and environmentalists, marched from the Bank of England to Trafalgar Square. Demonstrators repeatedly expressed exasperation that politicians were failing to tackle the climate emergency with the required urgency. “We don’t have time,” said Paula Somrisa, 41, from Oxford. “It’s great to make statements about ambitions and what is going to happen in the future but we really need action now.” Dawn Fuller, 56, said: “We have had enough of hearing them talk – now we absolutely have to see some real action.” She said her two grown-up children were increasingly anxious about the escalating climate emergency. “We have seen so much greenwashing at Cop26 … But it has to stop – it is our children’s future at stake.” Many protesters called for urgent reform of the economic system and linked the climate crisis to global inequality and structural racism. Rebecca Hotchkin, 23, who is studying medicine in London, said global health inequalities were being exacerbated by the climate crisis. “Health justice and climate justice are linked. Governments must start addressing the underlying causes to the various crises we face.” In Glasgow organisers estimated that more than 100,000 people were in attendance, but police were reluctant to put a figure on the crowd. In London they said about 10,000 were marchers, although organisers put the figure closer to 20,000. Worldwide there were more than 300 protests, with more than 100 in the UK alone. Nicola Sturgeon told reporters on Friday that she had confidence that the Glasgow climate march would be policed “appropriately”, adding that Iain Livingstone, Police Scotland’s chief constable, had spoken to the force’s independent advisory group after the concerns were raised in an open letter.Sir John Major has launched a searing attack on the government over its handling of the Owen Paterson lobbying scandal, condemning its actions as “shameful and wrong”. The former prime minister said it suggested Boris Johnson’s administration was “politically corrupt”, and that Major would be posed with a dilemma if he had to consider voting for Johnson to remain PM at the next election. The comments came after the government briefly tried to shield Paterson from punishment for what the standards committee called an “egregious case” of breaching lobbying rules. Major told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I think the way the government handled that was shameful, wrong and unworthy of this or indeed any government. It also had the effect of trashing the reputation of parliament.” MPs had been due on Wednesday to vote on the Tory MP’s 30-day Commons suspension for advocating on behalf of two companies, which paid him more than £100,000 a year between them. But Downing Street instead backed an amendment suspending the punishment and creating a new standards body with a built-in Tory majority. The following day, after intense criticism, the government performed a U-turn – turning its back on the amendment after it had passed through the House of Commons. Paterson, a former Northern Ireland and environment secretary, announced his resignation shortly afterwards. Major called this attempt to protect Paterson “profoundly un-Conservative” and something he disliked “intensely”. He also said the action of the current administration was “damaging at home and to our reputation overseas”. The former PM said what happened this week wasn’t the only time Johnson’s government had behaved in an “un-Conservative” way – and that he had been concerned for some time. One example he gave was how announcements are often leaked to sections of the press before MPs are informed; another was the handling of Brexit – particularly the decision to override elements of the Brexit deal. He said: “There is a general whiff of ‘We are the masters now’ about their behaviour.” An enraged Major added: “I’m afraid that the government, with their over-large majority, do tend to treat parliament with contempt. And if that continues, it will end badly. “They bypass parliament at will and the speaker has expressed his frustration about that on many occasions, and rightly so. But they also behaved badly in other ways that are perhaps politically corrupt.” Major is no stranger to sleaze, given the scandals that engulfed his own government back in the 1990s, such as cash for questions. “[The sleaze] was immensely damaged or damaging and it was embarrassing. It hurt the government. It hurt parliament. It involved a relatively small number of people who misbehaved, the worst of which was ‘cash for questions’. There was no excuse for that.” But he said the crucial difference is the way he handled it. “When that happened I set up the Nolan committee on standards in public life to stop it, which has been a huge success. The striking difference is this: in the 1990s I set up a committee to tackle this sort of behaviour. “Over the last few days we have seen today’s government trying to defend this sort of behaviour. Sleaze is unacceptable, was unacceptable when I was there, and I suffered a great deal of pain and anguish over it … It needs to be stopped.”The Ministry of Defence has quietly settled 417 Iraq compensation claims and paid out several million pounds to resolve accusations that British troops subjected Iraqis to cruel and inhumane treatment, arbitrary detention or assault. Individual claims that have been settled run into the low tens of thousands and follow high court rulings that concluded there were breaches of the Geneva conventions and the Human Rights Act during the military operation that followed the invasion in 2003. Martyn Day, a senior partner with Leigh Day, the solicitors that brought the action, said: “While we’ve had politicians like David Cameron and Theresa May criticising us for supposedly ambulance chasing, the MoD has been quietly settling claims. “The settlements here cover a mix of cases, instances of false imprisonment, assault,” the lawyer added. “What this shows is that when it comes to what amounts to policing in a foreign state, the military are simply not the right people to do it.” Many of the details of the cases remain confidential, although one involved the death of a 13-year-old boy. However, the financial settlements were based on four test cases concluded in the high court in 2017. The four were awarded a total of £84,000 based on three separate incidents. At the time, one claimant was awarded £33,000 by Mr Justice Leggatt for unlawful detention and a beating it was determined he had suffered in 2007, by “one or more implements”, probably rifle butts. Two Iraqi merchant seamen received payments after their detention in 2003: one was awarded £28,000 after an assault and hooding, while a second was awarded £10,000 because they had also been hooded. Many of the fresh claims also involve hooding – where a sandbag or other hood is thrown over the head of a detainee. The practice was banned in 1972 by Ted Heath, when he was prime minister, although some British soldiers have admitted they were not aware of the order while serving in Iraq. The MoD has not made any public announcement about the claims, but an official disclosure out this week showed that the civil actions had been resolved. It noted that 417 “Iraq private law” claims had been settled during 2020-21 and a further 13 relating to Afghanistan. However, there is no prospect of any criminal action following the 417 civil settlements, after several years of often politically charged debate about the conduct of British soldiers in Iraq during the years of combat operations, which ended in 2011. The government closed down the Iraq historic allegations team in 2017, following the conclusion of the controversial al-Sweady inquiry three years earlier. That inquiry found that allegations of British troops murdering detained Iraqis and mutilating their bodies were fabricated. The lead lawyer who had brought those claims, Phil Shiner, was subsequently struck off. In April, the government passed the Overseas Operations Act, which introduced a presumption against criminal prosecutions for five years after the event and a longstop to prevent civil claims being brought after six years. At one point, Day and two colleagues were also accused of professional misconduct for the way in which they had brought claims, but the three lawyers were exonerated following a hearing at the solicitor’s disciplinary tribunal. An MoD spokesperson said: “Whilst the vast majority of UK personnel conducted themselves to the highest standards in Iraq and Afghanistan, we acknowledge that it has been necessary to seek negotiated settlements of outstanding claims in both the Iraq civilian litigation and Afghan civil litigation.” They added that service police and the Service Prosecuting Authority remained open to considering criminal allegations should new evidence emerge.If the dark nights of recent days have left you feeling vulnerable on your bike, how about a cycling jacket with built-in LEDs to let motorists know that you are there? Simon Sibia came up with the idea for his Vizirider cycling clothing after twice being knocked off his bike in Sydney, where he was living at the time. Fast forward to today and the Briton has returned to the UK’s south coast and is selling his jackets and gilets direct to the public, and via a small number of bike shops. Each features 12 LEDS and reflective materials. While LEDs have been around for a while, they have taken an inordinate amount of time to make it into cycling jackets, given that they can really make the cyclist stand out on country lanes and in the busiest cities. Until recently, riders had to fork out £200 or so for a light-up jacket. This week, Guardian Money has been trying out Vizirider’s £85 jacket, which has to be a contender for the best-value hi-vis cycling jacket around. If my experience is anything to go by, you will have to put up with plenty of “disco boy” and “Christmas tree” references from friends and even passersby but if you really value being seen by other road users, this jacket is at the top of the (Christmas) tree. At first glance it resembles any other hi-vis jacket. However, look closer and you see six white, waterproof LEDs bonded to the front and six red ones in the back. There is a rechargeable battery in a special pocket. Vizirider says the battery will last up to 20 hours on slow flash, 14 hours on fast flash or 10 hours on constant. The jacket lights are designed to be used in addition to normal bike lights but are bright enough to keep you seen if those fail. The jacket isn’t technically waterproof but it is water-resistant and it kept me dry on a 30-minute ride in the rain this week. It appears well made and has three useful pockets, for carrying keys, a mobile, gloves, etc. The removable battery is charged via a standard mobile phone cable and should last the life of the jacket – 300 charges. The makers advise it should be charged every two to three months. The jacket is washable at 30C with the battery removed. If you don’t want a jacket, the company sells a basic LED cycling vest for £39 or a two gilets – one at £45 and another at £65, with the latter featuring the full 12 LEDs. Neither I nor my wife (who also wanted to try it) liked the fastest flash mode, as it had a rather unwelcome strobe effect, so I recommend the slower-flash mode. Its lack of breathability caused by the fact that it has no underarm venting will mean some riders will get too hot, particularly in spring and autumn. If you tend to ride more slowly this won’t be a problem. The other negative is that it does not, annoyingly, feature a loop to allow it to be hung on a hook. Hi-vis jackets – the other best options Métier’s Beacon cycling jacket was the first to feature LEDs. It is a serious bit of kit featuring hydrophobic, wind-resistant and breathable performance fabrics, and LEDs front and back. However, it is black in colour and, at £250, this is one very much for the aficionados. The rain version can be had for £200. Proviz’s Nightrider men’s and women’s cycling jacket 2.0 does not have LEDs but features Proviz’s REFLECT360 retro-reflective material, which shows up amazingly well in vehicle headlights and even street lights. This £85 jacket comes in high-vis colours – there’s a great purple for women – which are good on the way to work in daylight. Again, there is no underarm ventilation. If you ride quickly, and you can afford it – upgrade to a coloured REFLECT360, which is £129 but comes with much better venting. Both are waterproof. Order a size down than you would normally unless you have very long arms. If you are on a tight budget, look no further than the £29.99 Triban RC120 hi-vis yellow jacket from Decathlon. It has enough reflective bands to make sure you are seen at night, while the 3,000mm hydrostatic head rated fabric will keep you dry over a 20-minute commute. Another jacket that is a bit of a bargain at the moment is the Madison Stellar men’s waterproof jacket. Again, it comes in hi-vis colours for daytime riding and has lots of reflective material for when it is darker. The jackets are priced from £45-£70 at Freewheel Cycles. The Endura Urban Luminite waterproof jacket II is also worth looking at if you find one in your size and less than £85. These are a good bet if you live somewhere that gets plenty of rain.Snow bunting The most northerly of songbirds, the snow bunting breeds in the Arctic then heads south for winter, arriving on British coasts from Greenland and Iceland in late September. They are usually found in busy little flocks foraging across beaches, hillsides and clifftops. Their distinctive white wing patches and black wingtips make them easy to identify. Try Cley and Salthouse Marshes in north Norfolk. Birdtour runs day and weekend trips in this area, picking up sightings of cranes and pink-footed geese, too. Merlin Another resident that becomes conspicuous in winter along the coasts, the merlin is our smallest raptor: barely half the size of its larger cousin the peregrine, but likewise a masterful flyer, catching small birds on the wing. That is why in winter it heads coastwards, seeking the flocks of birds that gather on the shoreline. Resident merlin numbers are boosted in winter by arrivals from Iceland. Spurn Head and the Humber estuary are particularly good places for seeing them. Yorkshire Coast and Nature runs regular birding days in winter that help fund the Spurn bird observatory. Short-eared owl Unlike some of its cousins, this medium-size owl hunts at dusk and in daylight, gliding silently across tussocky hillsides and marshes in search of voles, its pale face dominated by a pair of big yellow eyes. Britain has resident short-ears, but in winter their numbers are boosted by others migrating from Scandinavia and Russia, increasing the chances of a sighting. The best locations are coastal saltmarshes and clifftops along the east coast, such as the RSPB reserves of Bempton Cliffs in East Yorkshire, Minsmere in Suffolk and Nene Washes near Peterborough, but the migrants also move into the Midlands, the south-west of England and the Scottish east coast. Owls often congregate in winter, so the lucky could see more than one. Undisturbed rough pasture is the likeliest location. Whooper swan Two species of swan fly to Britain in winter: the whooper from Iceland, and the Bewick’s from Siberia. They both have yellow-and-black bills, but the whooper is much bigger: at up to 15kg, it is one of the heaviest flying birds (only some desert-dwelling bustards get heavier). For this reason they like to be in water. Spot them in the north at reserves such as RSPB Portmore Lough in Northern Ireland or Loch of Spiggie in the Shetlands. Further south, the best spot is Welney Wetland Centre near Wisbech, where up to 7,000 whoopers and 2,000 Bewick’s overwinter. Fieldfare If the waxwing is the dapper dandy of winter birds, the fieldfare is the ragamuffin, an artful dodger patched up from stolen feathers: a slate grey cap, a snowy white rump, and in between a romp of speckled rufous and yellow. Up to a million of them start arriving in October, often mixed with smaller redwings. They roister across hedgerows and treetops, sometimes settling on the ground to feed. Leave any fallen apples on the ground and in a cold spell they may muscle in on the blackbirds’ banquet. Look for them anywhere except the mountains in the far north of Scotland. Check your local wildlife trust. Siskin A garden feeder favourite, the siskin is a resident, but numbers are augmented by Scandinavian visitors in winter, improving your chances of attracting them to the bird table. Hardly larger than a blue tit and endlessly busy, this small finch brings a dash of bright colour with bold, streaky green-and-gold markings under a black crown. Half a century ago they were a rarity, but now they seem to be thriving, with a particular liking for small seeds – niger may attract them. Alongside a siskin you might see a lesser redpoll, which is only a fraction larger and wears a jaunty red beret of feathers. You might find them anywhere there is alder growing (always near water), but a good spot is RSPB Arthog Bog on the Mawddach estuary. Goldcrest There is a resident population of these gorgeous tiny aviators, but winter sees large migrations from Scandinavia, sometimes thousands arriving at a time on the east coast. They feed on tiny insects, usually on pine trees, and need to keep up their fat reserves: a severe winter night can whittle away a fifth of their body weight, a potentially lethal loss when you only weigh the same as a teaspoon of salt. They do venture into gardens but rarely to a bird table. Maybe try chopped mealworms. This is a bird heard more often than seen, with its thin, high-pitched call tumbling from the tops of conifers. RSPB Broadwater Warren near Tunbridge Wells is a good bet for tracking some down. Turnstone If you think beaches are for summer only, think again. Many bird species pass the winter on our shores, where they find plenty of food. Many turnstones arrive in early autumn from Canada and Greenland, spending their time fluttering across seaweed-covered rocks and sandy tidal flats where tasty morsels hide (other turnstones that breed in Europe visit the UK earlier in the year). Their close wader cousin, the purple sandpiper, may also be around: it’s a little less distinctive and smaller, sometimes arriving from Arctic islands like Svalbard. Check out the seabird bounty of Marwick Head reserve in Orkney or places on the east coast, north of the Humber. Tundra peregrine Britain’s coasts catch some rarities with fabulous names: what about a red-flanked bluetail or a red-eyed vireo? There are also species you might think far too colourful for our grey skies: bee-eaters and rollers, for example. In winter the Shetlands, Orkney and Fair Isle are the sanctuary of many a polar bird, such as the tundra peregrine. Paler-faced than our familiar bird, it nests in ice-free Greenland coasts and places such as Canada’s Northwest Territories, but enjoys a bit of summer warmth – North American birds sensibly head for Cuba and Latin America. For us in the UK, sightings are rare and usually only in the far north. Check local bird–watching tours on the various islands of the Orkneys. Waxwing One of the great sights of winter is a horde of waxwings feasting on a frosted rowan tree’s scarlet berries. From a distance they look like undistinguished beige starlings, but seen through binoculars or a scope they leap into sartorial splendour, with flashes of black, white, yellow and red plumage. This autumn there is a bumper crop of rowanberries, so get ready: the first migrants arrive in late October, not leaving until March. They can be mercurial about where they go: Wales had big irruptions, as they are called, in 2004 and 2016, but some years there are far fewer around. The east coast is the most reliable: anywhere between Kent and the Moray Firth. Try St Cyrus reserve near Montrose. That stalwart of urban planting, the cotoneaster, is a big waxwing favourite, so they sometimes pitch up on roundabouts and in supermarket car parks. Soaked raisins on a bird table have also been known to attract them. • This article was amended on 6 November 2021. Minsmere is in Suffolk, not Essex as stated in an earlier version. Among the birding guides used by Kevin Rushby is Europe’s Birds (£20, Princeton Press), available at the Guardian Bookshop for £17.40.As dusk falls over east London, we arrive in Wanstead Park to unmask the local bats. Down at the pond, a gap in the tree-tunnel gives way to swooping bats, silhouetted against the blue-grey sky. We can tell the species apart from the frequency and pattern of the clicks on the bat detectors. The common pipistrelle (Pipistrellus pipistrellus) traversing overhead sounds like ball bearings slapping the side of a plastic pot. The Daubenton’s bats (Myotis daubentonii) fly swiftly over the water, their scattergun clicks reverberating off their prey. As we reach the dam at the end of the pond, the track opens out and the trees clear to reveal an uninterrupted stretch of pond. The sky fills with frantically flapping flittermice. It is here that we distinguish the soprano pipistrelle’s (Pipistrellus pygmaeus) higher frequency buzz as they pluck prey from the air. Over the summer the female bats have clustered together to raise their young in maternity roosts. Now the pups have fledged and the adults are looking for new mates. Occasionally, we see pairs of bats scything through the air together and hear their social calls – perhaps next year’s parents greeting each other for the first time? It’s starting to get cold and dark and our devices are silent. We leave the park with renewed enthusiasm for our furry neighbours, and a plan to return after their winter of hibernation. Nate, 10 • Read today’s other YCD: ‘A fungi fest and a dip in the loch’At first I didn’t know where to look, as I was interested in every sight and sound around me. My focus was soon snagged on the mushrooms. They littered the woodland path, all shapes and sizes. The small, red sickener; the thin, yellow, gooey fieldcap; a large, green, puffy bolete; white bracket fungus and a broad, dark red crab brittlegill. As I passed the gushing Kennick burn, I saw moss-covered spruce and damp tree stumps coated in wood sorrel. Its lemony taste filled my mouth as the wooded path emerged on to an open loch. My thoughts of fungi were washed away as I looked over the perfectly still expanse of water. Overhanging willow branches were mirrored in the loch’s surface, and a jumping brown trout was creating little ripples. I sat on the stony beach and removed my shoes and socks in preparation for feeling the loch at my toes. I stretched my feet into the water’s silver surface and cold engulfed them. At first I wanted to cringe away, but gradually my body adjusted. I sat watching the wildlife go by, feeling the cold on my feet. Eventually, I arose and walked back through the woods to tell my family what I had seen. Celeste, 12 • Read today’s other YCD: ‘The sky is full of frantically flapping bats’Gina Yashere, Stephen K Amos, Lenny Henry and Daliso Chaponda join a Zoom conversation on a Saturday evening filled with – naturally – much laughter, even during difficult conversations around their respective comedy careers as Black British comedians. For Yashere, opportunities in the US have allowed her greater creative freedom, while Amos sees some progress but still wonders whether the status quo will change. Henry is candid about the pressure he faced beginning his career in the 1970s, and Daliso Chaponda – who came to acclaim as a Britain’s Got Talent finalist in 2017 – explains the stereotypes he faced on emigrating to Britain from Malawi, including being asked to hold “an African staff” on TV. Although heavy in places, their conversation is shot through with optimism, and ends with plans being made for a Christmas reunion between the comics, and a continuation of the chat via WhatsApp (“Don’t give me a phone number you never pick up, Lenny!” jokes Yashere). What was the comedy scene like for Black performers when you were coming up? Lenny Henry When I was coming up in the 70s and 80s, I was having to represent everybody. I was doing these cockamamie accents, thinking I’ve got to show so much diversity. I did a lot of jokes against myself, because I’d seen old school black comedians do that and, for a really long time, I thought that’s what you had to do. It took 10 years of going round and round to realise I didn’t have to, and that I could be myself. I didn’t want to be a self-loathing comic. Gina Yashere When I first started out in the 90s it was a lot of Caribbean comics doing African accents and laughing at us; doing the old tropes about us having dry, ashy skin and being traffic wardens. I was turning the tables on the Caribbean comics; that’s kind of what got me noticed in the first place on the Black scene. For me it was revenge, because I’d gone through school having the piss taken out of me for being Nigerian. Stephen K Amos When I started, I had no idea that there was something called the “Black circuit”, because I hadn’t gone looking for comedy clubs. It was all about them and us [between the Caribbean and African comics]. I was like: let’s not start having divisions between us. Let’s put something out there for us. GY When I did the white clubs, I was writing bland, observational stuff, because I thought that’s what you were supposed to do. I saw these white comics talking about aeroplane food, that kind of thing. I got an agent who came and saw me at a Black club and a white club; he was like: “Why are you keeping all your good shit for the Black people?” I had an epiphany at that point. I was like: “I’m gonna be myself in front of everybody.” When I later did one of my last Live at the Apollo appearances, I decided not to mention anything to do with my Blackness, but changed my mind the day before. I’m glad I did; the clip of my set, and my mum standing up in the crowd, went viral, which led to my sitcom in America [Bob Hearts Abishola] Daliso Chaponda I had a different experience, because I came to the UK from Malawi [in 2006]. I would go on shows and find that they wanted me to be more African, like a weird parody. I remember the first time I went on television. The producers said: “Could we get you an African staff?” and, “Could you wear one of those multicoloured things?” It would be the worst possible thing for me to pretend that that was my culture. In terms of the material, you’ll do a 20-minute set with five minutes about Africa, and they’ll only air those five minutes. Then you get some random angry white comic saying: “These Black people just talk about being Black.” What are the other barriers you have faced in the comedy world? SKA There has always been a very vibrant Black comedy scene as I mentioned, but the gatekeepers wouldn’t go to those places. I had a meeting years ago when I was told by an executive at one of the broadcasters that I was really funny, I was ready. He pointed out of his window of the office that he had called me into for the meeting, and said: “They’re not ready for you.” I was like: “Who’s they?” GY I remember someone at Channel 4 saying to me: “You’re really great but we’ve already got Richard Blackwood.” The reason I had to leave England was because I felt that I was being forced into a position where I was jealous of other people’s success. When Jocelyn [Jee Esien] got her show [Little Miss Jocelyn], I was like: “Well, I’m done in this industry because she’s Black, a woman, Nigerian.” I wanted to be friends with people like Jocelyn and Andi Osho – I wanted to be in the trenches with them – but we were pitched against each other. I want to change that culture. SKA I think it’s ridiculous. I should point out as well, Lenny, I really hope you didn’t take that joke that went around about “one in, one out” personally [Amos once said that “the BBC have a diversity policy. Apparently I have to wait for Lenny Henry to die”]. The joke was never about you – it was about the system. The gatekeepers still have to open their minds, and not go: “Oh no, we’ve got one Black person now.” GY [laughs] He’s waiting for you to die, Lenny! DC I’ve recently been on panels where there were two Black people, which I’ve found very liberating. When you’re the only one, you feel you have to give the right answer, because you represent Blackness. If there’s another person, you can say something silly and off-kilter, there’s none of that responsibility. There are a lot of shows which are now more open to having more than one brown or Black person on. Radio has loads of voices; television still has further to go. Is being a Black comedian different from being a white comedian? GY There is a certain expectation when you’re a Black comic, especially if you’re in the public eye, because there’s so little mainstream representation. When we get out there, we’ve got that pressure of not embarrassing Black people. You don’t want to be called a sellout or a coconut. LH I remember being in Leicester after I won the programme New Faces [in 1975], which was seen by 16 million people, and a Black bus driver calling out to me. Black people started to say “make us proud” and make sure you moisturise before you’re next on TV. There was a lot of pressure on me at that time. DC I accidentally embarrassed Black people. Do you remember when Lord Sugar shared that picture [in 2018, Sugar shared a Photoshopped picture depicting the Senegalese football team as beach sellers]? I was on a panel, talking about my tour. I didn’t even know that was the issue of the day. They said: “Are you offended by this?” I was like: “I’m not offended.” I didn’t know I was speaking for all Black people; I got roasted by “Black Twitter”, and suddenly became an Uncle Tom. That was when I realised that I had to be really careful on these shows, I couldn’t play into the narrative they wanted me to. I also became aware very early on, not just on stage but in life, that I’m seen as “the unthreatening Black guy”. LH When Daliso dropped the stuff about Unicef and Bono on Britain’s Got Talent, there was a palpable thrill from the audience. Even though you might feel like you’re unthreatening, you went to a place where you were able to smack them with that stuff and make them laugh. I thought you made really brave choices. And in the subsequent sets, you were able to talk about things about being Black that were important to you. What have been your experiences being the only Black person in certain rooms? GY On Bob Hearts Abishola, I’m constantly fighting behind the scenes. There are Black writers in the room, because I made sure of that; I’m not one of those Black people that pulls up the ladder behind them. But I’m constantly fighting. Not against racism, but I’m working with people who have never worked with a majority Black cast. I have to tell them some things are stereotypical tropes, and I’m all about the authenticity. We spent an extra million dollars on the first few episodes of this season. I said: “The costumes have to be on point, and we ain’t using generic Lion King, South African-sounding music, we’re getting proper Nigerian music from Nigeria.” As an exec producer, I can do that, whereas if I was just employed writing on the show, I wouldn’t have the power. Do you think there is a Black British comedy renaissance currently occurring? GY It’s definitely broadened out. You can have different types of Black comics now, which I love. SKA Yes, I think with the advent of social media people from all walks of life – particularly young Black voices – have got a way to put their stuff out there. They don’t need to wait for anybody to come knocking on their door, so we’re seeing a wide range of voices within the Black community, which is brilliant. LH As Stephen says, you’re seeing different types of people now. You’re seeing wacky, you’re seeing surreal, you’re seeing political. Comedians starting out now can see this guy’s from Malawi, this girl’s from Nigeria and so on. We’re able to say this is what I’m like, or this is what my mum and dad are like. Even so, there’s still a long way to go. Why do you think Black British comedians matter? DC The greatest thing about comedy is that you can talk about anything. I was able to talk about things like Aids in Malawi, you can talk about Black Lives Matter to people who are borderline racist in a comedy club. Comedy is the perfect way to talk about the uncomfortable. SKA We all have a story to tell. The question should surely be, why don’t we matter?I suppose it’s this one, then,” said my husband as we stepped into the garden. “It is,” I whispered, a covetous gleam in my eye and lust in my soul. “It is.” We had looked at every house in Norfolk within our budget. None had been right. This one wasn’t either, but … running along the width of the bottom of the garden was a former cart house that the current owners had made into two rooms, one big – used to put up grandchildren overnight – and one small, used as a study. Plastered walls, a flagstoned floor, three sets of french doors opening on to the garden: it was, clearly, a library in waiting. The fulfilment of the only ambition I have held in life was standing before me: a room of my own, with every one of my books around me. There are about 8,000 of the buggers, thanks to more than 40 years of devoted reading and an unwillingness to let go of old friends. Very few of them are lookers – I’ve always gone for quantity of content over quality of livery – but almost every one evokes its own happy memories. Most of my Miss Reads, for example, came from a secondhand shop in Norwich the first time my boyfriend – now husband – and I went there 17 years ago. The shop has gone but we, and the villages of Thrush Green and Fairacre, remain. In truth, though, I had never dared to dream so big – a library separate from the house. “Your fortress of solitude,” said my husband, considering me with a mixture of emotions as I struggled to contain my glee. Reader, we bought it. And then I called my carpenter friend Al Lyons and told him that the time had come. Down he came from Holmfirth, West Yorkshire. We stood in the room and I said: “I want to line the whole place with bookcases. Then I want to paint them green, because that is the proper library colour, and then I want to fill them with books and be happy for ever.” Al nodded and, because his artistic eye is as good as his practical eye, got to work designing something that was not only up to the job of supporting 8,000 volumes and taking in the various beams and bits of jiggery-pokery with which an old structure likes to scupper simple plans, but looked beautiful too. He suggested all the finishing details as well as, most strikingly, the deeper bottom compartment marked out by an unpainted oak shelf. That would, he noted, break up the monotony, give me somewhere to perch, rest piles of books and place cups of tea as needful. And so it has very much proved. While Al measured, sawed, planed and generally made timber do his bidding, I flicked through Farrow and Ball’s Instagram account, kept a tally of greens I liked and ordered eight litres of the one that came out ahead: Calke Green. I asked the nice lady on the phone what yellow she would put on her walls if she had Calke Green shelves and she said “Sudbury”, so Sudbury it was. I wish I had a more glamorous decorating journey to share with you. But I have no style and no taste, you see. There’s nothing I can do about that, any more than I can do anything about being 5ft 2in or hating mushrooms. I can only mitigate potential disasters by keeping my options narrow and asking advice from them what knows. To prove all the above points, I went with my instincts in choosing the paint for the doors and they look disgusting. *** My real job, anyway, was shelving the books once all was magnificently finished and painted. The room has a beam about halfway along the back wall , which made a natural dividing line between fiction (left) and nonfiction (right). I started unpacking the hundreds of boxes that filled our sitting room, unfolded a picnic table and started sorting one group from the other. Lockdown hit just as I was beginning to sort the fiction into alphabetical piles. It was the perfect project to keep me going insane from fear, worry for my vulnerable parents in London and cabin fever. Whenever life became too much, I could slip away and dwell among my books – which is to say, my memories, and many of my happiest memories at that. As the world outside filled with uncertainties and the government proved new incompetencies at every turn, even as I sobbed over that table I felt better for bringing a tiny bit of order out of chaos where I could. Fiction-by-alphabetical-order-of-author is only the beginning, of course. You then have to sort your nonfiction, which yields unexpected results. I knew there would be a lot of medieval history and books about language, but I didn’t realise I’d amassed quite so much on New York, gardening or finance. Still, I’m eager to read them all. Sometimes your acquisitive self is ahead of conscious thought. Then there’s the separate section for beloved books you’ve had since childhood – Tom’s Midnight Garden, The Phantom Tollbooth, all the William Browns and many, oh so many more. Another for reference books. And then things start to get … blurry. You become a little lightheaded. You start to realise that, in fact, there are no rules. When it’s your collection in your room, you can order things exactly as best pleases you. How often does that happen? And so, I began to deviate from set paths. I set up a “Books I want to read next” section: Meg Mason’s Sorrow and Bliss, Jenn Ashworth’s Ghosted. A proof copy (and never in my wildest dreams did I think I would be someone who gets sent proof copies, but that is a bogglement for another time) of Charlotte Mendelson’s The Exhibitionist. And many, oh so many more. I put all my Norah Lofts together, separate from general fiction just because I love her so much and she’s never had her literary due. I put all my books on medieval history with fiction set in the middle ages, plus Chaucer (and his biographies) and all my editions of Gawain and the Green Knight, heedless of the boundaries being crossed – and felt only exhilaration. For a goody-two-shoes who has spent a lifetime cowering in fear of authority, this is incredible therapy resulting in profound personal growth. Most rules are human-made, mutable – did you know? I didn’t. I can feel my inner self uncurling and stretching before the warmth of this knowledge. Also, developing the Books About Books section, I came across a biography of Melvil Dewey (of Decimal System fame) that I’d forgotten I had and it turns out he was an absolute shit. So the whole endeavour gave me an even greater glow of satisfaction. The greatest discovery of all, however, has been that although it is a lifetime’s ambition realised, it will never truly be finished. There will always be a new combination to try, a better shelf to build (metaphorically, Al, metaphorically!), a refinement that one day reflects the ranking of the entire 8,000 that lives in my heart. Once I find the right sofa, I don’t intend to leave this building. Until then, I spend a lot of my spare time standing in the middle of the room, turning slowly from side to side as my eyes traverse the shelves and my mind the possibilities. It’s my haven when I break from writing in the study but don’t want to break my mood. It is my refuge when life threatens to overwhelm. It is my fortress of solitude except for the silently supportive company of thousands. Only the doors disturb me. I have got to get them repainted. Lucy Mangan’s debut novel Are We Having Fun Yet? is out now (Souvenir, £16.99).When Austin Mellor was in year seven, a boy in his year was being bullied. It had been going on for a while, and Mellor hated it. One day he snapped and gave the bully a black eye. It worked. The bully stopped. When Mellor’s mum, Julie, found out, she was worried. “She says I’m one of those people who goes out of their way to help others, even when I probably shouldn’t,” says Mellor, now 25 and an estate agent in Greater Manchester (who certainly would no longer advocate resorting to violence). On Julie’s birthday, 24 July 2021, the family gathered at her home in Anglesey to celebrate. Mellor woke up early and, wanting to get his mum out of the house so his girlfriend and sister could prepare a birthday surprise, suggested they go for a walk on nearby Benllech beach. It was a chilly morning despite the season. On the way back, Julie bumped into a friend, who promptly asked why there were balloons in her house. “I was like, urgh!” Mellor remembers. “There’s the surprise ruined.” Frustrated, he turned and gazed across the golden beach, which is bounded by jagged rocks on each side. The tide was out. The sea was turbulent. Mellor spotted two women about 30 metres out and was immediately concerned. “It was really cold that day. The waves were really choppy.” Mellor pulled out his phone and set a timer. “I do cold water swimming. Eight minutes in cold water can be a long time. I wanted to see how long they’d be in there for.” Mellor climbed on to a wall overlooking the bay to better watch the women. When the timer read four-and-a-half minutes, the women began swimming back. One of them staggered up the beach – he later learned that her name was Tina Powsey. Her friend, Maggie Kinnucane, was still in the water and being dragged out to sea. Powsey appeared to be in shock. She asked Mellor to dial 999, but he knew there was no time for that. He stripped to his boxers and plunged in. “The water was so much worse than I expected,” he says. “The waves were lapping over the top of me as I swam. As I got further out I had to punch through the waves.” A rip tide had dragged Kinnucane 60 metres out to sea. As he approached Kinnucane, he shouted to her to roll on her back. Kinnucane didn’t respond. She’d stopped swimming. Her head was bobbing under the water. A wave crashed over them both. When he emerged, he couldn’t see her any more. “I was like, ‘Oh my god, this is it.’” He found Kinnucane, who was completely limp, and began struggling back to shore. “I was fighting a rip tide,” he says, “holding a person.” Mellor swam towards the rocks at the northern end of the beach. “I managed to get my foot on a rock,” he says, “and dragged her up.” Kinnucane was barely conscious. They stumbled on the rocks, which sliced Mellor’s feet and legs. Two men ran over to help and the three of them carried Kinnucane to where an ambulance was waiting. Before it took her away, she thanked him. Mellor remembers: “She kept saying, ‘I was gone. I was done.’” “Austin saved my life,” says Kinnucane later, “risking his own life in the process. I will be for ever grateful and I’ll never forget him.” After she left, Mellor realised he was covered in blood. He had deep gashes on his feet and knees. He got in the shower and as he stood under the stinging water, the adrenaline wore off. “I could feel all the pain of the cuts, and it really hit me then.” In the water, Mellor never thought he was going to die. “I did think: this is bad.” But after, he realised how close he’d come. “There was a lot of luck involved. I have never felt at the mercy of something as much as I did when I was in the water that day. I didn’t have control. I just had to fight.” He keeps getting flashbacks to the moment Kinnucane’s head slid beneath the water. “It’s stuck in my mind,” he says. The night after the rescue, his girlfriend woke him up. He’d been swimming in his sleep, still trying to rescue Kinnucane. When you save someone’s life, says Mellor, you feel connected to them forever. Meeting Kinnucane after she was discharged from hospital, it felt “like she was family, someone I’d known for a long time”. He doesn’t feel like a hero. “I think everyone should try and help other people.” When it comes to his treat, Mellor makes a typically adventurous request: to visit a ski slope. Manchester indoor ski centre The Chill Factor sets him up with a complimentary month’s pass. Mellor has always loved skiing. He trained to be a ski instructor and always hoped to do a gap year on the slopes, but life got in the way. I catch up with him as he decompresses in a nearby Wetherspoon’s, après-ski. “It was really fun,” he says. “Just so nice to get out and enjoy the snow. For a while I thought I’d forgotten how to ski because it had been so long!” He plans to use his ski pass to get an adrenaline fix in a safer, more controlled environment. “It’s definitely better to do this than swim in rough seas all day,” Mellor jokes. And this way, his mother won’t have to worry. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comFormula One finally has the title fight it has craved, with blow and counter-blow. Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen are locked in a rivalry as gripping as some of the great head-to-heads and the intensity of a thrilling championship is set only to ramp up as Sunday’s Mexican Grand Prix heralds a potentially nail-biting run-in to close the season. Hamilton and Verstappen have had two serious clashes this year, both life-threatening. Despite the risks, it is clear neither is going to yield any time soon in the heat of competition between two such singular and determined drivers. Both understand what is at stake. A clash leading to a DNF would all but end their chances, with five races remaining. Red Bull’s Verstappen enjoys a 12-point advantage over Hamilton and Mercedes before the race at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez in the closest fought inter-team championship battle since the turbo-hybrid era began in 2014. The entreaty from their teams is to keep it clean, as doubtless is the logical thought process of the drivers. The indications remain, however, that both teams will be ignored if the pair are vying for position on track. At the last round in Austin they went head to head in practice when Hamilton refused to back out of his line, leaving an angry Verstappen giving him the finger. It was, at once, a nothing incident and one indicative of where they are now. At Monza, Verstappen attempted to pass Hamilton through the first chicane. Hamilton squeezed him, the Dutchman refused to cede position and hit the sausage kerbs; his car was launched on top of Hamilton’s and only the halo cockpit protection device prevented a huge impact with Hamilton’s head. The incident ended their races. In July, Hamilton’s attempt to pass Verstappen up the inside of Copse at Silverstone ended with the Dutchman skewered off into the barriers at 180mph. Hamilton was penalised for that, as was Verstappen for Monza. Neither driver believed they were at fault. Neither is willing to show weakness. Their cars are remarkably closely matched and although Red Bull were expectant of enjoying an advantage in Mexico where the thin air at altitude works to the strengths of their turbo and their high-rake design, it was Mercedes who were on top in qualifying. That they will go wheel to wheel again seems inevitable and it is likely to bear the hallmarks of the great rivalries – a refusal to back down. It has the unforgiving, ruthless air of Ayrton Senna versus Alain Prost and everything that was so enthralling about their battle Indeed, the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, suggested this past week that should it come down to the final race he could envision a Senna-Prost scenario of one taking the other out if it would secure the title. Hamilton and Verstappen denied they would do so but Wolff was perhaps just reading the room accurately. Both team principals have acknowledged the reality of the situation. “Max is a no-quarter kind of guy; Lewis has demonstrated that he doesn’t want to give anything either and when you get two racers of that mentality, you get incidents,” said Red Bull’s Christian Horner. Wolff has confirmed that a level of combative behaviour was inevitable. “The point is that these two are racing for a drivers’ championship and you can’t expect them to have velvet gloves on,” he said. There is an inescapable sense this simmering conflict has been escalating and is now an eyeball-to-eyeball standoff. Early in the season, with the experience of playing the long game that has helped win him seven titles, Hamilton was circumspect around Verstappen, pointedly noting: “I’m in the position that I’m in because I don’t get too aggressive when I don’t need to be.” Wolff has been ringside for what has developed since, as Verstappen has shown he will be uncompromising and is in this title fight to the finish. “The change of approach is that Lewis decided not to bail out any more when he thinks that the corner is his,” Wolff said after Monza. Ron Dennis, the former McLaren team principal who nurtured Hamilton’s career and brought him into F1 at McLaren in 2007, is convinced neither has any intent of giving ground on the run-in to the title. “One thing that both of them doesn’t want to show the other is that they are going to back off, that they are going to be intimidated,” he said. “It’s a couple of young stags rutting.” Verstappen’s style has been clear since his first F1 race at the age 17 in 2015: he will go for a chance and does so in the expectation his opponent will give way. It has paid off in the past and cost him too but only now in a fight for the title does his technique carry real jeopardy. His insistence on elbows-out, no-compromise racing is a far more costly and indeed dangerous prospect when it comes up against another driver unwilling to accept it. The immovable object and the unstoppable force. The respect between the two seems to be intact, certainly they are making the right noises in public as they have all season, but they know there is a world of difference between talking and split-second decision-making in the crucible of competition on a Sunday. When the two fighters square off again in Mexico, expect no quarter once more.“It’s actually a lot simpler than you think.” It’s a Tuesday afternoon, and somewhat to my surprise, I’m on the phone to Paris Hilton, who is graciously explaining the world of NFTs. Hilton is many things – a reality star, an heiress, an unlikely lockdown fitness guru who uses designer handbags instead of weights. But until now, she has never been considered a significant player in the art world. When artists have acknowledged her, often they’ve done so to fetishise her image. In 2008, Damien Hirst bought a portrait of her by the artist Jonathan Yeo, in which her body is constructed from collaged images cut from porn magazines. Yet in the past year she’s become a surreal figurehead in the NFT scene: a world flush with crypto dollars and high on a promise to transform the worlds of art and commerce. When we speak, Hilton has just returned from a bitcoin conference in Miami, where customers paid up to $25,000 for VIP tables at the opening party to watch her DJ in a pair of diamanté-encrusted headphones. “NFT stands for non-fungible token, a digital token that is redeemable for a digital piece of art,” she explains. “You can have it on your computer server or your phone. I have these screens in my house where I display them.” Sure enough, at Hilton’s Beverly Hills mansion there are screens displaying NFTs she made in collaboration with the digital artist Blake Kathryn. These include a video of a chihuahua on top of a rotating ionic column (a tribute to her deceased pet Tinkerbell) and an animated self-portrait of Hilton as a sparkling CGI Barbie floating in the clouds, a piece she’s called Iconic Crypto Queen, and which she sold in April for more than $1m. Hilton first started investing in cryptocurrency in 2016. “I became friends with the founders of Ethereum,” she says. (Ethereum produces ether, the currency in which the majority of NFTs are traded.) Since then she’s thrown herself into collecting crypto art, and owns more than 150 NFTs. To advocates of the NFT, the technology offers a revolutionary new way of selling art, and of circumventing snooty cultural gatekeepers whose resistance to a crypto future seems as square as the 19th-century Parisian art world’s disdain for impressionism. In this context, the relevance of Hilton’s brand to the NFT movement makes sense. Pink, jewel-encrusted, and openly motivated by being as rich and famous as humanly possible, she’s a far cry from the type of person whose work is typically exhibited in blue-chip galleries or hung in booths at art fairs. Yet Hilton’s endorsement may also be ammunition for those who view the NFT as just another depressing example of the speculative logic of finance monopolising taste. To detractors, from critic Waldemar Januszczak to artist David Hockney, the NFT marketplace is a home for morally bankrupt, environmentally vandalistic money-grabbers whose creations barely qualify as art. While most of us are still trying to remember what “fungible” means, a battle is under way to define how NFTs are understood. Are they a vital cultural product that tells us something profound about digital consumerism? Or are they just the latest cynical way to make absurd amounts of money? *** A motley crew of celebrities have tried their hand at selling digital art, including Snoop Dogg, Lindsay Lohan and John Cleese. In July, it was estimated that sales of NFTs in the first half of 2021 rose by more than $2bn (£1.47bn) – a trend that prompted Christie’s and Sotheby’s to host their own NFT auctions and that is credited with driving contemporary art sales to an all-time high. But only a tiny proportion of the proceeds of art NFTs have ended up in the bank accounts of the galleries that have, in addition to auction houses, traditionally taken the lion’s share of art-market profits. In March, the crypto firm Injective Protocol paid $95,000 for Morons, a physical artwork by Banksy depicting an auctioneer selling a framed picture bearing the words: “I can’t believe you morons actually buy this shit.” They then burned the picture before selling a digital token of the work for $380,000. The event was a marketing ploy, designed to stoke outrage, drum up publicity and turn a profit. Yet the symbolism was potent: digital art is here to replace its physical forebear, and its coming supremacy should be reflected by a higher price tag. In essence, an NFT is a digital certificate of ownership, almost always bought and sold using cryptocurrency, to which any digital file – a jpeg image file, a video, a song – can be attached. That Hilton is able to display Iconic Crypto Queen in her home, despite having sold it, is part of the NFT’s appeal – and the challenge it poses to the established business model for trading and accessing art. With a simple Google search, anybody can find and download the file associated with an NFT for nothing, and store it on their phone or computer, but only the owner has the right to sell it. Each NFT is unique, and all transactions are logged on the blockchain, a type of database invented in 2008 for the purpose of recording the movement of cryptocurrency. Unlike the commercial gallery business model, NFTs are designed to cut out the need for art dealers, enabling artists to trade directly online, typically via specialist auction sites. Crucially, in contrast to the contemporary art world, there is no “vetting” of collectors – a practice intended to stop the most speculative buyers flipping artworks by quickly reselling them at a profit. Anybody can buy an NFT, and prices, so often a thing of mystery in high-end commercial galleries, are listed as a matter of public record. Every time an NFT is resold, its creator also makes a profit – an inbuilt royalty system missing from the physical art world, where artists often feel as if they have been shafted when their work is resold on the secondary market. A model for trading and sharing art, built on the principles of financial transparency, royalties and easy access for all may sound egalitarian. The reality has been rather different. As soon as it became apparent that almost anything digital could be labelled as art and sold, the circus rolled into town. In March, Everydays: The First 5000 Days, a collage of previous artworks by a 40-year-old American named Mike Winkelmann, better known as Beeple, sold for $69.3m at Christie’s New York. After that, Kate Moss sold a gif of herself for more than $17,000. Jack Dorsey, CEO of Twitter, sold an image of the first ever tweet for $2.9m. A Brooklyn film director managed to sell an audio file of his own farts for $85. Dominic Cummings even threatened to use the technology against Boris Johnson, by releasing what he said was evidence of government malpractice in the form of an NFT. Along the way, the market became gratuitously inflated. Bidders at the top end included Vignesh Sundaresan, a blockchain entrepreneur who bought Beeple’s $69m NFT. A considerable number of small-time enthusiasts were also buying at the affordable end of the market, keen to celebrate the technology by investing in blockchain art. It didn’t take long before the bubble burst. By May, daily sales of NFTs had dropped by 60%. Crypto art’s reputation has also taken a knock because of its awful environmental track record. (The annual energy consumption of Ethereum is estimated to equal that of Iceland.) Despite this, advocates still believe NFTs can mount a challenge to the monopoly on trading art held by commercial galleries, and even create a future where physical artworks are replaced by their digital counterparts. As Hilton puts it: “There are paintings out there that are $100m or more, but if you think about it, it’s really just canvas with paint.” *** In the beginning, before the circus pitched up, there were nerds. Inevitably, because this is the internet, there were also cats. CryptoKitties, to be precise, is an online game launched in 2017, enabling players to trade and “breed” unique cartoon felines, sold as NFTs, using blockchain technology. Although the first NFT was created by a man named Kevin McCoy in 2014, CryptoKitties attracted attention and money, with some cats trading for hundreds of thousands of dollars. During 2020, as cryptocurrencies boomed and the pandemic accelerated our transformation into a species of screen-obsessed zombies, interest in NFTs rapidly picked up pace. As a consequence, the value of work by a relatively small number of artists already on the scene rocketed. Among them was Trevor Jones, a 51-year-old painter who lives in Edinburgh. You’ve probably never heard of Jones, but he’s the most successful NFT artist working in the UK. He started making NFTs in 2019. “Five years ago, I was struggling to pay the mortgage,” he tells me. “I went from having to borrow money from friends to pay the bills to making $4m in a day.” Jones has made a name for himself combining painting with digital technology, often producing pastiches of famous artworks with a crypto twist. In 2020, Bitcoin Bull – an animated painting of a Picasso-inspired bull, decorated with bitcoin logos and Twitter birds – was bought by a prominent crypto collector named Pablo Rodriguez-Fraile for $55,555.55. Jones is warm, unguarded, and stunned by his rapid ascent. “I grew up in a little logging community,” he says of his childhood in western Canada, a place he describes as “rough”. “When I was 25, a friend of mine ended up getting into a fight at a bar and was killed.” He left soon after, eventually settling in Edinburgh, where he worked at the city’s Hard Rock Cafe as a waiter and later as a manager. Jones tells me about the mental health crisis he suffered in his early 30s. “My girlfriend and I broke up and it kind of all came crashing down. At that point, it sounds cliched, but I decided I needed to find something to save me.” He set his heart on becoming an artist and “begged” his way on to an art foundation course at Leith School of Art, which he followed with a degree at the University of Edinburgh. Things began to look up for Jones in 2012, when he had the idea of incorporating QR codes into his art, painting the scannable barcodes in Mondrian-like colours on canvas. Scanning the paintings takes viewers through to an online gallery, where anybody can upload their work. “People were laughing at me at the time,” he says. While gallery audiences turned their noses up, he gained a new following online, one that would turn out to have deep pockets. In 2019, Jones began working with animators to turn his paintings into short videos that he sold as NFTs. Among his most successful works is Bitcoin Angel, an NFT based on Bernini’s baroque masterpiece The Ecstasy of Saint Teresa, which he sold in 2020 for the equivalent of more than $3m (all of Jones’s NFTs are bought using cryptocurrency). In Bernini’s marble sculpture, a nun has been stabbed in the heart by an angel with a spear. She leans backwards, overcome by the sublime ecstasy of being penetrated by a heavenly body. When the arrow pierces the heart of Jones’s nun, she bleeds bitcoin. To sell Bitcoin Angel, Jones used a website called Nifty Gateway, one of a number of online auction sites designed for trading NFTs that are now flooded with aspiring crypto artists. I dedicated an afternoon to scrolling through the lots, each one flashing and jiggling in the hope of attracting the attention of collectors. I saw gifs of muffins transforming into dogs, spinning trainers, sycophantic portraits of Elon Musk and an abundance of naked, big-boobed cyborgs. The art critic Dean Kissick described the male-dominated NFT scene as “Etsy for guys”, and on this evidence it’s easy to see why. Aside from the headline-grabbing sales, Nifty Gateway provides a platform for aspirational entrepreneurs and hobbyists, who practise their craft on computers rather than knotting macrame plant hangers. While those – like Jones – who successfully rode the NFT wave were busy counting their crypto dollars, over the past year the conventional art world has suffered a decline. During the pandemic, with audiences unable to physically attend exhibitions and fairs, art dealers have struggled to make online viewing rooms interesting or lucrative. As a consequence, global sales of art fell by 22%. To rub salt in that wound, millions of crypto dollars were exchanging hands for a natively digital art form. “The technology is designed against the existing art world,” says Noah Davis, a specialist at Christie’s New York. “It’s an art form that doesn’t need a gallery.” It was Davis who helped to sell Beeple’s $69m NFT, the first piece of crypto art ever listed by a major auction house. He views his own impact as pivotal: “I introduced NFTs to the Christie’s audience and thereby the world,” he says. The artwork was sold during an online auction in March that took two weeks to close. Bidding opened at $100, and within an hour that figure had risen to $1m – the result of a vast number of bids all happening digitally. “I’ve never seen anything so spectacular. You can’t bid that quickly at auction unless you just shout out: ‘A million bucks,’” Davis says, “and that’s impossible to do online. So all that bidding had to happen in increments and manually. “I look at my life as pre-Beeple and post-Beeple,” he adds. “The same way the world thinks about before Jesus Christ and after. Beeple is kind of my Jesus.” In the months since, Christie’s has continued to cash in on NFTs. In May, it achieved $16.9m for nine pixellated cartoon characters from the CryptoPunks series, early examples of NFT art that have become sought-after collectibles. Christie’s has also attempted to unite the crypto and modern art markets. This spring, it hosted a sale of digital artworks made by Andy Warhol in the 1980s. The images, which had been recovered from floppy disks and transformed into NFTs, include drawings, made on the artist’s Commodore Amiga computer, of bananas, flowers, and of a Campbell’s soup can that alone sold for more than $1m. In general, the commercial gallery world has been understandably cagey about adopting technology designed to circumvent it. Behind the scenes, however, a number of galleries have attempted to woo Jones. He has declined their advances. “What can a commercial gallery do for me?” he asks. “Having a gallery exhibition before, I worked a year creating paintings, I paid for all the framing, the overheads for the studio. I had the paintings delivered to the commercial gallery. I may or may not sell, the gallery takes 45 to 55% commission, and they might pay out a month, six weeks, two months later.” And now? “I sell something and three minutes later I’ve got the money in my digital wallet.” *** At times, the divide between the two art worlds seems more profound than a difference in business model: it’s an all-out culture clash. “Few of these cyber-millionaires could tell the back of a Rembrandt from the front,” wrote art critic Waldemar Januszczak. “There is no challenge whatsoever in NFT art,” conceptual art collector Pedro Barbosa told the New York Times, arguing that the ideas behind NFTs are often derivative, having “already been explored by artists like Josef Albers, László Moholy-Nagy, and Marcel Duchamp”. David Hockney branded NFTs “silly little things” for “crooks and swindlers” – a curious accusation from an artist happy to embrace and monetise novel digital technology. Since 2009, Hockney has been doing a roaring trade in souped-up iPhone and iPad drawings. Jones tells me that the crypto faithful, who, like Hilton, ardently believe that NFTs are the future of art, now use the dusty epithet “the legacy art world” to refer to their physical rivals. As a painter, Jones is unusual among NFT artists. On occasion, this has allowed him the opportunity to sell the original painting on which an NFT is based, as well as the NFT. Pulling off this kind of double sale, however, must be handled carefully. Charging more for a painting than an NFT, and thus valuing physical art more highly than digital art, could provoke the ire of the crypto crowd. When Jones sold Bitcoin Bull to Rodriguez-Fraile, he also sold the original painting to the second-place bidder. In order not to offend his fans, he priced the painting at $55,000 – $555.55 less than the NFT. A handful of established contemporary artists, notably those who have form when it comes to explicitly courting headlines and extreme wealth, have tried their hand at making NFTs – most prominently Damien Hirst, who released the project The Currency in July. Hirst put 10,000 NFTs up for sale, each corresponding to a unique spot painting, for $2,000 a piece. But there is a catch: after two months, the collector must decide if they wish to keep the NFT or the physical art work. Whichever one they don’t choose will be destroyed, forcing the owner to gamble on which version will be more valuable in the future. The most shocking aspect of the NFT to the art intelligentsia is its brazen entanglement with finance. Trading art has always been a pastime of the wealthy. Much of what counts for art history consists of flattering portrayals of the rich and powerful, and artists have long been expected to perform what Tom Wolfe called the Art Mating Ritual – attracting the interest of wealthy patrons and conservative institutions, while simultaneously presenting as Bohemians and renegades. Yet with the NFT, the distinction between art and asset seems to have disappeared. In place of the curated exhibition is the auction website; symbols of the market have seeped into the aesthetic language of the art itself. Prices, not ideas, dominate. Despite the promise of “art for everyone”, the final destination of the NFT might not actually be art. Art may simply be a useful way to advertise the possibilities of a new technology. “I’ve done everything from fashion, fragrances to endorsements,” Paris Hilton says, adding that NFTs are another way for “fans to have a piece of me”. As well as working with the rapper Ice Cube, Jones recently made an NFT for the whisky company Macallan, to be auctioned alongside a very expensive cask of scotch. This, it seems, is a taste of where NFTs may be heading: not a radical new model for trading art, but a digital marketing bauble. Perhaps the most significant legacy of the NFT’s assault on the art market will be the questions it forces us to ask about the nature of art, and what it is that we want from it. How should art be traded and viewed? Who gets to ascribe value to art? Is there a moral or aesthetic code by which artists are expected to work, and who has elected themselves to define it? And why would anybody part with their money in exchange for a digital fart? Then there’s the biggest question: is there a meaningful difference between an artwork and an asset? The answer, perhaps, is not always – but if we want art to be more than a tool for prettifying finance and flogging merch, then it’s an ideal worth holding on to. • Rosanna McLaughlin is editor of The White Review• The young French-Italian mezzo-soprano Lea Desandre studied ballet for 12 years before committing to singing. We should be glad she did. She trained in the strenuous classroom of William Christie’s Le Jardin des Voix academy and specialises, not exclusively, in baroque music. Amazone (Erato), with lutenist/director Thomas Dunford and the period instrument Jupiter ensemble, features Desandre in baroque works, from Vivaldi and Couperin to the Neapolitans Francesco Provenzale and Giuseppe de Bottis. This is a concept album, a “hymn to Mother Nature… a poetic, universal and timeless message”, with pictures of Desandre standing in yogic dancer pose. Don’t be put off. The music is beautifully performed, vivacious, and intelligently programmed. Desandre flies weightlessly around elaborate ornamentation, expressive and precise. The Jupiter players and Dunford excel. And hearing contributions from Desandre’s French and Italian senior star colleagues Véronique Gens and Cecilia Bartoli is a bonus. • Composed 34 years after he had stopped writing operas, Rossini’s Petite messe solennelle (1863) is singular in every way. “Petite” in the forces required rather than length, it is scored for soloists, a dozen mixed voices, two pianos and harmonium and lasts nearly an hour and a half. The orchestral version is better known. In a new recording (Outhere) with the agile Coro Ghislieri, conductor Giulio Prandi has used a new critical edition, recorded for the first time. The pianos and harmonium (played by Francesco Corti, Cristiano Gaudio and Daniel Perer) date from the 19th century, colouring the sound, sharpening contours, lightening the textures. With Sandrine Piau (soprano), José Maria Lo Monaco (alto), Edgardo Rocha (tenor) and Christian Senn (bass) as soloists, this performance brings out the idiosyncratic variety of Rossini’s music, at once operatic, sacred and quirky. • Alfredo Catalini’s Edmea? No, nor me. Wexford Festival Opera’s 70-year tradition of staging rare opera continues apace. Catch up with this 1886 work based an Alexandre Dumas’s play on BBC Sounds. Soprano Anne Sophie Duprels sings the title role.Perhaps the doubters should have listened to the Premier League’s most experienced first-choice goalkeeper. Three weeks after Arsenal had signed Aaron Ramsdale for an initial £24m that, whatever hindsight might suggest, made many eyes water they were offered an alternative viewpoint by Ben Foster. “The guy seriously impresses me every time he plays,” he said. “He’s got a little bit of that mentality where he doesn’t care. Nothing fazes him and nothing bothers him: he’s going to go on to be a serious monster in goal.” Foster will hope Ramsdale has an increasingly rare off day when his Watford side visit the Emirates on Sunday but, whoever finishes on top, the mutual respect will be genuine. Ramsdale is a West Brom fan and, through his teens, was present to see Foster keep goal at the Hawthorns. He has spoken reverentially of the 38-year-old in the past and considered it a career milestone when, two years ago, the pair faced one another during his time at Bournemouth. “I watched him for a long, long time,” he said after both keepers had achieved a clean sheet. “The way he plays, the speed he plays at and being able to kick off both feet, I know his game inside and out. There are definitely things you try to take out of his game and implement into mine.” Ramsdale’s attention to detail is little surprise. One of the attributes that has delighted colleagues at Arsenal’s training ground since his arrival is his absorption in the sport: Ramsdale verges on the hyper-observant, watching games religiously and paying attention to minor points of a player’s routine, down to the off-field commitments expected on a match day, where other professionals might not. It is an attitude that has, in seven league appearances, transmitted on to the pitch: at a middling 6ft 2in he might not fill the goal with his stature but a vibrant personality lifts those around him and presents opponents with a fresh obstacle. That was among the assets that seduced Mikel Arteta. One of the laziest barbs aimed at Ramsdale was that, in his two Premier League seasons, he had been relegated twice, with Bournemouth and Sheffield United. He missed only one game in those campaigns and perhaps it says something that, when Eddie Howe, Chris Wilder and Paul Heckingbottom tinkered in search of a formula for escaping the drop, the goalkeeping position remained unchanged. Maybe they saw what Arteta did: a preternatural ability to roll with the punches. “I watched a lot of clips and moments after he conceded a goal, making a mistake or a difficult moment,” Arteta said on Friday. “And that’s one of the big reasons we made a decision to sign him, because he could cope with those.” The logic was sound, if rarely heard. It can be taken as read that goalkeepers in the top two divisions are outstanding shot stoppers. The step up from competent to elite is made between the ears and Ramsdale’s imperviousness to disappointment, a condition that has afflicted Arsenal for too long, struck a chord. “He’s made some really big saves for us lately,” Heckingbottom said in May when the Blades’ fate had long been sealed. “But perhaps even more so than that, it’s been the belief and single-mindedness he has shown to keep on going and show people what he’s made of. Because it would have been easier for him just to fold. He didn’t. And that takes something a little bit special in my book.” In a revamped Arsenal defence that has shipped only four goals since he usurped Bernd Leno, Ramsdale is yet to encounter the negative scrutiny that accompanies regular concessions. The day will arrive when he makes a critical mistake but he has quickly amassed enough credit to fend off brickbats. Interaction with the fanbase has been a theme in his early months, from joining in with Leicester supporters’ barracking at goal-kicks last week to his increasingly familiar pumping-up of the Emirates crowd. Ramsdale operates with his heart on his sleeve: there is something of the amateur player, and not in the pejorative sense, in such an uninhibited approach. Figures at Arsenal liken him to an old-school football character: ready with wit and a wisecrack, but businesslike when required. Jack Wilshere, whose influence as a non-contract training participant at London Colney has also been well received, is cut from a similar cloth. “Connection brings unity and a different kind of vibration between fans and players,” said Arteta of Ramsdale’s ability to lift spirits. “Aaron is capable of transmitting that in a natural way. His competitiveness as well, on the pitch, brings the crowd to a different level, because of his desire to win.” None of it would matter without technical accomplishment, but Ramsdale has excelled so far. Only Édouard Mendy has a higher save percentage in the Premier League in 2021-22; it is arguable that his performance at Leicester, jointly with the Chelsea goalkeeper’s display at Brentford, was the goalkeeping highlight of the season to date. Distribution skills were a widely trailed reason for Arsenal’s decision to make their move and Ramsdale has broadened their range from the back: only Foster and his counterparts at Newcastle, Burnley and Everton have made a higher percentage of long passes. Arsenal will expect to bring up three straight wins against Watford, whose early form under Claudio Ranieri has been unpredictable. Foster, who should make his 371st Premier League appearance, is the Hornets’ model of consistency. “It was great to share the pitch with him,” Ramsdale said in the wake of that meeting in 2019. Master and protégé would both agree they belong on the same stage.A poster girl for 90s cool, Sadie Frost rose to prominence as a Vivienne Westwood model, before starring in Francis Ford Coppola’s Bram Stoker’s Dracula. The daughter of Mary Davidson and psychedelic artist David Vaughan, who died in 2003, Frost began her acting career with a Jelly Tots advert in 1968. She has since ventured into fashion (with the label FrostFrench), stage performance (one-woman play Touched … Like a Virgin) and film production (Set the Thames on Fire). She makes her feature-length directorial debut with Quant, a documentary about the influence of fashion icon Mary Quant. She lives in London and has four children: Finlay with her first husband, Spandau Ballet’s Gary Kemp, and Rafferty, Iris and Rudy with Jude Law. Mary Davidson I would have been 40 when this was taken. We were in a little black and white Tudor cottage in Shropshire, getting ready in my bedroom for Sadie’s wedding to Gary. It felt so exciting – lots of bridesmaids running around. Chaos, but really fun. I was nervous that day because the whole thing happened so fast. A few weeks before, Sadie called me from her holiday and said: “Mum, we’ve decided to get married. Can you get everything ready while we are away?” I had a few weeks to organise it all – the facilities weren’t great in the middle of the countryside, but it turned out really special. We had fireworks, and my dad led her down the aisle. He was incredibly proud. But he’s always been proud of Sadie. I got pregnant at 16 and loved it. My parents were absolutely horrified. And rightly so. But I was madly in love with David – he was completely different to anyone else I’d met. Labour took two hours – from 10am to midday. David wasn’t allowed in for the birth because we weren’t married, but afterwards he came in, looked at her and walked out. I didn’t see him again for 10 days. David was like that. He had mental health problems which I didn’t know about at the time. I was so young and inexperienced; trying to cope with him and a tiny baby was difficult. He was my first love and it was devastating. But he gave me Sadie. I had all sorts of jobs before she arrived. I was a magician’s assistant at one point, and was always on stage as a child. Sadie was a performer from the word go, too. As soon as she could walk, she could dance and sing. She wasn’t shy. We lived on Gloucester Avenue in Primrose Hill in north London, and she would always do performances with her friends in the street. We didn’t have much money, so I used to make clothes for Sadie and her sister Sunshine – high-waisted velvet trousers with little braces. Sadie loved fashion. We used to visit Carnaby Street and look at the Quant shop. At school she went through a brief stage of wanting to be quite straight, to fit in with all the other kids. Then when she was 14, she went punk. Her friend chopped all her long hair off – my pride and joy, gone! I’d always said there was nothing Sadie could do to shock me, but she did her best. In her Vivienne Westwood kilts and big boots, she did look pretty good, though. A mother-and-daughter relationship is forever changing, and you never stop worrying about them. It was difficult when her marriage with Gary didn’t work out. I loved him and always will, but that’s life. I never thought of Sadie as famous, but the paparazzi attention did get a lot. They even followed me, but I learned not to take much notice of tabloid stuff. People say me and Sadie are similar, but I don’t see it – she has always been so strong and curious. We’ve had amazing adventures together. I got to see her perform at the Roundhouse in London with the Argentinian dance troupe Fuerzabruta in 2014. She was doing acrobatics over my head! Always doing crazy things, always something new. That’s Sadie. Sadie Frost This photo captures such a tender moment – the mother-daughter relationship that you often take for granted. I was 22 and getting ready to get married. I thought I knew everything, but I didn’t know what marriage was about. I imagined this amazing princess life ahead of me, but it was never going to be that easy. I always knew our family was a bit different because my sister was called Sunshine Purple Tara Velvet and my mum dressed us in spectacular 60s clothes. Mum was still a kid; at times it felt as if she was more of a sister to me. She and Dad gave me a bohemian, traveller-like childhood. We lived on a bus which we drove from Belsize Park to Morocco. We’d pitch up everywhere from Formentera, in a house with no electricity, to the Mull of Kintyre. When I was born, I had jet-black hair and jaundice. According to my mum, when Dad came to the hospital he looked at me and said: “That’s not my baby – she’s ugly.” He was a character, but he was also an amazing man: a lot of my creative influences come from him and his anarchy. He was successful in the 60s – Dad’s collective (Vaughan, Dudley Edwards and Douglas Binder) painted Paul McCartney’s Magic Piano and the car on the cover of the Kinks’ compilation album Sunny Afternoon. But he was schizophrenic at a time when nobody really talked about mental health. When I was about four, he got spiked with acid and never really recovered. He had a breakdown and left my mum; set fire to everything. They were crazy times – not least because we had a family of five girls. There were never quiet moments at home. At five, I was doing mini-acting jobs and commercials, and was loving the attention. By the time I was 11, I’d got a scholarship to the Italia Conti stage school. I went from singing musicals in front of the mirror to cutting all my hair off, quitting stage school and going to the local comprehensive because I fancied the boy next door who was a punk. I’ve been brought up to never judge anyone: Mum treats everyone the same, and as a result I’ve never heard anyone say anything negative about her. I have a spiky side from my dad. Looking back at the 90s, there was so much judgment. Women were too thin, too fat, too shy, too loud, or too drunk. I was going through a public divorce, remarried (to Jude Law) and was being spotlighted by the press. I’d get pushed into cars so it would look like I’d just stumbled into them. Of course, there were times I did stumble. But that was just 1% of the time. I wasn’t wild. I was doing the healthy stuff that I do now – I’ve always been a vegetarian, eaten organic and exercised every day. I hate cocktails, I can’t drink white wine or champagne, and would get drunk after two glasses. It was the press deciding on an angle. When I look at this photo I see a huge umbilical cord connecting me and my mum. We’ve been through lots of children, a few divorces, and both realise we are probably better off being single. I would have hated to be a Hollywood star because I’ve wanted to be grounded, to be at home. Showing up, cooking good food and loving my family. That’s what’s important. Mum taught me that.Woven into your clothes is a material that takes on many disguises. It may have the texture of wool, the lightness of linen or the sleekness of silk. It’s in two-thirds of our clothing – and yet most of us don’t even know that it’s there. It’s plastic, and it’s a big problem. Today, about 69% of clothes are made up of synthetic fibres, including elastane, nylon and acrylic. Polyester is the most common, making up 52% of all fiber production. Plastic’s unique durability and versatility have made it indispensable to the fashion industry. “It’s in the waistband of your jeans, your shoes, in practically everything you wear, because plastic is this miracle material,” said George Harding-Rolls, campaigns adviser at the Changing Markets Foundation, an organization that investigates corporate practices. But there’s a climate cost: the raw material for these fibers is fossil fuels. Textile production consumes 1.35% of global oil production, more oil than Spain uses in a year, and significantly contributes to the fashion industry’s huge climate footprint. Synthetics also continue to have an impact long after production, shedding plastic microfibers into the environment when clothes are washed. In response, a growing number of brands are switching to recycled versions of synthetic fibers like polyester, often advertising these clothes as the “more sustainable” or “conscious” choice. This seems like an environmental win. But as brands weave more of these recycled yarns into their garments, some experts question whether they are just patching over fashion’s environmental harms. “We’ve been led to believe that recycled and sustainable are synonymous, when they are anything but,” said Maxine Bédat, executive director of the New Standard Institute, a non-profit pushing for a sustainable fashion industry. The common recycled substitute for virgin synthetics are polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles, the most common type of plastic bottles, which are produced in the billions each year. A survey of nearly 50 fashion brands by the Changing Markets Foundation revealed that 85% of them aimed to source recycled polyester from plastic bottles. Estimates show that recycled polyester could reduce emissions by up to 32% compared to virgin polyester. The demand for recycled synthetics from industries including fashion is expected to accelerate. Nike uses “some recycled material” in 60% of its products, said Seana Hannah, Nike’s vice-president of sustainable innovation. Recycled polyester is a primary focus: “Nike is the highest industry user of recycled poly and we divert more than 1bn plastic bottles on average a year from landfills,” Hannah said. Many big brands are setting targets. H&amp;M, Madewell, J Crew and Gap Inc are among more than 70 brands that have committed to increase the share of recycled polyester to 45% by 2025 as part of a recycled polyester challenge set by the Textile Exchange, a non-profit working to increase uptake of lower-impact fibers across the textile industry. Synthetics make up the second-largest share of fibers after cotton for Gap Inc, said Alice Hartley, director of product sustainability and circularity at the company. All four of its brands – Banana Republic, Old Navy, Athleta and Gap – have committed to the 2025 challenge, with Old Navy opting to increase its recycled polyester to 60%. The company says that recycled synthetics are not a magic bullet. “We really try to stay away from the term ‘sustainable garment’, because that implies that we’ve reached the destination. We really haven’t, it’s a continuous journey,” Hartley said. Yet this nuanced message may not be filtering through to consumers, especially as many other brands do describe recycled fabrics as sustainable. Experts worry that people may believe their purchases are impact-free – when that’s far from true. “If you are recycling synthetics, that doesn’t get rid of the microplastics problem,” said Harding-Rolls. Fibers continue shedding from recycled plastic yarns just as much as from virgin yarns, he said. PET bottles are also part of a well-established, closed-loop recycling system, where they can be efficiently recycled at least 10 times. The apparel industry is “taking from this closed-loop, and moving it into this linear system” because most of those clothes won’t be recycled, said Bédat. Converting plastic from bottles into clothes may actually accelerate its path to the landfill, especially for low-quality, fast-fashion garments which are often discarded after only a few uses. “One of the hallmarks of greenwashing is taking one piece of the puzzle and extrapolating broad benefits from that,” said Ashley Gill, senior director of standards and stakeholder engagement Textile Exchange. “Sustainability in the apparel industry is a really complex issue.” There are moves to use recycled textiles as feedstock for new clothes – less than 1% of clothes are currently recycled into new fibers – especially as projections from some markets suggest that cross-industry demand for recycled bottles will soon outstrip supply. But most clothes are made from a medley of fibers, and commercial-scale technology doesn’t yet exist to disentangle these. “A whole supply chain needs to be built up to really get to the commercial volumes that we need, to see more recycled fiber-to-fiber textiles,” Hartley said. Hyping the lower emissions impact of recycled yarns, said Bédat, distracts from fashion’s larger emissions source: textile mills, which process fibers into yarn to make fabric as well as dyeing and finishing, an energy-guzzling process that accounts for about 76% of a garment’s lifecycle emissions. “Brands are focusing on what magical material they can create, rather than doing the less sexy work of improving energy efficiency in textile mills,” said Bédat. “I don’t want to pooh-pooh progress, but we really do have to start prioritizing where we’re going to be able to move the needle the most.” Some innovators think the solution lies in finding viable alternatives to fossil fuel-derived synthetics that have the same performance traits. Materials science company Kintra Fibers has developed bio-based fibers made from corn and wheat designed to compost fully in nature. “That addresses the microfiber issue, and provides another pathway for textile circularity as well,” said Alissa Baier-Lentz, the company’s co-founder. The fiber can also be returned to its base components through chemical recycling and used as a feedstock for circular yarn production, Baier-Lentz said. “It’s just on us to get the [recycling] system in place, and work with industry partners to make it happen,” she said. In 2020 Kintra partnered with clothing brand Pangaia to scale up production of the compostable yarn; the company will launch the first clothes made with Kintra fibers in 2022. But no one innovation is going to solve the fashion industry’s complex plastics problem. Some think the real answer is moving the industry away from a model of excessive production and consumption. Brands churn out dozens of clothing collections a year and, in 2014, people bought 60% more clothing than in 2000 but kept it for half as long. Textile Exchange will focus some of its future industry challenges on “slowing down the growth rate” of clothing production, said Gill. Legislation will be needed to drive real, systemic change, said Harding-Rolls: “[The apparel industry] is one of the most lightly regulated industries in the world. What we need now are mandatory measures. We see it working in the plastics space, and it’s time for the fashion sector to follow.” There’s a role for us, too, said Bédat, and that involves people seeing themselves as citizens who can make ethical and political choices. “We’ve been trained to see ourselves primarily as consumers … that the way we solve these problems is by buying, which is the antithesis to the real solution.”Class assumptions, silly plots and merciless typecasting of women aside, a Gilbert and Sullivan operetta never fails to deliver some pleasure. What never? Well hardly – no need to finish. You know the rest. WS Gilbert’s brilliant verbal ingenuity has weeviled its way into the language even if the origin is forgotten. Likewise, Sullivan’s tunes, once heard, are liable to tickle the brain for ever. The duo’s early HMS Pinafore (1878) offers a non-sagging two hours of catchy songs and choruses. English National Opera has chosen it as the first new production of the 2021/22 season. Bumping into the Guardian’s illustrious theatre critic emeritus Michael Billington in the interval, I was taken with his suggestion that there’s a life cycle to G&amp;S appreciation, from youthful enthusiasm to middle-aged disdain – that inevitable, sophisticated cooling off, yes, guilty – to renewed pleasure in advanced years. (Michael actually said “when you reach senility” but I’m not allowing him that.) There’s much to unpack in his wise words, not least the question of whether new generations, in thrall to TikTok or Clash or the latest app usurper, will continue to want these shows. Is there still an appetite? ENO must think so. For its first ever Pinafore, the company has created a lavish and visually delicious staging built to last, directed by Cal McCrystal (responsible for ENO’s 2018 Iolanthe), designed by takis, choreographed by Lizzi Gee and conducted by Chris Hopkins. The jokes, many added, are eye-rolling and mildly smutty (you can do a lot with “poop deck”. They do.) One invention, an elderly woman who totters in demented fashion, is offensive and can be excised. The rest, in its physicality and ridiculousness, is innocently funny, occasionally sharp, and an ideal replacement for ENO’s Mikado (Jonathan Miller’s 1986 production), which has run its course. The headline name in the cast is actor and comedian Les Dennis, as Sir Joseph Porter, “ruler of the queen’s na-vee”. There’s some self-defensive banter as to whether or not Dennis can sing. His patter song, When I Was a Lad, is half spoken, and Hopkins has to keep the volume of the crisp and lively orchestra down, but Dennis is mostly on note and tackles his new, if momentary, career shift gamely. In this fare you need one performer whose presence zaps up the energy; who can sing, and articulate beautifully, and who has that rare comic timing that makes a mere twitch of an eyebrow funny. Here, that person is the bass baritone John Savournin (Captain Corcoran). Versatile in other repertoire, too, he has made a speciality of Gilbert and Sullivan, as singer and director. In his naughty, pip-squeak cabin boy, 13-year-old Johnny Jackson (alternating with Rufus Bateman), he has a perfect, pint-sized tap-dance partner. Their twinkle-toed hornpipe captivated. Elgan Llŷr Thomas and Alexandra Oomens are lyrical and fresh-toned as Ralph Rackstraw and Josephine. Henry Waddington, Marcus Farnsworth, Bethan Langford and, with and without clothes, Ossian Huskinson make witty contributions. The chorus excels. As Buttercup, Hilary Summers skilfully squeezes every ounce of comedy out of the role, which I suspect will get a good deal raunchier once the ad-libbing takes off. If the show, which has a long run, hits an iceberg, all that mast and rigging and dry ice can always be recommissioned for Wagner’s The Flying Dutchman. The exceptional string group 12 Ensemble, which performs without a conductor, was formed in 2012 by the violinist Eloisa-Fleur Thom and cellist Max Ruisi. At Kings Place, Thom was soloist in Max Richter’s Four Seasons: Recomposed, in which the British-German composer has discarded the majority of Vivaldi’s score and remade it: a ghostly silhouette of the original, strangely weightless and mesmerising despite an at times surging bass line pushing through. When the work was new in 2012, it caused a sensation and some predictable condescension, just as Nigel Kennedy’s wild, gamechanging version had in 1989. As it happens, tracks from that set feature on Kennedy’s new album Uncensored (Warner), launched to promote his autobiography of the same name. Cool-headed Richter and hot-headed “muvvafukkin” Kennedy – to quote the man himself – are as different as can be in approach. Both reinvigorate the music’s spirit. Star ratings (out of five) HMS Pinafore ★★★ 12 Ensemble ★★★★ HMS Pinafore is at the Coliseum, London, until 11 DecemberRandom phone searches for police officers should be carried out to check for inappropriate jokes and racist, sexist and homophobic slurs, the chief inspector of constabulary has said. Sir Tom Winsor said trawling WhatsApp and social media could act as a deterrent, much in the same way that the random drug testing of police officers does. Sir Tom also spoke of his revulsion over officers taking photographs of the murdered sisters Nicole Smallman and Bibaa Henry before sharing them in a group message with colleagues. In an interview with the Times, he condemned the actions of PC Deniz Jaffer and PC Jamie Lewis, who are facing jail for photographing the sisters and sharing the images on WhatsApp. The Guardian understands that Jaffer was a mentor for new recruits. The Met say he resigned in August and that he and Lewis will face a fast track process to sack them. “The police see people in their most desperate moments, in the worst times of their lives. Photographing the bodies of two people who’ve been murdered, it’s just unspeakably disgusting, revolting,” he said. Winsor said police must be tougher in vetting new officers to stop another Wayne Couzens joining the service, but also be more assiduous in “weeding out” officers who show a fondness for violence, enjoy exercising power over others, or display homophobia, racism or misogynistic tendencies. He said: “It seems to me that there is no strong case for saying there should not be random checks of their social media. If they put stuff up on Facebook, a public site, it’s public. WhatsApp communications are encrypted end to end, but they are still stored on the receiving device and indeed the sending device. So they can be interrogated.” Addressing concerns about how this could breach privacy, he said due to the extraordinary powers the police have, they should be held to higher standards than other professions. “Let’s say rather than put the information on an electronic message, the person in question wrote it down, put it in an envelope and posted it to another person. Nobody would seriously assert that the paper correspondence should be confidential in all circumstances. “The right to privacy of your correspondence, under the Human Rights Convention, is not an absolute right.” Last month it was announced that Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services (HMICFRS) had been commissioned to investigate vetting and anti-corruption in policing. The home secretary, Priti Patel, launched the investigation to examine why Couzens, sentenced to a whole-life tariff for the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard, had not been identified by the force as a sexually aggressive predator. Launching his annual state of policing report, Winsor warned that such a case could occur in any force – and said internal police investigation units needed to be staffed with some of the best detectives to guard against officers abusing their power for sexual purposes. HMICFRS declined to comment on Winsor’s remarks.It would be great to say that this lo-fi movie from Mississippi film-maker Jaclyn Bethany, set in a single location at a small-town New Year’s Eve party, was an indie find. Sadly it’s like a flabbily conceived and impossibly indulgent student film, and the meta-level of reality disclosed at the end is supercilious; it adds nothing to this unfunny and laborious piece of work with its muddy lighting, flat sound design and torpid, almost indistinguishable performances. However, the appearance of child actor Ivy George, playing a little girl who’s been sent by her family to complain about the party’s noise (and concealing a hidden motive) does pep things up a little. The drama takes place in the Californian town of Cambria on Highway One between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Maria (Aisha Fabienne Ross) is one of many young people at this party vocal-frying their lines to each other. She is disturbed (though the acting here doesn’t give much of a clue) to hear that someone called Nina (Juliette Labelle) is going to show up; this was the woman who left the neighbourhood 10 years before to follow her dream of acting in New York: Maria once had feelings for Nina. What will happen when they see each other again? The answer, bafflingly, is … not a whole heck of a lot. There seems to be no great emotional charge to their reunion, which was promising so much, and the drama does not concentrate all that clearly on it in any case, constantly straying away to all the other silly, unfunny little subplots: a guy with a mysterious Russian accent, an ethereal young woman dating her professor, a flippant and haughty Brit whingeing about being dumped. There is a strong sense of: so what? • Highway One is released on 5 November on cinemas, and on 8 November on digital platforms.Wriggling sunsets, intriguing mountains, desert plains strewn with old bits of technology, wiry flotsam half-drowning in a slow wave of sand: Sable’s setting is familiar – think Star Wars’ Tatooine, Dune’s Arrakis, or Mad Max’s wasteland – but unlike the others, no violence occurs in this sci-fi vista. Whatever battles scattered the bones of old civilisations across this world are long forgotten; your task here is not to become yet another warrior or world-saver, but a gap-year student, off to find herself. You play as Sable, a girl who, like all adolescents in her nomadic tribe, must transition to adulthood via a year-long rite of passage known as The Gilding. You set out from your home camp into the empty wilds on a rickety hoverbike, scavenging for parts to make your ride a little smoother, while trying out distinct roles and responsibilities in search of the position best suited to you in adult society. The things you choose to do and the people you help then unlock physical masks, the manifestation of different vocations, which allow Sable to try on different futures. This is a barren world, but rendered exquisitely, drawing careful inspiration from French cartoonist Jean “Moebius” Giraud in its blend of space and intricacy. Exploring its crannies delivers a slow-burn joy. Developed by a small team from north London (Shedworks, because the two founders began work in a garden shed), Sable is an unusual expression of the so-called “open world” – the dominant video game genre today. Most lead you in certain directions, ensuring you approach landmarks from the best angles, matching every plot beat with a suitable musical flourish. Here, by contrast, you are totally free to explore wherever, whenever, however you wish. There are whispered points of interest, but there is no wearying to-do list, and as such your journey and destination are uniquely, wonderfully personal.In 1984,at the age of 29, Dr Denis Mukwege moved to France from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to complete his training as a junior obstetrician. It was his first trip to Europe, and he had spent half his life savings on the air fare. The city of Angers was to be his home for five years, but he struggled to make it one. He would arrange to view flats and on arrival would be told that they had just been let. It took him a while to figure out that it was his skin colour that was making apartments disappear. He finally found a home in a houseshare with other students. When he took up his training position, he was astonished at how well staffed and equipped the hospital was compared with the one he had come from in the DRC, which delivered the same number of babies annually with just two doctors, as opposed to 30. Mukwege was already far more experienced than his peers in France. He had gained expertise beyond his years working in a small, under-resourced hospital where he operated on women and girls by torchlight and often broke away, mid-surgery, to consult medical literature for instructions. Assisting in a caesarean section, he surprised a French professor who, puzzled by Mukwege’s skill, asked him if he had done this before. “About 500 times,” Mukwege said. “Then why are you here?” the professor asked. After his training, Mukwege would return to the DRC and embark on a career that would save thousands of lives and galvanise doctors and activists globally. He became not only a surgeon, treating victims of rape as a weapon of war, but also an advocate, a champion of women in the DRC and across the world. He understood early on that his medical work would have limited impact until the root causes of sexual violence were eliminated. So he ran his surgeries, but also challenged different armed groups, and his own government, for their complicity in sexual war crimes, inviting threats to his own life. This has made him an inspiration to feminists the world over. Michaela Coel called him a “real hero”. Jill Biden said that “beyond healer to these women and girls, he is hope”. The author V (formerly Eve Ensler), after meeting Mukwege in 2008, forged a personal friendship with him, as well as a professional partnership to raise funds and awareness with him. This culminated in the construction of the City of Joy in Bukavu, Mukwege’s birth town in eastern DRC, “a safe space for raped women that offers protection, education, and inspiration for its residents”. Mukwege has been clearing those safe spaces for women since the first day he stepped into a small rural hospital in the DRC in 1983. Thirty-five years later, he found himself in Norway, accepting a Nobel Peace prize for his efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict. Today, Mukwege is talking to me on a video call from a hotel room in Paris, where he is on a whistle-stop tour prior to the French publication of his book, The Power of Women: A Doctor’s Journey of Hope and Healing. His accent is unmistakably French, as is his outfit: a dark suit, a white shirt, and a colourful silk cravat tucked into his collar. His body language, the way he leans into the screen, ear first, calls to mind a doctor listening before he can give an opinion. After I tell him that his book resonated with me, an African woman with a difficult obstetric experience in the past, and whose grandmother who lost multiple children shortly after birth, he won’t let me move on. “You have to talk about these things,” he says. In many parts of Africa, he explains, there is too much hidden trauma that people carry around. “We need to get people healthy so that they can have this capacity to think about the future. But when we have all this trauma, it can be hard.” *** Mukwege’s path to medicine started early, when he was a child in 1960s Bukavu, touring the homes of sick children with his pastor father. But it was the tenacity of his mother that explains why he’s here today. It wasn’t until he was an adult that he learned how close he came to death in the days after he was born. “I discovered that my mother fought for my life,” he says. Baby Denis was born at home, like his other siblings. His father was away and a neighbour doubled as a midwife. Her only qualification was the ownership of a sharp razor. His umbilical cord wasn’t cut correctly and the resulting septicaemia would have claimed him in hours. His mother was alone but acted fast, bundling him into a cloth wrapped across her back. A Swedish missionary nurse intervened at the 11th hour and arranged for treatment. Mukwege still speaks with awe about the lengths to which his mother, and women like her, have gone to save their children. “I am so grateful for what she did,” he says. He was unaware of his own brush with death when, at eight, he resolved to become a paediatrician. “When my father was praying for a child, I saw how weak he was.” His father explained to him why he was powerless. “He told me, ‘I am not a doctor.’ So my impression was, if my father can’t do it, I will do it. So we can be a team.” The two made a pact. Mukwege would become a doctor. He would heal, and his father would pray. The Power of Women is not a read for the faint-hearted. In it, Mukwege writes of how he arrived as a newly qualified doctor in a hospital in the village of Lemera, in a remote eastern province of the DRC. By the end, his intention to become a paediatrician had evaporated. The extent of the maternal health crisis in a country where women gave birth at home in a cruel lottery (both his grandmothers died in childbirth) overpowered him. Women were dying from treatable infections and birth obstructions. They would appear at the steps of the hospital after travelling for miles on foot, sometimes with their dead babies still inside them. Once he had completed his five years of training in Angers, he returned to Lemera in 1989 as the first trained obstetrician-gynaecologist in the region. It was the start of a career that would save an incalculable number of lives. *** In the mid-90s, Mukwege and his hospital were caught in the political and tribal crossfires of the Congo’s first and second war. Ethnic tensions in the region had boiled over, leading to the 1994 Rwandan genocide, where Hutu slaughtered Tutsi wherever they found them. Two years later, the Tutsi-led Rwandan army invaded eastern DRC (then Zaire) to hunt down Hutu groups who had fled into the country, and made common cause with the Congolese rebels there. Mukwege’s hospital in Lemera, near the Burundi and Rwanda borders, became engulfed in the chaos. Mukwege went from treating women who simply didn’t have adequate care to women who had been gang-raped, and then shot or stabbed in their vaginas. He tried hard to maintain neutrality, refusing to allow government troops to dictate to him who he should and should not treat. Lemera was eventually overrun by Tutsi forces. He was away at the time, but scores of patients and several members of his staff were killed. In 1997 Mukwege fled to Kenya. That year, rebel leader Laurent-Désiré Kabila was installed as president. A year later Mukwege returned to the DRC with his wife, Madeleine, and his three daughters, and started again. In 1999 he began to build a hospital in Panzi, a suburb of Bukavu, a maternal and sexual health facility that came to specialise in treating the sexual violence inflicted by various troops and rebel groups since the early 90s. Mukwege discovered that he was up against not just the physical effects of violence against women, but an entire patriarchy and justice system that ensured these crimes would continue. “I realised I wasn’t doing enough,” he says, and so he began to campaign, speak at conferences and implore the United Nations to do more. He had to get used to the global stage. The new government, he says, fought him at every turn. His work was seen as a form of political dissidence, a rebuke to authorities who had abandoned women; “a way to challenge them, to ask them to do what they are supposed to do. This didn’t create a good relationship.” In 2011, he was delivered a death threat by a Congolese minister in a mafia-like meeting in New York. Mukwege was told that if he wanted to return to the DRC and live, he would have to cancel a speech on sexual violence which he was scheduled to make at the UN. Bewildered, Mukwege relented. As Panzi hospital took in more victims (to date the hospital has treated 60,000), Mukwege was beginning to struggle psychologically, so horrific were the sexual injuries he saw on women, girls, even toddlers. His experience has taught him that the mind is slower to heal than the body. “I think that the reality is, you can’t work for a long time with all these women who are so traumatised without yourself being affected,” he says. “If you are not affected, you are not human.” Because he applied perfectionist standards during procedures, he would be paralysed by an internal monologue. He would ask himself: “What if this happened to my daughter, to my wife? But very quickly I understood that I could not go on that way.” Procedures that should have taken one hour were taking three, “because I was just thinking about all the questions that I get. When a girl of 14 asks you: ‘Doctor, do you think I will be able to have sex?’ But her vagina is completely destroyed. ‘Doctor, I hope that with this operation, I will not be incontinent.’ And you can’t reassure.” He shakes his head. “I decided to get a psychologist to support me.” Today, he manages to practise without taking on the burden of his patients’ turmoil. “Many of my staff, especially the psychologists, really burn out. It’s a very traumatising situation and you need to find a way to go on doing the job, without yourself falling down.” Mukwege, who is also a Pentecostal pastor, finds comfort in his faith, too. He preaches in a small local church in the same parish his father covered in Bukavu. I ask him how he can reconcile the horrors he has seen with his faith. “I believe that we are created to be good, but at any moment we have a choice. The God I believe in calls us to love others, and this is a decision. It’s a responsibility. It’s not a matter of God – it’s a matter of ourselves.” *** Mukwege’s book is barely a memoir. His story is told more in stories of the women he has met along the way, who, in extreme distress, found deeper wells of resilience. There is the young woman he treated after she escaped a gang of rapist soldiers, only to leave the hospital and return a few years later with HIV. There is the girl he attended to when she was raped and pregnant, who returned a little over a decade later with a daughter, herself pregnant as a result of rape. And there is the elderly woman who told him that she wanted an apology from the authorities for the fact that she had been gang-raped by a group of soldiers young enough to be her grandchildren. These women, he says, “don’t have many possibilities, they don’t have many means, but they still fight to save lives, to save their children. They try to give their children food, education. I am so grateful for African women – they are doing a lot for our humanity.” He sees them not as extreme cases that illustrate some African pathology, but examples of what happens anywhere in times of societal breakdown. In his book, he traces a broad sweep, from sexual violence in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, to the war in the former Yugoslavia, through Yazidi women enslaved by Islamic State, and Japanese “comfort women” forced into sexual slavery during the second world war, to show that women are the first victims when things fall apart. Mukwege believes that challenging misogyny in peacetime is paramount, in order to fortify society in moments of conflict. The first things to confront are silence and shame used “to keep women under control of men”. He adds: “When I talk in the west, I am always telling them: ‘What I am showing you, it’s happening even here, in your country.’” Mukwege sees feminism as a straightforward matter of striving for the good of women, not a state of political enlightenment. “Feminist,” he says, “is a word that found me doing what I was supposed to do for humanity. I know many women in Africa who are fighting daily for the rights of women, and they are not saying that they are feminists.” During our conversation, he returns, again and again, to the humbling tenacity he sees in these unwitting African feminists. *** In 2012, Mukwege survived the most serious assassination attempt yet, one in which a friend gave his own life to save him. As Mukwege was driving into his compound, five armed men jumped into his car. A man in the front seat jabbed a machine gun to Mukwege’s torso; from behind, another pressed a pistol to his temple. Mukwege stepped on the accelerator. The men were thrown briefly. Then he hit the brakes and swiftly opened the door of the car, seeing that the entrance of his own home was within reach. But he was too slow. The Kalashnikov that was held at his belly was now in front of him. Mukwege braced himself for death. At that moment, his friend and employee Joseph came running, shouting: “Papa! They are going to kill you!” Joseph had already been tied up by the assassins, but managed to free himself. Mukwege can’t quite remember what happened next. Shots were fired. He collapsed in a pool of blood. The assassins fled. When he came to, he realised the blood wasn’t his. Joseph, lying dead next to him, had drawn the gunfire. “I can’t explain how I am still alive,” he says. “When I was attacked in my house, and my friend was killed, the red line was drawn.” He reported the attack to the police, who were lethargic in their response. To this day he does not know who the assassins were. His responsibilities as a parent and husband took over, and he fled to the US. But a few weeks later, he received word that a group of women from the island of Idjwi in Lake Kivu, a few hours from Bukavu by boat, had written to then-President Kabila demanding that the government bring Mukwege back to the DRC, and provide him with security. The women then wrote to the UN secretary general, turned up at Panzi hospital, and pledged that, if money was the issue, they would sell fruit and vegetables to pay for his and his family’s plane tickets. “This really disarmed me. I could not resist,” he says. Only three months after he left the country, he returned. His reception was overwhelming. Women lined the roads for hours, celebrating and singing, as the authorities received him tersely, shamed by the spontaneous gathering. “It was 30km of women on the roads,” he says, beaming. “They were there just to say, ‘We are here and we want to support you. We want our doctor back, and we want to protect him.’” They followed him from the airport to Panzi hospital. “I did a small speech,” he says, after which one woman addressed the regional governor and the police chief. “She told him, ‘We will get 25 women who will do the security for the doctor, so he can treat other victims. We will feed him, we will protect him, and if someone wants to kill him, he will have to kill 25 women before they reach him.’” If there was any question that he would stop his work, it was settled. Now, he intends to stay in the DRC until “we can end violence on women in Congo, or bring justice – so women can feel that they are protected by a system.” He sounds determined, but also resigned, as if he no longer has a choice in the matter. The government continues to face challenges from rebel groups, and innocent civilians are again in the crossfire, while eastern DRC remains volatile and lawless. Mukwege has moved permanently into the Panzi hospital compound, and he has round-the-clock protection by armed guards and UN peacekeepers. But he also feels shielded by the power of women. “Sometimes I have this question: am I afraid? And my answer is yes. I don’t want to be a hero. But I have this feeling that there are these invisible forces around me.” Now, he says, “the ones who are trying to attempt on my life” might think twice. “They know that the women are there.” • The Power of Women, by Dr Denis Mukwege, is published by Short Books at £20. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Denis Mukwege will be in conversation with Annie Kelly for a Guardian Live online event on Tuesday 16 November. Book tickets hereJosh Hawley’s guide to being a Real Man Listen up, lads! The porn has got to stop. Ditto the video games. You’ve got to grab yourself a wife, get yourself a good old-fashioned manufacturing job, and reclaim what it means to be a red-blooded American male. Such is the advice, anyway, from Official Arbiter of Masculinity (and insurrection enthusiast) Senator Josh Hawley. The Missouri Republican is widely expected to launch a 2024 presidential bid and seems to be laying the groundwork for it by spewing all the right’s favourite culture war talking points. In a speech to a group of Republicans last Sunday, Hawley railed about how traditional masculinity is under attack by feminism and liberal elites. “Can we be surprised that after years of being told that they are the problem, that their manhood is the problem, more and more men are withdrawing into the enclave of idleness and pornography and video games?” Hawley asked. Well, yes, I am a little bit surprised actually. My little woman brain assumed that the reason men might be spending more time on the likes of Pornhub and Fortnite than they used to is because of the wonders of high-speed internet, rather than wokeness and feminism. Anyway, I thought Republicans were the party of personal responsibility? Not sure how that squares with blaming male “idleness” on women. Then again, of course, far-right populists don’t really care about being rational – they’re more focused on whipping up resentment. They preach about the importance of individual responsibility in one breath, then talk about how they’re victims of the all-powerful left in the other. I’m not sure whether Hawley believes self-awareness is a tenet of masculinity, but his speech certainly didn’t betray any. Part of Hawley’s speech was about how America needs men “who will enter the covenant of marriage and then honor it”. It seems like the guy may have forgotten about his buddy, Donald Trump, who has had five children from three marriages, bragged extensively about having extramarital affairs, and paid hush money to a porn star. But then again, by Hawley’s logic, I suppose feminism drove Trump to do all those things. Hawley’s “manhood” speech is easy to ridicule and has been widely mocked. However, it’s important to note that at the heart of it there is a truth that should be not ignored: men, as a whole, are not doing well. There has been a big rise in single men over the last few decades (from about 29% in 1990 to 39% in 2019); this group has fallen behind partnered men in earnings and education. Nearly 60% of students in American colleges and universities are women, and boys in America have been falling behind girls in school since the 1950s. And while there’s a loneliness epidemic everywhere, loneliness seems to be more likely in men. So are deaths of despair: men are more likely to die of suicide and alcohol abuse than women. Men are the victims of 77% of homicides and commit 90% of them. As Hawley noted, “Many men in [the US] are in crisis, and their ranks are swelling. And that’s not just a crisis for men. It’s a crisis for the republic.” It certainly is. Where there’s loneliness, resentment and poverty there’s a fertile breeding ground for fascism. Hawley and his pals, of course, are well aware of this. Trump successfully weaponized masculinity when he was president, and his acolytes are trying their hardest to do the same. One of the most depressing things about all this is that it’s not feminism men need to be worried about, it’s people like Hawley. It’s politicians who invent culture wars in order to distract from their unwillingness to solve real problems. It’s people who want to keep men trapped in the 1950s, adhering to rigid gender stereotypes that make them fundamentally unhappy. Men who identify with a traditional masculine ideology, it has been well-established, are worse off than men who don’t: they are less likely to seek psychological help and more likely to feel isolated. Toxic masculinity is bad for everyone. As are toxic politicians like Hawley. Spain expands free IVF to lesbians, single women, trans people This is the terrifying outcome of voting in a Socialist-led government: more people get access to healthcare. Meanwhile, in the capitalist paradise that is America, people have the freedom to choose between paying a lot of money to one health insurance company or paying a lot of money to another health insurance company. Why won’t anyone rent to London’s Vagina Museum? Multiple landlords have rejected the museum’s lease requests and the founders aren’t sure why. Magdalena Andersson is likely to become Sweden’s first female prime minister Sweden is the only Nordic country that hasn’t had a female prime minister yet. But that may soon change: Andersson, who has served as Sweden’s finance minister since 2014, was elected head of Sweden’s governing Social Democrats on Thursday. She now needs to win approval as prime minister from parliament. Polish activists protest after woman’s death in wake of strict abortion law There has been outrage in Poland after it was revealed that a 30-year-old woman died of septic shock in her 22nd week of pregnancy. Her family’s lawyer say that doctors didn’t perform an abortion, even though her foetus was lacking amniotic fluid. Activists say she is the first person to die due to recent draconian restrictions of Poland’s abortion law. Tinder has plans for a dating ‘metaverse’ God help us all. The week in potato-archy A New Zealand couple were doing a spot of weeding in their garden when they came across giant 7.9kg potato, which may very well be the biggest spud in the world. While the potato, nicknamed Doug, is big it’s not exactly beautiful – it’s also apparently “getting a bit pongy”. So, rather than keeping Doug on display, it seems the couple have plans to turn it into booze. After all, when life gives you enormous ugly potatoes, you gotta make potato vodka. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for pre-orderThe big 3-0 After six years, Adele is back with her fourth album, 30. On Sunday 14 November she’s previewing the whole shebang with Adele One Night Only, a two-hour CBS TV special complete with an intimate interview by Oprah Winfrey from a garden in a Santa Barbara beachside property. Someone like you gets a car There have been many notable Oprah TV events but one stands above the rest: the 2004 episode of her show when she gave every member of the studio audience a free Pontiac G6 Sedan. Oprah bellowed “you get a car” over and over to the crowd, who in turn went berserk in a manner so intense it was mildly terrifying – memes would follow. Beetle-mania In 2010, Oprah did it again: this time everyone got a free Volkswagen. Cue more wild reactions (again, vaguely terrifying). It was canny marketing from the Germans, who’ve long had some advertising tricks up their sleeve. Back in the 60s, just before The Graduate made Dustin Hoffman a star, the actor did a Mad Men-esque turn in a TV slot for VW; because they are slow to change their car models, he later told Ellen, the campaign ran for a decade. Key change Another bit of work that won’t place high in the Hoffman canon is his demanding choirmaster in 2014’s Boychoir, from French-Canadian director François Girard (watch Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould; rent on Apple/Prime in the UK). Peter Bradshaw described the film (later renamed The Choir), which also includes Debra Winger, Eddie Izzard and Kathy Bates as “very off-key”. Dolan double In 2018 Kathy Bates featured in a film by a Quebecois director, the youthful prodigy Xavier Dolan, then 29. His English language debut, The Death and Life of John F Donovan (streaming on Now/Sky Cinema), however, was considered a dud. The prolific Dolan also turns his hand to music videos, directing a clip for Adele’s recent single Easy on Me, as well as Hello, her 2015 comeback song. Hello from the other side ... of the rabbit hole. Listen Among the collaborators on 30 is Inflo, a producer and member of enigmatic and prodigious Black British music collective Sault – start with 2020’s Untitled (Black Is). Drink In a recent US Vogue interview Adele expressed her devotion to Whispering Angel Rosé. Rolling in the deep with this wine’s “refreshing acidity” will set you back £18.99.The former England batsman Mark Ramprakash has called for Yorkshire County Cricket Club to be “dragged into 2021” after what he said was their “disappointing” reaction to accusations of racism in the club. The scandal that has engulfed the club sparked recriminations and resignations on Friday as the chairman resigned and accused the English game’s governing body of failing to act. Roger Hutton, the chairman of Yorkshire, stepped down along with two other board members in the wake of the row over Azeem Rafiq, the former Yorkshire cricketer who in 2020 went public with allegations of racial harassment and prompted a 12-month investigation that did not result in any of the club’s current employees facing action. Ramprakash told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “These issues have come to the fore in recent years because of George Floyd, people no longer willing to accept racism, and things have moved quickly. But Yorkshire has not moved quickly. The attitudes of the board show, as Roger Hutton said, a lack of contrition and a lack of understanding of the gravity of what happened. “That is what is so disappointing. There need to be more elements coming together to drag Yorkshire into 2021 – and show that they can lead as a county club and that they want diversity.” Chris Willetts, who runs Platform Cricket, an initiative that aims to increase the participation of children from disadvantaged and black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds, told the Guardian that far more needs to be done to keep them in the cricket system. “The traditional cricket clubs may not have the capacity to increase diversity; they just take children who come through the door,” he said. “Actually, cricket is a hugely popular sport among the south Asian communities. Around 30% of cricketers are from a south Asian background. But that drops down to 4% at elite level and that is where it is going wrong. I don’t think anybody has been serious about tackling it; we just get token box-ticking. “This issue sits within a broader issue of inequalities, which you can see from privately educated adults dominating cricket. Even staying in further education is a block to access as cricketers are likely to hit their prime later than footballers. With lots of south Asian children, they may take on work at weekends in their late teens and then lose access to the game.” Cricketers who work with children at grassroots level to increase diversity warned on Saturday that far more work needs to be done to embed diversity and equality of access in the sport. Speaking to the Times, Ebony Rainford-Brent, the first black member of the England women’s cricket team said she felt “different” when she entered the world of cricket as a child. Rainford-Brent, who is also director of women’s cricket at Surrey County Cricket Club and a commentator, said that initially she did not take up the sport because of a lack of diversity. “I’m on the board at Surrey, which is a great club that’s been going for 175 years. We’re in the heart of quite a strong black community, but there’s none coming through our system,” she said. She added that being on the board of the club has given her the platform to raise the issue of a lack of diversity and to work to change that. She runs a charity called ACE, which seeks to engage young people of African and Caribbean heritage in the sport.To the British, the swan is not so much a bird as a national treasure – the avian equivalent of Dame Judi Dench or Sir David Attenborough. Its unique status is a result of its long and complex history living alongside us, a relationship that goes back well over a thousand years. Alarm at reports last week that dozens of swans and cygnets have died of bird flu in Shakespeare’s home town of Stratford-upon-Avon – up to half of the town’s population – reminded us just how passionate the British public are about the bird. Swans are both more vulnerable than many other birds to the disease, and being so large and obvious, when they do have symptoms more likely to get noticed. The town’s former mayor, Cyril Bennis, who has been campaigning on behalf of the local swans for four decades, has described the deaths as “heartbreaking”. The swans in Stratford – and the species we usually see on our park ponds, lakes, rivers and gravel pits – are mute swans; yet despite this name, they can and do make a wide range of sounds. “Mute” was chosen to contrast with the whooper swan which, as its name suggests, makes a loud, honking call when in flight. What is not so well known is that the mute swan used to be called the “tame swan”. This was partly to distinguish it from the two species of “wild swan” – the whooper and its smaller cousin, the Bewick’s – both of which are winter visitors to Britain from Iceland, Scandinavia and Siberia. The description “tame” was applied because, for more than a millennium from the Anglo-Saxon era through to the 19th century, swans were farmed in swanneries. Today, only one of these, at Abbotsbury in Dorset, survives. Swans were kept not simply as a source of feathers and meat (the tender cygnets being preferred to the adults’ much tougher, gamier flesh), but also as a status symbol; owning them was in the gift of the monarch, who would bestow on favoured nobles the right to keep swans. Such was the value of these magnificent birds that to kill a swan was classed as treason, and taking even a single egg could result in a year’s imprisonment. The fact that swans were in the gift of the crown led to another myth – that all Britain’s swans are owned by the Queen. They are not; although the annual swan-upping ceremony on the River Thames, in which the year’s new cygnets are caught and marked, does denote royal ownership of some. Unlike most birds, swans are indeed very tame. Sometimes they may approach closer than you would prefer, especially if you are on their territory in the breeding season. And although the belief that a swan can break a man’s arm with a single blow of its wing is another myth, when a large male shuffles towards you with wings outstretched, hissing loudly, it can be pretty scary. As the Queen’s official swan warden, Professor Christopher Perrins, points out, not everybody likes swans. Not surprisingly for such a huge and noticeable bird, swans feature more than almost any other species in myths and legends, art and literature, across much of the northern hemisphere. Ancient swan myths include Leda and the Swan. This dates back to ancient Greece, when the all-powerful god Zeus supposedly turned himself into a swan so that he could approach – and then seduce – Leda, Queen of Sparta. This story has featured prominently in art, poems and music by, among others, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, WB Yeats and Lou Reed, all of whom were seemingly captivated by the taboo subject of sex between a swan and a woman. Perhaps the most celebrated depiction of swans is in Tchaikovsky’s stunning Swan Lake, the most performed, and possibly best-loved, ballet of all time. As well as the wonderful music, its popularity is surely also due to the visual beauty of the white swan at the heart of the story. A darker side to swans was explored in the 2010 film Black Swan, starring Natalie Portman, a tale of rivalry and madness, which swept the board at the following year’s Oscars. Amid all this history, mythology and culture, it is easy to forget that the swan is a real bird which, despite its size, can also be extremely vulnerable. As well as suffering from bird flu, swans can die from attacks by dogs, plastic waste, discarded fishing tackle, collisions with pylons or wind turbines, and – a very current threat – waterways polluted with raw sewage. At the end of the first lockdown in summer 2020, there was also a steep rise in the number of swans being deliberately killed with airguns and catapults – often leaving behind cygnets to starve to death. As a nation we may love swans, but we also cause them untold harm. The Swan: A Biography, by Stephen Moss (Square Peg) is out now. He is a naturalist and author based in Somerset, who runs the MA nature and travel writing course at Bath Spa UniversityThe former Trump cabinet member Nikki Haley was accused of ageism, as well as a startling lack of awareness about senior figures in her own party, after questioning Joe Biden’s mental health and suggesting there should be “some sort of cognitive test” for office holders “above a certain age”. Haley made the remarks in an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network – a conservative outlet founded by and often featuring the televangelist Pat Robertson, who turned 91 last March. Asked about the mental health of the president, who turns 79 later this month, the former ambassador to the United Nations first avoided directly commenting on Biden. “What I’ll tell you,” she said, “is rather than making this about a person, we seriously need to have a conversation that if you’re going to have anyone above a certain age in a position of power, whether it’s the House, whether it’s the Senate, whether it’s vice-president, whether it’s president, you should have some sort of cognitive test.” Haley, 49, is widely seen to have ambitions to run for the Republican presidential nomination in 2024. But in a party dominated by older men, her remarks may not have done her too many favours. The former president Donald Trump is 75 – and has boasted, while in office and facing questions about his mental acuity, of passing a simple cognitive test. The Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, is 79. The oldest Republican in the Senate, Chuck Grassley of Iowa, is 88 and has said he will run for another six-year term. Democratic leadership is also dominated by older politicians. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, is 81. The House majority leader, Steny Hoyer, is 82. In the Senate, Dianne Feinstein of California is three months older than Grassley. Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, is a relatively sprightly 70. Haley pressed on. “Just like you have to show your tax returns,” she said, “you should have some sort of health screening so that people have faith in what you’re doing.” Candidates for president do not have to show their tax returns. Trump memorably upended the convention that they did so by refusing to release his. “Right now,” Haley continued, “let’s face it, we’ve gotten a lot of people in leadership positions that are old. And that’s not being disrespectful. That’s a fact. And when it comes to that, this shouldn’t be partisan. We should seriously be looking at the ages of the people that are running our country, and understand if that’s what we want.” Finally, Haley came round to the subject of the question. “You look at Biden,” she said, “and I think there’s a concern. I think there’s a concern when people say, ‘You know, who’s really making the decisions here.’ That’s his job to prove that he’s making the decisions, but it’s not helping us when he says, ‘Oh, I didn’t know that France wasn’t included in the idea that we were going to do this [defence] deal with the UK and Australia.’ “He can’t act like he doesn’t know something. Because every time he acts like he doesn’t know something, from ‘OK, they tell me to call on these reporters,’ you know, he keeps giving signals that he’s not with it. “So it’s not people hating on Biden, it’s Biden really showing the country that he’s not totally in charge and that makes everyone nervous.” Amid widespread criticism, Sarah Longwell, publisher of the Bulwark, a conservative anti-Trump outlet, said: “What I’m hearing is: Nikki Haley calls on Donald Trump to release his tax returns and prove mental competency ahead of 2024.” In South Carolina, where Haley was governor before she joined Trump’s cabinet, a columnist for the State newspaper said her comments “reeked of ageism and that’s nothing to joke about”. Trudi Gilfillian added: “According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, ‘An employment policy or practice that applies to everyone, regardless of age, can be illegal if it has a negative impact on applicants or employees age 40 or older and is not based on a reasonable factor other than age.’ “Given that standard, perhaps all politicians of all ages should be taking these cognitive tests Haley supports. I’d wager some of the youngest ones likely wouldn’t fare too well.”That’s it for today’s blog, but you can follow England v South Africa with Tim. Thanks for your company and emails, ta-ra! Good news for Australia: England have won the toss and will bowl first Dew is often a big factor at Sharjah, so that’s potentially a huge advantage to England. Don’t quote me on this, but Australia will play Pakistan in the second semi-final in Dubai on Thursday. We don’t know the exact permutations yet*, but South Africa will have to hammer England if they are to reach the semi-finals ahead of Australia. You can follow that game with the great Tim de Lisle. * The commentator Mark Nicholas thinks South Africa would need to win by around 57 runs if they bat first, or reach their target in 12.3 overs if they are chasing. The Australian players form a guard of honour for Bravo and Gayle. They are the highest wicket-taker and run-scorer in T20 history, not that numbers do justice to the joy of watching them play. Chris Gayle and Dwayne Bravo, two of the true greats of T20 cricket, say their farewells - first to their teammates and then the Australian players when they walk onto the field. David Warner walks off, drenched in sweat and well and truly back in form. He was close to his best today, making 89 not out from 56 balls with nine fours and four sixes. 16.2 over: Australia 161-2 (Warner 89, Maxwell 0) Warner works Chase for four to complete an emphatic victory, one that should - should - be enough to put them in the semi-finals. 16th over: Australia 157-2 (target 158; Warner 84, Maxwell 0) Marsh took Gayle’s gesture in the right spirit - the game is won, and Marsh played superbly to make 53 from 32 balls. Hahaha, Chris Gayle has taken one last wicket! With one run needed to win, Mitch Marsh blasted straight to mid-off. Gayle broke into a big smile and then ran after Marsh to jump on his back in celebration. Fantastic stuff. 15th over: Australia 150-1 (target 158; Warner 80, Marsh 53) Dwayne Bravo bowls his last over as a West Indies player. Warner picks a wide slower ball, runs across his stumps and switch hits it for four - and then he hoicks the next delivery into the crowd! This has been quite brilliant for Australia. Bravo’s final delivery is a loopy yorker that Warner drives for a single. Australia are eight runs from victory. 14th over: Australia 133-1 (target 158; Warner 69, Marsh 50) Everything is going Australia’s way. Marsh edges consecutive deliveries from Holder for four, and a single takes him to a terrific fifty from only 28 balls. It’s his first in the World Cup. 13th over: Australia 122-1 (target 158; Warner 68, Marsh 41) Dwayne Bravo and Chris Gayle are enjoying themselves in their final game (probably, in Gayle’s case) for the West Indies. Gayle can’t stop smiling, and Bravo is going through his repertoire of slower balls. Warner continues Australia’s march to victory, and probably the semi-finals, by squirting a wide yorker for four. That’s another brilliant shot. I think it’s fair to say he’s back in form. Australia need 36 to win. 12th over: Australia 114-1 (target 158; Warner 62, Marsh 40) Warner is beaten for pace by Russell, yet still manages to flap a hook to fine leg for four. A single off the other five deliveries make it nine from the over. This is the dream scenario for Australia, whose net run-rate has had quite a makeover since they were trounced by England a week ago. 11th over: Australia 105-1 (target 158; Warner 55, Marsh 38) Bravo bowls a rare boundaryless over, including a lovely slower ball that beats Warner, but Australia are still cruising. Mitch Marsh has quietly raced to 38 from 21 balls. 10th over: Australia 98-1 (target 158; Warner 54, Marsh 33) Andre Russell comes into the attack. A single from Warner brings up a dominant, assured fifty partnership from 35 balls, and then Marsh picks Russell up for six to deep backward square. He timed that beautifully. Another flick to the same area bounces through the fielder Hosein for four more, and Marsh makes it 14 from three balls with a squeeze to third man. This isn’t a run-chase, it’s a run-stroll, and it’s going perfectly for Australia. At this rate, South Africa will need snookers to reach the semi-final. 9th over: Australia 82-1 (target 158; Warner 53, Marsh 18) Yeeha! Warner smashes Walsh over midwicket for a big six, his third of the innings. A two off the next ball brings up a skilful, impatient half-century from only 29 balls. Right here, right now, it looks like he is batting Australia into the semi-finals. 8th over: Australia 71-1 (target 158; Warner 43, Marsh 17) Marsh swaggers down the track to chip Hosein handsomely for six. Warner has a stroke of luck later in the over when a top-edged pull drops short of mid-on. Ten runs from the over; Australia need 87 from 72 balls. If they can get them in something like 50 balls, so much the better. Warner is not out! He inside-edged a reverse sweep off Hosein onto the pad, and it pitched outside leg anyway. WEST INDIES REVIEW FOR LBW AGAINST WARNER! It’s a desperate review, I think he’ll be fine. 7th over: Australia 61-1 (target 158; Warner 41, Marsh 9) It’s time for the legspinner Hayden Walsh Jr, who bowled so well against Australia in the Caribbean recently. Marsh, whose T20 record against legspin isn’t the best, reverse-sweeps assertively for four. So far so good for Australia; if they keep this up they’ll have the opportunity to win with two or three overs to spare. That would make life very difficult for South Africa. 6th over: Australia 53-1 (target 158; Warner 40, Marsh 3) Warner sweeps Hosein high over backward square leg for six, and then skids back in his crease to back cut for four. This is pure class from Warner, who has raced to 40 from 22 balls. 5th over: Australia 41-1 (target 158; Warner 29, Marsh 2) Dwayne Bravo comes into the attack. His first ball is full, slightly wide and launched over mid-off by Warner. He is batting seriously well. Bravo pulls it back thereafter, with only a couple of singles from the last five deliveries. Australia need 117 from 90 balls to win. “Kudos for adding to the lexicon of batting terms with your reference to a ‘belaboured’ drive down the ground,” says Brian Withington. “Am I dimly recalling a passing Popeye reference?” Well, I don’t know. You’ll have to ask your YouTube. 4th over: Australia 35-1 (target 158; Warner 24, Marsh 1) Good work from Hosein, who has figures of 2-0-7-1. “I think Australia will struggle to make the target and win this match,” writes Lawrie Smith, “and so will be heavily dependent on the Eng vs SA result and the associated NRR.” I think they’ll win this game, though I’m not certain that will be enough. The toss in the other match could be so important. Aaron Finch goes! It was a good piece of bowling from Hosein, who looks a really decent find. Finch tried to dab a ball that drifted in a touch and was too tight for the shot. All Finch could do was drag it back onto the stumps. 3rd over: Australia 33-0 (target 158; Warner 23, Finch 9) Brilliant stuff from Warner, who batters the new bowler Jason Holder for 16 from three balls. He drives Holder over mid-on, glides the ball just past the diving Pooran - that was very similar to his dismissal against England - and then launches a short ball over the ropes at wide long-on. He has 23 from 11 balls. 2nd over: Australia 18-0 (target 158; Warner 9, Finch 8) Spin at both ends, with Roston Chase sharing the new ball. Warner, who looks busy even by his standards, makes room to thump a boundary through extra cover. And then Finch, who eats offspinners for brunch, batters four through mid-off. An already expensive over from Chase gets worse when he oversteps, which means a free-hit for Finch. He drags it into the leg side for a single, which makes it 13 from the over. 1st over: Australia 5-0 (target 158; Warner 4, Finch 1) Warner is beaten first ball, flashing at a lovely delivery from Hosein that swerves away from the bat. It’s the start of a threatening first over from Hosein, who almost slips an inswinger through Finch later in the over. Finch just managed to drag his bat across in time. Five runs from the over. The players are back out on the field. The left-arm spinner Akeal Hosein will open the bowling. I’d still fancy Australia to chase that target maybe seven times out of 10, but the chances of massaging their net run-rate have diminished. West Indies scored 58 from the last five overs. 20th over: West Indies 157-7 (Russell 18, Holder 1) Andre Russell finishes the innings with consecutive sixes! The first was a monstrous pull, 111 metres in fact, and then he belaboured a low full toss down the ground. Russell ends with 18 from seven balls, and Australia need 158 to win. Nobody said it was easy. Pollard lifts Starc miles in the air towards long-on, where Maxwell crouches to take a comfortable catch. Pollard made 44 from 31 balls, and there are four balls remaining. 19th over: West Indies 143-6 (Pollard 44, Russell 5) Andre Russell improvises smartly to flick his first ball, a leg-stump yorker from Cummins, past short fine leg for four. But that aside it’s another punishment-free over for Australia, with only three singles. Cummins finishes with 4-0-37-1. 18th over: West Indies 136-6 (Pollard 42, Russell 0) Pollard is looking pretty dangerous now. He works Hazlewood for two boundaries in three balls, and again keeps the strike with a single off the last ball. He has 42 from 27; Hazlewood finishes with 4-0-39-4, a fine comeback after his first over went for 19. Dwayne Bravo has batted his last for the West Indies. He swiped a slower ball from Hazlewood down the ground, where Warner took an excellent running catch. He embraces Kieron Pollard, who takes off his gloves to applaud Bravo off the field, and then hugs the incoming Andre Russell. He has entertained us for so long - I can remember a delightful performance to beat India at the World T20 as long ago as 2009. 17th over: West Indies 123-5 (Pollard 30, Bravo 10) Warner saves two runs with an outstanding diving stop at long-off, but he can do nowt when Pollard cuffs the next ball - a low full toss from Cummins - down the ground for four. Pollard top-edges a pull for six later in the over and keeps the strike with a single off the last ball. That’s West Indies’ best over since the second of the innings; 14 runs from it. “I’ve just realised,” writes Robert Kirchhof, “that even if the Aussies win this game, the Poms could deliberately lose to the Saffas by a lot and kick us out of the tournament.” I wouldn’t worry – there’s no chance Eoin Morgan would allow that. The big thing in that game is the toss. South Africa will be desperate to bat second: partly because of the conditions, partly because they will know exactly what they need to do to reach the semi-finals (if Australia win this game). It could end up with South Africa needing to score something like 142 in 16.2 overs to reach the semi-finals. 16th over: West Indies 109-5 (Pollard 17, Bravo 10) Bravo is almost run out after being sent back by Pollard. The bowler Starc collected the throw and missed the stumps, but I think Bravo was home by then. He’d have been out with a direct hit though. After a slow start, three from eight balls, Bravo gives his strike-rate a boost by driving Starc handsomely over wide mid-off for six. We’ve seen that shot so many times in the past 15 years. 15th over: West Indies 99-5 (Pollard 15, Bravo 2) Pollard lumbers down the track to Marsh, who sees him coming and beats him with a slower bouncer. Later in the over he smears the ball towards the non-striker Bravo, who jumps out of the way and throws his bat in the air. Five from the over. You can never sit comfortably against Pollard, Bravo and Russell, but for now Australia have this game under control. 14th over: West Indies 94-5 (Pollard 10, Bravo 2) Zampa hurries through his final over, conceding only two runs, and ends another classy, clever spell with figures of 4-0-20-1. 13th over: West Indies 92-5 (Pollard 9, Bravo 1) The new batter is the retiring Dwayne Bravo. Australia are doing very well to restrict West Indies’ boundaries, with just three in seven overs since the Powerplay. “Part of me worries that Australia are on an upward curve and growing with confidence as the tournament progresses,” writes every England fan ever, but specifically Tom Van der Gucht. “I’ve spent too many years experiencing the Aussie short-form juggernaut to ever write them off and can envisage them winning this comfortably before arriving in the knockout stages with renewed vigour and confidence that builds and builds until they steamroller England in the final and carry it on to the Ashes where they win 6-0 even though there’s only five Tests (they’ll win one of the Tests in under a day, organise a second one in the remaining four days and win that too).” Shimron Hetmyer walks! He tried to ride a short ball from Hazlewood but could only glove it down the leg side to Matthew Wade. That’s another very good wicket for the Aussies - Hetmyer was playing nicely and made 27 from 28 balls. 12th over: West Indies 87-4 (Hetmyer 24, Pollard 8) Oof, Zampa drops Pollard off his own bowling! Pollard drove a low full toss whence it came, and Zampa couldn’t hang on to a sharp two-handed chance above his head. He had a second go as he fell backwards but couldn’t reach the rebound with his left hand. The next ball is a googly that almost gets through Pollard, and later in the over Hetmyer just manages to get his bat down on a quicker delivery. Classy stuff from Zampa - and then from Pollard, who ruins an otherwise superb over for Australia by squeezing the ball behind point for four. 11th over: West Indies 81-4 (Hetmyer 23, Pollard 3) Mitchell Starc is back. West Indies bat deep - Jason Holder is No9 - so Australia won’t feel comfortable just yet. Starc enquires for LBW when a slower ball hits Pollard on the pad; it pitched outside leg again. Seven from the over. “Thanks to Brian (9th over) for that link, which actually I did not even have to click on for the images to appear in my scarred brain,” says Ian Copestake. “Does this mean YouTube is inside me?” Stop plagiarising future episodes of Black Mirror. 10th over: West Indies 74-4 (Hetmyer 19, Pollard 1) Hetmyer survives an optimistic LBW appeal from Zampa. Pitched outside leg. Steve Smith takes a lovely catch to get rid of the dangerous Evin Lewis! Zampa, who had been swept for four the previous ball, followed up with a slightly slower googly. Lewis sliced it high in the air, and Smith ran round from long off to take the catch two-handed as he dived forward. That was superbly done, by Smith and Zampa. 9th over: West Indies 65-3 (Lewis 25, Hetmyer 17) Those three quick wickets have inevitably curbed West Indies’ boundary-hitting, with most of the runs coming in singles at the moment. The moment I type that, Hetmyer larrups Marsh to long-off for four. Warner ran round the boundary and got something on the ball, but it was hit with ferocious power and went straight through him. “So Ian Copestake wants to name and shame anthem non-singers?” writes Brian Withington. “May I present Exhibit A for the prosecution of a certain Welsh Secretary. If only this was his worst offence against humanity...” 8th over: West Indies 57-3 (Lewis 23, Hetmyer 11) It’s time for Adam Zampa, who has quietly become one of the world’s best T20 bowlers. Lewis survives a run-out chance when Wade’s throw misses the stumps at the non-striker’s end; he would have been a long way short had Wade hit. Just four from the over. Australia are putting the squeeze on very effectively - in the last five overs West Indies are 22 for two. 7th over: West Indies 53-3 (Lewis 22, Hetmyer 9) Hetmyer misses a wild mow across the line. The review aside, it was an excellent over for Australia - just three from it. Lewis is not out! It was an awful review. Lewis tried to pull a ball from the new bowler Mitch Marsh that kept low and brushed the flap of the pad. It was missing off stump by a mile. AUSTRALIA REVIEW FOR LBW AGAINST LEWIS! I don’t think this is out, I’m not sure why I bothered with the bold type and exclamation mark. 6th over: West Indies 50-3 (Lewis 21, Hetmyer 7) Glenn Maxwell comes into the attack. His fourth ball is too short, too straight, and Lewis slams it round the corner for four. That aside it’s an excellent over from Maxwell. 5th over: West Indies 44-3 (Lewis 16, Hetmyer 6) After a few singles, Hetmyer waves Cummins classily through extra cover for four. Seven from the over in total. Australia will take that during a Powerplay. 4th over: West Indies 37-3 (Lewis 14, Hetmyer 1) A tremendous second over from Hazlewood: two runs, two wickets and even two dot balls. Roston Chase goes second ball! This was a Test-match dismissal, a gorgeous delivery that nipped off the seam and went through the gate to ping the off stump. Hazlewood’s first over went for 19; in his second he has taken two wickets in three balls without conceding a run. Anyone? Anyone? (CB) Fry? Another one! Nicholas Pooran cloths a heavy, length delivery from Hazlewood straight to Mitch Marsh in the covers. That was a pretty naive shot, especially so early in the innings. 3rd over: West Indies 35-1 (Lewis 13, Pooran 4) The way Chris Gayle raised his bat as he left the field suggests this his last innings for the West Indies, though we will still see him in franchise cricket. It’s a cliche, I know, but he is the closest we have to a T20 version of Bradman. The new batter, Nicholas Pooran, gets off the mark by driving his second ball through mid-on for four. That was a delightful stroke. Cummins then has an optimistic LBW appeal turned down; it pitched outside leg. Gone! Chris Gayle muscles Pat Cummins’ first ball over long on for six, but then drags the next one back onto the stumps. That’s a vital wicket for Australia: Gayle made 15 from nine balls and was looking pretty ominous. 2nd over: West Indies 24-0 (Gayle 9, Lewis 13) Josh Hazlewood’s first over has disappeared for 20! It started with Evin Lewis, who belted the first three deliveries for four: a spectacular flat pull, a drag to fine leg and a hearty thump back over the bowler’s head. Gayle joined in, of course he did, by heaving a short ball over midwicket for six. “Please name those who did not verbally anthemise,” says Ian Copestake. “We need more shaming in the game to help rid it of non-singers.” Gary Neville. Let’s go back in time to 1996 and cancel him via the burgeoning platforms of the information superhighway. 1st over: West Indies 4-0 (Gayle 3, Lewis 0) Starc’s first ball is an attempted yorker that Gayle inside-edges for a couple. Gayle then scrambles a quick single to mid-off; if this is his last game for the West Indies, I doubt he’ll miss running (sic) between the wickets. A leg-bye brings Gayle back on strike, and he leaves a couple of deliveries outside off stump. He has always taken a bit of time to get his eye in, even in T20. He’s not going to change now. “Finally, recognition for Karen O’s subtle cricket agenda,” says Matt Dony. “Wasn’t Maps basically a paean to bowling straight and full, and not straying beyond leg stump? (Rob, they don’t love you like I love you!)” And that line in Art Star – “I’ve been working on a piece that speaks of sex and desperation” – refers to her 10,000-word epic on England’s tour of New Zealand in 1983-84. After the players take a knee, Mitchell Starc marks out his run. Chris Gayle will face the first ball. The players line up for the anthems. Some players sing lustily, others awkwardly; some don’t sing at all. It’s time for the cricket to start. “As an England fan anticipating another difficult Ashes winter, I find it important to enjoy little crumbs of pleasure when you find them,” says Robert Ellson. “It’s only just dawned on me that, regardless of what happens in the first match today, Australians will be cheering on England in the evening game. What a delightful thought.” In that first sentence, the word ‘difficult’ is doing a lot of heavy lifting. Turns out this isn’t a meaningless game for West Indies. Their T20 ranking is such that they need to win to qualify automatically for the Super 12s at next year’s World Cup. Yes, I did just hear that on the TV, and now I’m drowning in context. Australia are unchanged. West Indies bring in the legspinner Hayden Walsh Jr - who had a tremendous series against Australia in July - for Ravi Rampaul. Australia Finch (c), Warner, Marsh, Smith, Maxwell, Stoinis, Wade (wk), Cummins, Starc, Zampa, Hazlewood. West Indies Lewis, Gayle, Pooran (wk), Chase, Hetmyer, Pollard (c), Russell, Bravo, Holder, Hosein, Walsh. Aaron Finch says Australia aren’t thinking about net run-rate. “We’re here to win two points, that’s all.” Everything. Everyone. Everywhere. Ends. We know that Dwayne Bravo, one of the T20 greats, will play his last game for the West Indies tonight. He might not be the only one; most people think it will be Chris Gayle’s farewell too. It’s certainly the end of an era. But my word, what joy and exhilaration they have provided over the past decade. West Indies 2012-21: remember the team. Hello, good day and welcome to live coverage of Australia v West Indies in Abu Dhabi. Whatever your preferred nomenclature – Judgement Day, Super Saturday or, as it was once known, Saturday – this is a very big day (and night) for Australia. In around 10 hours’ time they will either be planning for a semi-final, probably against Pakistan in Dubai on Thursday, or arranging flight DO1 back to Australia. You almost certainly know the state of play, but let’s have a quick recap just in case. There are two games today that will decide whether Australia reach the semi-final of the men’s T20 World Cup for the first time since 2012: this one in Abu Dhabi and then England v South Africa in Sharjah. The use of net run-rate (NRR) as a tiebreaker, and the fact the two matches are staggered, means a whole heap of uncertainty. Australia could lose and go through; they could also win and go out. Australia’s marmalisation of Bangladesh means they are ahead of South Africa on NRR. They also have the easier fixture, at least theoretically, against a West Indies side who are out of the tournament and at the end of an era (though that may liberate them for one last orgy of sixes). South Africa’s trump card is the schedule. For most of this tournament it’s been beneficial to bat second. Today, it’s an even bigger advantage to play second. South Africa will start their game against England knowing exactly what they need to do to qualify. (It’s possible that both Australia and South Africa could go through at England’s expense, but it’s probably a 500/1 shot.) All Australia can do is win against West Indies – the bigger, the better, as renowned cricket tragic Karen O would say – and hope England do the necessary, whatever that may be, against South Africa. It’s going to be a long night, so you might want to source a few things before play starts: industrial-strength caffeine, valium, a calculator. And if you know how to set up a NRR spreadsheet, you’re my new best friend. The match starts at 2pm in Abu Dhabi, 9pm AEDT, 10am GMTThe reaction to Everton’s 13-minute collapse against Watford was telling. Scorn rained down on players and manager alike after a 2-1 lead in the 78th minute became a 5-2 defeat by the 91st, but a sizeable number of fans in the main stand at Goodison Park headed for the directors’ box to accuse the major shareholder, Farhad Moshiri, and the director of football, Marcel Brands, of deep-rooted mismanagement. Anger has understandably risen to the top. After three successive Premier League defeats, one win in seven matches and a woeful response to the Watford debacle at Wolves on Monday, it is Rafael Benítez’s turn in a spotlight that has passed from Manchester United to Tottenham to Everton in the past fortnight. It is just his luck at Goodison so far to encounter a Spurs’ team with added motivation to impress Antonio Conte rather than the sterile version that did for Nuno Espírito Santo. It also spectacularly misses the point, and remedies nothing, to attribute Everton’s recurring malaise to the fifth permanent manager Moshiri has appointed in five years. Dissent will inevitably increase in the event of a fourth straight league defeat on Sunday, and not only from those who were against Benítez from the off because of his Liverpool connection. A bright start to the Everton manager’s reign with the new signings Demarai Gray and Andros Townsend to the fore has given way to alarming performances that invite criticism – aired by several of his predecessors – of the character within the squad. Never mind its ability. Inherited weaknesses and a lengthy injury list affecting the entire spine of the team do not give Benítez a free pass. Everton were abject in the first half at Molineux and required the half-time introduction of Fabian Delph, who was not match fit after almost three months out with a shoulder injury, to avoid another heavy loss. They conceded from a corner yet again, the sixth league goal shipped from a set piece this season. Under Carlo Ancelotti last term the total was seven. And he selected Alex Iwobi over Anthony Gordon. Yet these are teething troubles compared with the structural flaws that prompted fans to seek out Moshiri and Brands after the last game at Goodison. The team against Wolves provided a perfect illustration of the club’s problems under an owner who appears easily swayed by the advice of a select few agents, or Alisher Usmanov, thereby undermining the role of director of football in the process. The starting XI were signed under six different Everton managers – David Moyes (Séamus Coleman), Roberto Martínez (Mason Holgate), Ronald Koeman (Jordan Pickford and Michael Keane), Marco Silva (Richarlison, Iwobi and Jean-Philippe Gbamin), Carlo Ancelotti (Allan and Ben Godfrey) plus Benítez (Townsend and Gray). The spectre of a seventh, Sam Allardyce, hovered on the substitutes’ bench in the form of Cenk Tosun. Lucas Digne was injured and so Godfrey, a right-footed central defender who missed the start of the season with Covid and has struggled since his return, deputised with damaging consequences at left-back. There are no other left-backs at the club to provide genuine competition for Digne and his form has declined markedly, too. Niels Nkounkou was loaned to Standard Liège in the summer for more first-team experience while Thierry Small, who holds the record of being Everton’s youngest first-team player, signed for Southampton after rejecting a first professional contract at Goodison. Another blow to an academy that has supplied little to the first team in recent years and also falls under Brands’ remit. In place of Abdoulaye Doucouré, a dynamic influence until suffering a stress fracture of the foot, Gbamin made his first Premier League start in more than two years having been plagued by serious injuries since his £25m transfer from Mainz. The midfielder was unceremoniously hauled off after a 45-minute display that reflected his condition and the dilemma of how to give him the games necessary to rebuild a stalled career. Despite Ancelotti prioritising a new right-back before the summer, and Benítez concurring, none arrived and so Coleman continues to plough the flank at the age of 33. The captain’s disgust with the lack of effort at Wolves was striking and shared by another sold-out away support. He was one of the few in royal blue to show any fight or take responsibility for the full 90 minutes on Monday. They are hallmarks of a Moyes signing and qualities that have been missing in too many of those who have followed under Moshiri. More than £500m has been spent on new players since the billionaire’s arrival in February 2016. Benítez, working within the restrictions of the Premier League’s profit and sustainability rules this summer, has had £1.7m of it. He has been promised more for January but that looks a distant window with Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea on the horizon after Spurs. “I am convinced that the players who were on the pitch the other day are feeling the same as Coleman,” insisted the Everton manager, who recently called for improvement in every department at the club. “We know how important it is to give everything because we are professionals but also because at this club the fans are demanding that. “I can talk about Spain or other countries where they just want to see the team playing well, nice football, passing football and they are happy with that but, here, it is not like that. The fans want to see players giving everything and I think this group of players are giving everything. “There are two ways to improve players: one is coaching them and the other is going to the transfer window and taking players. In this case we are coaching them and we are really pleased with the way they train and work. I was not happy the other day in the first half because we were not competing in the way we have to do it, but it can happen. “A group of players like this one, when you are missing important players, it can happen. At set pieces we are not doing well but I am sure if I ask you if we have [Dominic] Calvert-Lewin, Yerry Mina and Doucouré on the pitch will we be better at set pieces, you will tell me: Yes. Everybody can see that. We have to be realistic and analyse where we are and where we were. That is the context we have to consider.”Isabelle de Joantho is a painter and sculptor who studied at the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz School of Art. Food La Goulue restaurant (named after a can-can dancer at the Moulin Rouge who used to gulp down her clients’ drinks) serves great, local fare in a Basque-red 1900s dining room. I love the chipirons grillés a la plancha (squid grilled with garlic and parsley) and Spanish-style sea bream. For fresh food, Les Halles covered market is filled with tasting bars, organic bakeries, cheese and charcuterie stalls and fishmongers. Two other places not to miss are Place Bellevue on the seafront for one of Maison Pariès’ caramel fondant kanougas, flavoured with vanilla or Espelette chilli pepper. And in Bidart, a town a little way down the coast, it’s worth watching a gâteau basque (a cake with a creamy filling and orange zest) being made in front of you at the Moulin de Bassilour watermill. Inspiration Overlooking the old fishing port is the impressive, greystone neo-Gothic Église de Sainte-Eugénie – patron saint of Napoleon III’s wife, Eugénie de Montijo, who fashioned Biarritz as a spectacular health and holiday resort in the mid-19th century. My inspirational place lies beneath: the huge, vaulted crypt, which is used as a venue for art shows. I have exhibited there many times and it has an amazing ambiance. Biarritz is now a major hub for galleries and contemporary art, and I always attend La Brouillarta, an annual outdoor art fair on the seafront. There’s also a parcours d’oeuvres d’art, a walking route around the city’s many frescoes and outdoor sculptures. Green space Biarritz’s assets include the sea, the mountains, the countryside and the Spanish border, but we have three golden retrievers, so green spaces are very important to us. There are two wonderful lakes just outside the city, Lac Mouriscot and Lac Marion. Mouriscot is popular with joggers and cyclists: it has wide, wild pathways through the woods and plenty of benches overlooking the lake. Marion, which is equally good for dogs and families, has a bucolic lakeside path, some areas of marshland, plus lots of mature trees and lawns. Both can be reached on bus route 5 from the centre of town, heading past Biarritz’s horse racing track. Neighbourhood Biarritz’s Grande Plage and casino seafront can become very crowded in the summer, so it is best to visit out of season, but the Port des Pêcheurs to the south is always wonderful. Set on a natural creek, the protected harbour has a “village” of 65 cabins known as crampottes – whitewashed fishing huts built into the rock, with red, blue or bright green shutters. They have hardly changed in 150 years, though a few have been turned into cafes and restaurants. There is a 19-year waiting list to rent one – you have to own a boat and a mooring in the fishing port. The port sits beneath the old whale-watching tower and is the most authentic and charming stretch of the Biarritz seafront. It has a little beach, and lanes draped with floats, fishing nets and the occasional giant anchor. Nightlife Le Bar Jean, at the heart of Biarritz’s tapas, paella and beef-eating culture since the 1930s, stays open until well after midnight, as do many of the pintxos (tapas) bars around Les Halles market. It’s popular to go from bar to bar in Biarritz, tasting tapas with Basque cider, which is poured into tiny, round glasses from high above the table so the cider becomes aerated, though it is quite sour and vinegary! Or, if you are at the beach along the city’s Côte des Basques, it’s only 100 steps up to Bar Etxola Bibi, a great place to watch the sunset with a cocktail and plate of pintxos. Stay Close to the beaches and Les Halles, Villa Koegui (doubles from €85, breakfast €15pp) was renovated this year. It has a stylish lounge, an outdoor terrace and family suites.Nearly 40 years after their break-up, Abba’s reunion album upholds the contradictory legacy of the very first Swedish pop powerhouse. Half of this record finds hatchet-burying divorcés Benny Andersson and Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Agnetha Fältskog and Björn Ulvaeus returning as titans of emotionally literate pop. There are songs here with a cinematographic grasp of gesture allied to countermelodies of aching prettiness, almost casually thrown away. In the very same breath, though, Voyage packs in a surfeit of hokey oompah and two Christmas tunes too many. The saccharine children’s choir on Little Things is an inevitability; cynically, Andersson and Ulvaeus probably wanted a slice of the never-ending fruited royalty pudding that comes with Christmas-themed songs. In short, Voyage is an album that asks: “Which Abba are you – frothy or full-on?” as you hit the skip button. But you’ll be glad Abba made it. Both a monument to bittersweet pop erudition and a mass-market sop, it finds all four singers in strong voice, their effortless harmonies evidence of much water having flowed under Stockholm’s bridges, interpersonally speaking. Crucially, given even Paul McCartney’s urges to get with the times on his Greg Kurstin and Ryan Tedder-produced Egypt Station album of 2018, Abba aren’t trying to be contemporary. Andersson and Ulvaeus tune out all the chart noise of the past decades; neither Fältskog nor Lyngstad has taken to melisma or mumble rap. One track, Just a Notion, actually dates from the sessions for 1979’s Voulez-Vous album. The perky penultimate track, No Doubt About It, merely sounds like it does. You can hear the odd update. Andersson and Ulvaeus have levelled up the technical specs that were available to them 40 years ago while still cleaving close to the blithe, minor-to-major-to-minor-key Abba template. Their classical tendencies, previously more leashed, are given fuller rein in some lavish string arrangements. Ode to Freedom, the somewhat cryptic closing track, has an unabashedly orchestral bent. Untouched by the years, Fältskog’s and Lyngstad’s voices actually sound more similar than they used to, making it hard to work out who is taking the lead vocal. In an interview with Swedish radio, Fältskog alludes to this “marriage” of their voices – and her intention to keep rekindled Abbamania at arm’s length. This Voyage was by no means certain. After decades of reunion naysaying, by 2018 it was clear that Abba, buoyed up by theatrical and film successes, were cooking up a hi-tech live experience. That curtain rises in early 2022, when four imperial period “Abbatars” created with motion capture technology will deliver the music of peak-period Abba in a specially built arena in east London. As Andersson and Ulvaeus tell it, new tunes snowballed from the idea that any set list their virtual avatars might “play” should include a couple of fresh tracks. When footage emerged of the four seventysomethings gathered around a piano, lyrics in hand, it felt like a triumph of Nordic steadfastness in a super-heated world full of suboptimal outcomes. So let’s take Voyage as unexpected evidence that hope is not a fool’s game. It helps to ignore the album’s cheesier shortcomings – the John Lewis ad-gone-supernova that is Little Things, with its simpering talk of stocking fillers, or the Celtic pop of When You Danced With Me, or the well-intentioned, but misfiring environmental ballad, Bumble Bee – and cut straight to the bleeding heart of Abba’s best craft. On break-up songs such as The Winner Takes it All or Knowing Me, Knowing You (at least before Alan Partridge hijacked it), the “boys” – Andersson and Ulvaeus – had always put words in the mouths of the “girls” – Fältskog and Lyngstad – to sing. By and large, despite this imbalance of power, the feelings conveyed in Abba songs have been believable, sensitive, even. Here, Don’t Shut Me Down, the better song of the pair of singles released in September, finds Abba telling the story of their return (“I’ve been reloaded!”) while the song’s flawed central character begs eloquently for a second chance at love. Another fully realised vignette, I Can Be That Woman, comes from a similar place. A couple argue in front of a dog, with Fältskog’s protagonist alluding to an alcoholic past that she has overcome in her hopes to be a better partner. “The dog, bless her heart, licks my fingers, but she jerks every time you swear” is a lyric that perhaps doesn’t sing when isolated on the page, but it renders the homely, fraught scenario in high definition. Keep an Eye on Dan, meanwhile, finds a parent anxiously dropping a child with his dad for his tenure of the custody agreement, then driving around the corner and punching the car steering wheel in abject misery. This is what we pay Abba for – mature storytelling awash in melody.California-born, Oregon-based Margo Cilker has honed her story-songs on the road for years, travelling across the US and the Basque country of Spain, where she formed a covers band playing the likes of Creedence, Dylan and Neil Young. “You need to challenge what you’re afraid of,” she’s said, “and I’m scared of a 9-5”. That training, along with her love of Woody Guthrie, (“a true compadre”), Gillian Welch and Lucinda Williams, tells on her debut album, Pohorylle, out last week: the classic construction of the likes of the ambling Kevin Johnson, with its rinky-dink piano, or the grandly weary Chester’s, a not-drinking song in which she observes the cautionary tales at the bar, feels instantly familiar. Yet there’s a restless wanderlust there too: Pohorylle, which follows a couple of EPs and a mini-album of covers, explores connections between Basque culture and Cilker’s native west coast through wistful expanses such as That River and honkytonk thigh-slappers like Tehachapi, driven by a band featuring former collaborators of the Decemberists, Son Volt, Joanna Newsom and Beirut, with Cilker’s sister Sarah on harmonies. It’s the sort of record that becomes an instant close companion; as frank and fresh as it is warm and companionable: “I could tell you who to vote for, who to pity and who to fuck,” she asserts on the sardonic Brother, Taxman, Preacher. Frankly, she can tell us whatever she likes; we’re happy to come along for the ride. Pohorylle is out now on LooseMy very first memory is meeting my dad. I was small and because he worked in America, I only knew him from the photo that sat on the mantelpiece. It’s because of my dad that I made every effort to become a musician. He said to me, “You should find a decent job, because if you make music, you’ll never eat a decent meal in a decent restaurant.” Well, I’ve eaten some nice meals in some nice restaurants! I know my dad is proud of me. He never told me to my face, but he would brag about me to his friends. To my face he’d say, “Are you still trying to play that guitar?” That was our running joke. I made a point of giving him a copy of every release and production I’d ever made, to the point where if I wanted some of my old stuff, I would have to go to him to get a copy. Even then he’d only let me borrow it. I was scared of moving to London. I’d done four years of secondary school in Barbados before I came in 1965. I’d heard it was cold and that worried me. When I got here, I couldn’t get to grips with having fish and chips wrapped in newspaper. I thought it was so strange to be eating ink and oil. Nobody in Barbados would do that. And I hated having to wear shoes. First time my dad caught me walking around with no shoes, he told me, “You can’t do that here, son – you’ll catch a cold!” Playing the guitar is enduringly cool. Liking the Beatles helped. Liking the Rolling Stones did, too. But if there was one thing that helped a boy from Barbados be accepted in south London, it was being able to play Jimi Hendrix solos. Me and Linton Kwesi Johnson are very similar. It’s what has helped us collaborate successfully for so long. We believe that all men are equal. We believe that social injustice is a crime. We believe in free speech. And we believe in the unity of mankind. We also believe that the police are not so kind as they would have you believe. Actually, Linton is currently recording a poem about the deaths of black males in police custody. It’s called Licence fi Kill. I look at Black Lives Matter and think we’re winning. We’re not gaining as much ground as we should, but we’re winning. We’re making people in authority take notice of what we’re saying. There are too many examples of police wrongdoing to just turn a blind eye. For years, the police were stopping and searching young black kids going about everyday lawful business and trying to provoke a physical response. I’m still angry about the six months I was jailed, wrongfully. That said, while I was in prison, I wrote a number of songs, vented my anger on them and came out and got a record deal with EMI. So I guess they can keep their compensation. Bob Marley was stand-offish. You had to know him before you could get into a conversation. Our band Matumbi supported the Wailers once. They didn’t get a very good soundcheck and when they came on stage there was loads of feedback. Our set sounded just fine. Because of that, journalists were more favourable in their reviews of us than them. Our drummer, a huge Wailers fan, was horrified. Dennis Bovell’s remix of Swanky Modes by Jarv Is is out nowHow much longer? After the 5-0 humiliation against Liverpool, this was another Theatre of Screams occasion for Ole Gunnar Solskjær, another big game when the gap to the very best yawned like a chasm, when his Manchester United team were an incoherent mess. There was no evidence of an attacking plan. The Manchester City goalkeeper, Ederson, was a virtual bystander, with United barely entering his penalty area. There were no options. There was no movement, no direction. And, at the end, after City had coasted through the second half, having done their damage before the interval, it was impossible not to wonder how the United hierarchy could continue to tolerate it, how Solskjær could remain as the manager. Solskjær’s tenure has been a wild ride, featuring plenty of enjoyment, thrills and spills. There has been spirit and last-gasp winners. Broadly, it has been possible to get behind the glorious madness of it all. But the team looked broken here and the only relief for the United support was that it was not another heavy scoreline. That had been the fear, another massacre, which rather sums up the climate around the club. David de Gea stood in City’s way, making a string of fine first-half saves, although even he erred for the second goal, scored by the excellent Bernardo Silva. The opener had been a comical Eric Bailly own goal, the defender enhancing his reputation for the erratic. City put the memory of last Saturday’s shock home loss to Crystal Palace firmly behind them, their superiority in all areas total; the fluency of their approach pronounced. It was a day when Pep Guardiola comprehensively outmanoeuvred Solskjær and the travelling supporters could enjoy themselves, revelling in the pain of their neighbours. For United, it is now four points from six games. There were some boos at the interval and full time from the Old Trafford crowd, although they were nothing like as sustained as those that greeted the half-time whistle against Liverpool at 4-0. Apart from De Gea, it was difficult to score any United player as more than 4/10 – with Aaron Wan-Bissaka, Luke Shaw, Bailly and Fred particularly dreadful. Bruno Fernandes could get nothing going while Cristiano Ronaldo, who had United’s only shot on target, was guilty of a spiteful lunge at Kevin De Bruyne in stoppage time. It reflected the bitter frustration. Bailly’s early aberration set the tone for United. There was no sky blue shirt in his immediate vicinity when João Cancelo crossed from the left but, with his body shape all wrong, Bailly swung with his right boot and sliced with his shin past De Gea. Guardiola had said that he knew what to expect from United – in his own words, a man-to-man press up front and deeper defence. Were United really going to press? There was no evidence of that. It was more difficult to second guess how Guardiola would play it and this was yet another occasion when it was a struggle to classify his formation. Who was the false nine? Not Phil Foden, who worked productively off the left, or Gabriel Jesus, who played on the other side. Instead, Guardiola used De Bruyne, Silva and Ilkay Gündogan in roving central attacking midfield roles and each of them was allowed to step up, at various times, to the front of the line. It was too much for United. In possession, City gorged on options, their movement quick and coherent, while out of it they swarmed men around the ball, suffocating their rivals. Guardiola’s players had time and space. United’s had neither. For long spells, it looked as though City had more men on the pitch. The first half was an ordeal for United and the wonder was that they trailed by only two at the end of it. De Gea made five saves in quick succession from the 28th minute and two of them were world class – those to tip over from Jesus at close quarters and to prevent Victor Lindelöf from scoring another United own goal. Of all the damning statistics, the one which showed United had more shots at De Gea than Ederson probably won the prize. Ronaldo’s sole attempt was a volley on 26 minutes that needed Ederson to react smartly – the rebound came too quickly for Mason Greenwood – and the only surprise about City’s second was that De Gea was at fault. He was not alone. Shaw was ball-watching as Cancelo shaped a cross to the far post, failing to notice Silva stealing in around the back. Silva’s prodded finish squirmed through De Gea at the near post. Solskjær’s starting 3-5-2 system was an abject failure. Put bluntly, the players did not appear to have any idea about how to construct moves while even the fundamentals were missing such as fight in the 50-50s. Solskjær hooked Bailly at the interval, sent on Jadon Sancho and switched to 4-2-3-1. The game already felt lost. It was a case of trying to stop the bleeding. City did not seem to have the appetite to twist the knife. Rather, they prioritised the retention of possession, giving United a lesson in how to look after the ball and move off it. They toyed with them. City still created chances. De Bruyne sliced when well placed; Foden struck the outside of the post; John Stones dragged wide and Jesus shouted in vain for a penalty against the substitute Alex Telles. “Ole’s at the wheel,” mocked the City fans. For how much longer?A perfectly intact room that was lived in by slaves has been discovered in a suburb of the ancient Roman city of Pompeii. Three wooden beds, a chamber pot and a wooden chest containing metal and fabric items were among the objects found in the cramped living quarters of what was a sprawling villa in Civita Giuliana, about 700 metres north-west of Pompeii’s city walls. The discovery comes almost a year after the remains of two victims of the AD79 eruption of Mount Vesuvius, believed to have been a master and his slave, were found in the same villa. A chariot shaft was also found in the room, which archaeologists said had served as the humble lodgings of, possibly, a small family who carried out day-to-day work in the villa, including preparing and maintaining the chariot. The only natural light in the 16-square-metre space came from a small upper window, and there is no evidence of any wall decorations. Gabriel Zuchtriegel, director of Pompeii’s archaeological park, said the discovery was “exceptional”, especially as it gives a rare insight “into the precarious reality of people who seldom appear in historical sources, that were written almost exclusively by men belonging to the elite”. Several personal objects were found under the beds, including large amphorae, used for storing personal possessions, and ceramic jugs. The three beds, one child-size, were made of rope and wooden planks. “What is most striking is the cramped and precarious nature of this room, which is something between a dormitory and a storage room,” said Zuchtriegel. “It is certainly one of the most exciting discoveries of my life as an archaeologist, even without the presence of great ‘treasures’. The true treasure here is the human experience – in this case of the most vulnerable members of ancient society – to which this room is a unique testimony.” Excavations on the site of the Civita Giuliana villa began in 2017 and several relics have been found, including a ceremonial chariot and a stable containing the remains of three harnessed horses. In May, three frescoes looted from the villa in 2012 were returned to the archaeological park. Casts were created of the remains of the two Vesuvius victims found in the villa last November. The two men, lying close together, are believed to have escaped the initial phase of the eruption, when the city was blanketed in volcanic ash and pumice, only to then be killed by a further blast the following day. Experts said the younger man, who was probably between 18 and 25, had several compressed vertebrae, which led them to believe that he was a manual labourer or slave. The older man, aged between 30 and 40, had a stronger bone structure, particularly around his chest, and was wearing a tunic. They were found lying in what would have been a corridor in the villa. In August, the partially mummified remains, including hair and bones, of a former slave who rose through the social ranks were found in a tomb at the necropolis of Porta Sarno, one of the main gates into Pompeii. The tomb is believed to date from the decade before the city was destroyed by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. Last month, the partially mutilated remains of a man buried by the eruption were found on what would have been the beach at Herculaneum, the ancient Roman town a few miles north of Pompeii. Archaeologists said the man, believed to have been between 40 and 45, was killed just steps from the water as he tried to flee the eruption.As the Conservative party decided to self-immolate in sleaze last week, one of the most jaw-dropping aspects was the insistence from Owen Paterson and his supporters that the investigation which found he had “egregiously” breached lobbying rules “did not comply with natural justice”. The idea he has been denied justice is laughable. The process for regulating the conduct of MPs has multiple safeguards to ensure fairness. Any investigation will be carried out by an independent standards commissioner. After that, a committee of MPs and lay members recommends whether any sanctions should be imposed, and finally MPs approve or reject those sanctions. Our system is widely regarded as an example of best practice across the world. For purposes of political expediency and sheer mendacity, the Tories decided this system must be scrapped immediately, only to U-turn when their nefarious scheme backfired spectacularly. It is uncontroversial that Paterson was in breach of the rules – he was handsomely remunerated by two companies and he approached public bodies and government departments on their behalf. The witnesses whom he complains were not interviewed by the standards commissioner were overwhelmingly character witnesses and their testimonials did not require interrogation, so they were not interviewed. Nothing they could have said could have changed the facts. The investigation process he was subjected to was determined by parliamentarians – including him. The obvious truth here is that Paterson wanted to dictate to the commissioner who would be heard, when and by what means. If you face criminal charges, try dictating the terms of trial to the judge in the same way. He also claims he was not given a right to an appeal, yet in its report the committee clearly notes that: “A member is entitled to contest, even vigorously contest, the commissioner’s interpretation of the rules and her findings.” He must have forgotten that he was invited to appeal against the commissioner’s findings both in writing and in person, and did so. It’s a familiar pattern of behaviour from the Tories – whether it’s Dominic Cummings racing to Barnard Castle to test his eyesight or Matt Hancock putting his libido above lockdown – the rules are for little people, not for them. It is no surprise that Tory MPs – including the two most senior law officers, the attorney and solicitor general – lined up to trash the rule of law and undermine our democracy. They also sought to threaten the standards commissioner with the sack for having the temerity to do her job. Kwasi Kwarteng’s attempt to bully Kathryn Stone out of her job was yet another breach of the ministerial code, and the latest example of the Tories’ slide into corruption and moral bankruptcy. Boris Johnson has had multiple run-ins with the standards commissioner. It is clear he simply wants revenge and impunity from the rule of law. This level of flagrant norm-shattering and lawbreaking demands more than tut-tutting. That’s why we need the adviser on ministerial interests to launch an inquiry into Kwarteng’s threats. And it is why Labour has urged the standards commissioner to open an investigation into the prime minister over the financing of the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. However, we know that such breaches mean little to the PM – from Priti Patel’s bullying to Robert Jenrick’s liaisons with Richard Desmond and all the way through to rehiring Gavin Williamson, there is no outrage the PM is unwilling to excuse. How’s that for natural justice? David Lammy is shadow justice secretarySometimes, an idea seems so transparently and hyperbolically awful that you wonder if there is some secret brilliance to it. Such is the one for Munger Hall, the plan to build a dormitory at the University of California, Santa Barbara, where 94% of the 4,500 students will live in rooms without windows. Glowing screens that mimic sunlight are promised instead. Some contrarian minds have tried to justify it, not least Charlie Munger, the 97-year-old billionaire who is the building’s donor and designer. He has compared the rooms to the berths inside cruise ships, a view that seems to ignore the difference between a short holiday, where your windowless cabin might be compensated for by the tropical paradises you visit, and an academic year. The university has tried to make a virtue of the fact that students won’t have to go to the trouble of opening windows as they will get all the oxygen they need from a ventilation system. One urban planner justified the project as a response to the shortage of residences caused by nimbies. The problem with this argument – let’s address housing need by making dwellings ever more miserably confined – is that it knows no bottom. Perhaps in the future students can be cryogenically frozen at night, then efficiently stacked using the storage and retrieval systems of an Amazon distribution centre, before being defrosted in time for their morning slurp of laboratory-made food substitute. But we don’t have to go that far to see what a shrivelled vision of humanity it is that gives no value to sunlight or to the rhythms of night and day and where this approach is willingly accepted by a university seemingly because it comes with a large dollop of cash. On reflection, Munger Hall is as terrible as it looks. An exhibition too far An “international PR firm” sends me “a special invitation to Moscow”. It wants me to see “a mesh-framed eco-pavilion filled with plastic water bottles”, installed at the Garage Museum of Contemporary Art. The pavilion, designed by a Moscow-based practice called Lipman Architects, is about “inviting conversation around topics such as material recycling and the environmental impact of temporary architecture”. But the climate emergency is surely past the point where “inviting conversations” will do much good. You will also have spotted the conceptual flaw in organising 3,000-mile, carbon-intensive round trips for journalists to witness this worthy work. Ghastly gentrification Plantation Wharf is a residential development in Battersea, south-west London, which includes addresses including Cotton Row and Molasses Row. Now, 26 years after it was built, the local MP, Marsha de Cordova, has called for the names to be changed. “They’re quite sickening and in many respects almost glorify what was an abhorrent enslavement of Africans,” she says. When it comes to cloth ears, it is hard to beat the marketing blurb for Plantation Wharf that local councillor Aydin Dikerdem found on the website of estate agent Eden Harper. Alongside breathy tales of local celebrities, it tells of “a harmless chap of anomalous habits” who lived on a dilapidated barge. One night, “with plans afoot for gentrification, a mystery blaze destroyed the eyesore vessel and the eccentric inhabitant was never heard of or seen ever again”. What a piquant tale this is, what a value-enhancing piece of local colour: a man made homeless and possibly burned to death in the interests of real estate. Perhaps the development’s “expansive glazed sections”, as Eden Harper calls them, offer good views of the scene of the crime. • Rowan Moore is the Observer’s architecture criticThe actor Will Poulter arrives for our lunch date alone, 15 minutes early and, perhaps counter-intuitively, carrying a bag of his own food. He explains that he’s on a strict diet for a film role, but can’t tell me what the part is. He buys a juice from the café that I’m not sure he actually wants, and suggests we sit outside, which is pretty damp and cold if I’m honest, because he thinks it would be taking the piss somewhat to occupy a table inside when he’s only bought a drink. Poulter’s thoughtful like that. He then unwraps what looks like a chocolate Rice Krispie square, but tastes much less fun apparently, and apologises that I have to watch him chomp his way through it. “I’m speaking fluent cake,” he says, chewing dutifully. He has just come from a workout and it’s clear that his pandemic experience has included more than just the occasional Joe Wicks session. He wears a black Nike compression shirt, mercifully less figure-hugging shorts and, though it’s not very 2021 to note this, the guy is shredded. The whole, slightly strange scene makes a lot more sense a couple of weeks later when the reason for Poulter’s carb-loading and gym-bunnying is revealed. The gig he couldn’t talk about is that he has been cast in Marvel’s Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 3 as Adam Warlock. Even if you’re not that invested in the superhero universe this, in Hollywood power terms, is a big deal. It’s rumoured that pretty well every 20-something actor here and in the US and beyond wanted the role. It is a huge coup for Poulter and the 28-year-old from west London is taking the transformation into Warlock, a character genetically created by scientists to be the perfect, invincible human, seriously. And if that means eating bland, protein-packed oat snacks, so be it. “I’m inherently greedy so it could be worse,” says Poulter. “And there’s nothing more boring than hearing actors talking about how they’re struggling to eat a lot of food that has been sent to their door for free.” A blockbusting Marvel film is a step up, at least in notoriety, for Poulter in what has already been a precocious career. He made his debut at 13 in Son of Rambow, Garth Jennings’s charming, effervescent 2007 indie film about a pair of schoolboys who recreate Sylvester Stallone’s First Blood with a home-movie camera. While still a teenager, Poulter was snogging Jennifer Aniston in the 2013 comedy We’re the Millers. Then followed roles with more dramatic heft: he left Leonardo DiCaprio for dead in the Oscar-winning The Revenant, was a racist cop in Kathryn Bigelow’s Detroit and gave us nightmares in the Swedish horror flick Midsommar. Poulter clearly has an ear for accents, but directors have noticed that he really excels at playing characters you can’t immediately get the measure of. He’s handsome no doubt, but he can switch between sweet and boyish in one scene to downright menacing the next. “I’m aware I’m kind of alternative-looking,” says Poulter, picking his words. “Just not classic or, I don’t know, outside the norm. I’ve always been told I’m quite expressive.” When you Google Poulter’s name, one of the predicted searches is: “Who is the actor with the eyebrows?” He clearly has mixed feelings about the notoriety of his boomerang ’brows. “It’s funny when people comment on my eyebrows, it’s as if they don’t realise that’s something I’m used to,” he says. “They’re on my face and they are directly above my eyes so I’ve seen them. Sometimes people comment on them like they just landed on my forehead. But yeah, that has become a thing and I can’t escape it really. If I shaved them off, I’d have less of an emotional range, so I just decided to keep them.” We will have to wait until at least May 2023 for the third instalment of Guardians of the Galaxy, but before then – and this Poulter can talk about – he has logged another nebulous, hard-to-read performance in a gripping eight-part drama on Disney+ called Dopesick. The series tracks an American town that unravels during the opioid epidemic, which gathered speed with the introduction of OxyContin, a “non-addictive” wonder drug made by Purdue Pharma, in the mid-90s. Opioids were responsible for the fatal overdoses of nearly 500,000 Americans between 1999 and 2019, and the life-crushing addiction of millions more. Dopesick is a heavyweight production, with Michael Keaton as a family doctor and Poulter as Billy, the slick Purdue sales rep who convinces him to prescribe the painkiller. “Working with Michael Keaton was really one of the most special experiences of my life,” says Poulter. “He’s one of those people who draws things out of you that you don’t ordinarily have. He’s just stunningly good.” Beyond an unimprovable cast – which also includes Kaitlyn Dever, Rosario Dawson and the great Michael Stuhlbarg as Richard Sackler, the head of the dynasty that owns Purdue – Poulter clearly feels the story is an important one to tell. He comes from a medical family: his mother was a nurse and his father Neil is professor of preventative cardiovascular medicine at Imperial College, London; one of his sisters runs a Covid vaccination centre and has spent much of the past 18 months working in intensive-care units. For good measure, Poulter’s other sister is a teaching assistant for children with special needs. “What I do in comparison,” he laughs, “feels quite self-obsessed and narcissistic.” Acting will never compete with these “far more noble pursuits”, but Poulter believes he has a duty, where possible, to select projects with a social conscience. Dopesick is one of these. Another was Detroit, Bigelow’s 2017 crime drama inspired by riots in the city in 1967 that resulted in 43 deaths and more than 7,200 arrests. “When you think about social movements, be it Black Lives Matter, be it MeToo, given the fact I’m just a straight, white male, there’s a personal responsibility to make sure I’m contributing to those conversations and those movements positively,” says Poulter. “And that I’m not being a bystander.” Detroit, in particular, was an awakening for him, especially conversations he had with Ziza Delgado, a professor in ethnic studies at Berkeley. He has subsequently become involved in the UK with the Black Curriculum, a social enterprise that wants to change how black history is taught in schools. “But at the same time, I don’t want to kid myself about what my limitations are,” Poulter goes on. “I’m an actor, not an activist, and I don’t commit my life, nor do I make my living by being an activist. A project like Dopesick, which does shed a light on injustice, or does try to, I feel very lucky to be part of those conversations. But I’m under no illusions that, at the end of the day, I’m an actor, and if I want to be an activist, then I quit acting and become an activist.” With Billy, his character in Dopesick, Poulter created a dense backstory, as he often does. He read Dale Carnegie’s classic self-improvement text, How to Win Friends and Influence People, because that’s the kind of book he thought an ambitious, manipulative sales rep would seek out. There were a couple of lines in the script about how Billy had high-achieving creative parents, and he jumped on those. “Billy’s motivations around wanting to be a successful sales rep probably stemmed from insecurities as a kid,” says Poulter. “And not necessarily being a success in the eyes of his parents. He was the guy at school who wasn’t popular and got overlooked, and was distinctly average…” A wry smile, “Maybe inspired by my own experiences.” Poulter doesn’t immediately jump out as “distinctly average” – he has built the kind of varied career that child actors rarely do – , but he insists it is the case. He has dyspraxia and struggled to keep up academically at school. He was bullied. He has had “mental-health issues for as long as I can remember” and these eventually led, as a teenager, to being diagnosed with depression and generalised anxiety disorder. “I always felt like I was too young to be contemplating the idea of having depression,” he says. “And it was something I think performing and drama helped me sort of purge to a degree, or even informally treat. But yeah, it made life outside of that quite, quite difficult.” School was Harrodian in Barnes, west London, which now has a reputation as a hothouse for young actors and performers. Robert Pattinson went there, so did Tom Sturridge and 1917’s George MacKay, along with the superstar YouTubers JacksGap, the twins Jack and Finn Harries. Poulter thinks it is less about the school, and more about two teachers one of whom, Laura Lawson, created an after-school comedy club that took a cast of 13-year-olds – including Poulter – to the Edinburgh Fringe. “I say to Laura, she was the reason I went to school,” says Poulter. “I was getting up and going to school for that one hour of drama on a Friday. And it was about just getting to that Friday morning, and then seeing out the rest of the day and then there was the weekend.” When he was shooting Son of Rambow, acting became all Poulter could imagine doing. “I came back every day saying, ‘This is what I’m going to do for the rest of my life!’” he recalls. “And my parents were a bit like, ‘Chill, chill, chill…’ But then they looked at my grades and were like, ‘It’s probably a good thing that Will is going off and doing this alternative summer camp.’ And I was so unhappy at school, and so happy whenever doing drama, that I think they were delighted this incredibly rare opportunity came along and would distract me for a while.” Poulter did end up at university, studying drama at Bristol for a year, but professional assignments kept rolling in. Most of his training has been on the job, often alongside some of the most famous actors on the planet. “Generally speaking, I’ve been very, very lucky with those people, but don’t get me wrong, I have a lot of pinch-myself moments or times where I’m on my own in my hotel room thinking, ‘Did I just do a fucking scene with Leonardo DiCaprio?’ There are definitely moments where I’m conscious of the fact there is a fanboy inside me.” When he first started acting, Poulter would throw himself into characters, almost, he thinks now, to the extent of not developing his own personality. “It felt like a reprieve from being who I was on a day-to-day basis,” he says. He feels he is in a better place now. Therapy has helped; Matt Haig’s books have, too. He stays off social media, except to spread the word of campaigns he believes in, such as anti- bullying initiatives and World Mental Health Day. The pandemic was stressful, mainly because he worried about his family, but Poulter – who lives on his own in east London – feels he has come through it pretty well unscathed. “As an actor, you spend a lot of time unemployed, so lockdown wasn’t wildly different to a lot of the time that I’ve spent,” he says. “And I am a bit of a social recluse as well, I guess, so it wasn’t a huge adaptation for me.” As for being “unemployed” that’s less of a problem these days: during the Covid era, in addition to Dopesick, Poulter also shot a musical, The Score, with Johnny Flynn and Naomi Ackie, and wrapped Hugh Laurie’s directorial debut, an Agatha Christie adaptation, Why Didn’t They Ask Evans? “I’ve never been that busy,” he says. “But more than me being in demand, I guess it’s a reflection of the industry picking itself back up after a dormant period.” In lockdown, Poulter also recorded the audio book of Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment: “I don’t think Audible quite realised that they’d asked a dyspraxic kid to read Crime and Punishment until I’d over-recorded by about four days.” Perhaps Poulter’s biggest release is collecting sneakers. At home, he has a custom-designed shelving unit for his shoes, which are exclusively Nike and currently number – he guesses, though I wonder if he skews low so he doesn’t come over as some Imelda Marcos of streetwear – around 50 pairs. Generally he goes for a “stock and rock situation”, which means he buys one pair to wear, and another to keep pristine and box-fresh. “I’m just obsessive about them, it’s a sickness really,” he admits. “It’s my one really extravagant habit that I need to keep a bit of a lid on.” There’s a story that Poulter cleans his shoes with tiny toothbrushes – that isn’t true, is it? “I do do that,” he sighs. “Yeah, and I actually carry around wipes for my shoes in my bag here.” Landing the Guardians of the Galaxy gig will make Poulter very famous and, while you worry for his sneaker habit, his moral compass seems secure. He’s attentive, considerate and humble; the phrase “couldn’t happen to a nicer guy” could have been coined for him. If anything, it seems likely Poulter will use his celebrity to bring greater attention to the causes he believes in and work on projects that he considers important. By coincidence – without any inkling of the big announcement round the corner – I happen to ask Poulter how he would respond if he were offered a role in a big franchise. What would that mean for the message-driven films he seems drawn to? His response is revealing. “I think it’s about balance,” he replies. “Also, being frank, it’s about recognising that certain jobs open doors to other things that you would really like to be giving attention to or platforming. There’s an argument to be made that you can’t do one without the other. Or that you can, but it’s just harder and sometimes leads to less success, I guess.” He takes a bite of his oaty-krispie-cakey thing and munches for a few seconds in silence. “So I don’t honestly know, I’m trying to wrestle with that balance myself at the moment,” he continues. “But certainly my hope is that, on balance, I can create a portfolio that does carry a lot of messaging and meaning that I feel proud of and I can stand by.” He has to go. I ask if he wants a coffee or something for the road. “I’m fine, thank you,” he replies, patting his bounty of designated food for the day. “I’ve got plenty of treats in the bag.” Dopesick is on Disney+ from 12 NovemberAnyone who hoped that recruiting Oscar-winning director Chloé Zhao (Nomadland) to the Marvel stable might herald a radical change of direction is likely to be disappointed by Eternals. At its most effective, Zhao’s film-making is delicate and intimate, capturing fragile human connections with warmth and naturalism. Exactly the kind of thing that gets crushed to oblivion by the steamroller action onslaught of a comic-book movie. Certainly in terms of the look of the film, aside from a few wistful magic-hour shots, there’s little to indicate that Zhao’s guiding vision was able to swim against the tide of prevailing genre conventions. But elsewhere, there are hints of Zhao’s sensibility, not least in the diversity in the writing and casting of the Eternals: a group of immortal humanoids billeted on Earth and tasked with protecting humanity from the destructive appetites of the Deviants (depicted in the film as part lizard, part rage, part high-tensile cable). Leader of the Eternals is Salma Hayek as Ajak; the most powerful is Ikaris (Richard Madden); the most accomplished warrior is Thena (Angelina Jolie), but it’s the empathetic Sersi (Gemma Chan) who is central to the story. Kumail Nanjiani is hammy fun as Kingo, who has hidden out on Earth as a multi-generational Bollywood acting dynasty and insists on saving the planet with his valet in tow. The cast also includes deaf actor Lauren Ridloff as Makkari, and has Brian Tyree Henry playing Marvel’s first openly gay superhero. But for all the effort that has gone into ensuring representation in the casting, the storytelling, with its forced flashbacks and synthetic sentiment, lets the whole thing down.Damon Albarn was born in east London in 1968. Interested in music from a young age, he studied at East 15 Acting School and then Goldsmiths, where he co-founded the band that helped kick off Britpop. As well as recording eight studio albums with Blur, Albarn also co-created Gorillaz and the Good, the Bad &amp; the Queen, spearheaded the collaborative organisation Africa Express and has scored stage productions including Monkey: Journey to the West and Dr Dee. He lives in Notting Hill, west London, with his partner, Suzi Winstanley. On 12 November, Albarn releases his second solo album The Nearer the Fountain, More Pure the Stream Flows on Transgressive Records. 1. Film Swan Song (dir Todd Stephens) I just got back from Los Angeles, where I watched this amazing film in my hotel room. It’s about a midwest hairdresser, played by Udo Kier, whose life has been reduced to sitting in an old people’s home folding napkins. Then he gets a call from the lawyer of one of his society clients who is recently deceased, but in her will she wants him to give her a final makeover. I really love films that focus on small, obscure places and the details of people’s lives. I found this one very moving and I thought Kier’s performance was magical. I really recommend it. 2. Exhibition The World of Stonehenge (the British Museum, London) I’m really looking forward to this show [opens 17 Feb]. Ever since I did Dr Dee at the ENO, I’ve been obsessed with all things esoteric. And I drive past Stonehenge all the time on the A303 on the way down to Devon. Every time I go past it, it’s different – sometimes bigger, or smaller, or the stones are a different colour. So I’m fascinated to see what the British Museum has unearthed that I haven’t already seen or read about. I’m also delighted that the plans to build an underpass beneath Stonehenge have been abandoned. I don’t know how that possibly could be a good idea. 3. Restaurant Maramia Cafe, London This is a Palestinian restaurant in Golborne Road, west London, with fantastic food and lovely people and it’s the only place I’ve found where they serve sage tea. Sage is incredibly good for cleaning the throat, so it’s very good for singers. I’ve been drinking it for years and years but I didn’t realise they drink it in Palestine. They allowed restaurants in Golborne Road to have outside seating during the pandemic, so that’s been a really nice development. 4. Music Concert of Sacred Music by Duke Ellington This record has such a fascinating form to it and it’s really inspired me recently. Duke Ellington claimed it wasn’t a mass, it was something new – I suppose a fusion between jazz and spirituality. But it’s very experimental and I like the idea that the older he got, the more experimental he got. It’s a fucking brilliant record. I don’t listen to a lot of jazz but I definitely enjoy it. I really love Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker. The longer in the tooth I get, the more I gravitate towards Radio 3. 5. Books The Baron in the Trees by Italo Calvino This is a really interesting book about a child who decides to leave his family and live in the trees for the rest of his life. Maybe it’s a metaphor for individualism, I don’t know, but it’s a very weird book and I do like Calvino’s writing. I don’t generally read that much fiction. I could have chosen a hundred different nonfiction books, but this is one of the few novels I’ve stayed with recently. Calvino is a singular author. His book Invisible Cities had a big effect on me when I was younger. 6. App Djembeföla! This is a brilliant app. Djembe is the centrepiece drum of west African percussive ensembles and the app is a kind of almanac of classic, traditional rhythms; you can break down each rhythm and listen to all the different parts and work out how these polyrhythms fit together. It has notation as well and there’s also a bit of history about each rhythm. I used it when I was working on Le Vol du Boli at the Châtelet in Paris last year, with Fatoumata Diawara and Abderrahmane Sissako. I don’t have many apps, but this is one I really enjoy. If you’re into rhythm, it’s useful and fascinating. 7. Theatre Fairview by Jackie Sibblies Drury (Young Vic, London) This is the last thing I saw in the theatre that absolutely blew my mind. It’s a brilliant, Pulitzer-winning play and I think it needs to come back, so I’m recommending it in the hope that more people get to see it. It’s about an African American family who gather to celebrate their grandmother’s birthday and it’s just a very intelligent look at what it is to be [a person] of colour in American society. It’s so innovative in its staging: it repeats itself midway through, but the second time the actors are just mouthing the words. I really enjoyed it. I’m looking forward to working in theatre again. One of my favourite things is losing myself in a big project.Manchester United David de Gea Zero chance with the first goal, made fine saves from Jesus, Cancelo, De Bruyne and his own teammate Lindelöf, but a howler allowed Silva to strike, much to his own fury. 6 Victor Lindelöf Made a fine block from a stabbed Gündogan attempt and was composed but, as a member of a bombarded rearguard, needed more protection from absent midfield. 5 Harry Maguire Wanted to be firm in tackle, the captain was a threat at a solitary set piece but lacks a true presence to fire his team up. 5 Eric Bailly Should be bitterly disappointed with intervention that beat David de Gea to give City a dream beginning. Replaced at the break on a day to forget. 3 Aaron Wan-Bissaka Awful. Up against Foden, he shirked tackles and disappointed when asked to defend, make a pass or join the attack. Confidence is particularly low. 3 Fred Not good enough. Lacks the silk and craft of City’s midfielders. 3 Scott McTominay Was unable to dictate play as a Manchester United central operator has to. Contest waved at him on the way past. 4 Bruno Fernandes Radar awry initially but fought his way into the match and was the sole United man to try to make City think. 5 Luke Shaw Yet to take off this season, he allowed Silva to steal in for City’s second. Head blow forced him off. 4 Mason Greenwood Partnering Ronaldo for the first time, floated off the front in quasi-No 10 mode and applied classy touches whenever fed which was alarmingly rare. 5 Cristiano Ronaldo In his first Manchester derby since 2009, he was spied helping out in defence before a graceful left-foot volley. Starved of supply so was peripheral. 5 Substitutes Jadon Sancho Came on at half-time for Bailly but did close to nothing. 5 Marcus Rashford Ineffective, though hardly his fault. 5 Alex Telles Came on as a concussion replacement for Shaw. 5 Donny van de Beek 5 Came on to delight of crowd but too late Manchester City Ederson Nothing to do until saving a Ronaldo volley which the consistently rock-solid No 1 repelled. Will have enjoyed his view of teammates dominance. 8 Kyle Walker A killer cross led, eventually, to Bailly’s own goal. The right-back is in prime form and was as accomplished in defence as when roving forward. 8 Rúben Dias Was told off by Guardiola for choosing wrong passing option but this was as stressful as the captain’s outing became due to United’s woeful insipidness. 7 John Stones As with partner Dias, little to do regarding the ball coming at him. The centre-back was keen to make an extra midfielder, as Guardiola likes him to. 7 João Cancelo Sweet cross created City’s first, tested De Gea with a 20-yard bullet, and orchestrated Silva’s finish. Being booked costs him a mark. 7 Rodri Always ready to link defence to attack, the elegant Spaniard frequently used the extra second he seems to always carry with him. 7 Kevin De Bruyne The Belgian was the visitors’ chief prompter but continued recent uneven contributions by appearing menacing then off pace. Snatched at second-half chance. 6 Ilkay Gündogan Snapped into challenges, the German constantly reminded Fernandes he was about in a feisty turn that showed up what his opposite midfield number lacked. 7 Bernardo Silva Spooned early shot but was impressively alert with close-range goal on stroke of half-time. The Portuguese impressed all day and is currently undroppable. 7 Gabriel Jesus Preferred to Riyad Mahrez, the Brazilian was tidy but hardly inspiring – though he did not need to be, and continued to burst forward until end. 6 Phil Foden Positioned on left, he danced away from defenders when turning on the high gear. The youngster pared it back a little – as his whole team did – in second half. 7David Hytner’s verdict has landed. “How much longer? After the 5-0 humiliation against Liverpool, this was another Theatre of Screams occasion for Ole Gunnar Solskjær, another big game when the gap to the very best yawned like a chasm, when his Manchester United team were an incoherent mess.” Click below for more. Thanks for reading this MBM! Ole, not so happy, talks to Sky. “It is very difficult to talk now, of course. We started badly, passive, and when they got the first goal it was always going to be a difficult game. David kept us in the game, some good stops, then they score the goal they always score. We know that’s going to happen, and it shouldn’t happen. City played well, so some praise has to go to them, but we were not at our level and standards need to be raised. We still don’t trust ourselves with the ball, pass it as well as I know they can. We sometimes made the wrong solutions, sometimes the right solution but not the right execution. We have to get back to what we started to look like, a proper team, towards the end of last season and the start of this one, we have to get back to that. I’m sure when we come back, the demands on me and the players will be high. We’ve just got to get back to what we were for a while, and we have the players to do that. I have good communication all the time with the club. I want the best for Man United, and as long as I am here, I will do all I can to improve this.” An extremely content Pep talks to Sky Sports. “It was a solid performance and a good game. A deserved victory. Three more points. You have to put the ball in the fridge, a lot of passes, a lot of passes. The ball comes where we are. We don’t come to pick up the ball. It’s completely different. I’m so demanding, we know our standards, but I am very pleased. If you attack quick against United, and you don’t finish this action, you will be attacked quicker. They are so dangerous. That’s why we shoot a game with lots of control and maintain possession, because then they cannot run.” Roy Keane, past the stage of being angry, gives his verdict on Sky. “City are a different sort of team to Liverpool and just toyed with United. The difference in quality ... it was men v boys. United were so awful. Foden mentioned there that it’s a tough place to come. It’s not. Ask Everton. Ask Aston Villa. Ask Liverpool. Teams are coming here and getting a bit of joy now ... I don’t know what I’m going to say, it’s so poor. These players aren’t good enough for Manchester United. I wasn’t shocked when Bailly sliced that into the net, he’s got that in him, he’s erratic. It’s hope more than any belief. Ole has to take responsibility, of course he has, they have to get more out of these players. I’d like to go in hard on the United players but today I’m just feeling sorry for them, they’re just not up to playing for Man United.” Phil Foden talks to Sky. “I think we had the game of our lives today. Everything just went right. We dominated from start to finish, which is obviously really good. We are really pleased. We knew we could exploit the space in behind the full backs. It gives us massive confidence, it was important to get the win before the international break. It was very important to get back to winning ways. United are a great team and it’s such a difficult ground to come to, and we showed our class today.” The stats are fairly damning for United. Sky flash up a graphic that shows City enjoyed 68 percent of possession and took 32 touches in the opposition’s box; United by comparison had just four, with only one in the second half. Their previous low since Opta began counting these things in 2008 was nine. A word from the editor. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. ... and so the pressure is cranked up on Ole Gunnar Solskjaer even more. With the international break coming up, United don’t play again until they go to Watford in a fortnight. A lot of time in which to sort a few things out, one way or another. Meanwhile City, their mood much better, go into the break having moved into second place for at least a day. Paul Fisher adds: “The thing is the Strand man was in control and cool.” United trudge off to boos again. Again. City completely bossed them today. A two-goal loss flatters United. Solskjaer disappears down the tunnel clapping the fans; not all of them reciprocate. 90 min +4: Ronaldo never gives up, of course, and he flings himself at a right-wing cross. He’d have scored, too, but Stones flicks away just in time. 90 min +3: It’s party time in the City end. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer stands in the pouring rain, head bowed, a study in loneliness, like a man who smokes Strand cigarettes. A hot-topic pop-culture reference there for the kids. 90 min +1: The first of four additional minutes passes without drama. 90 min: Cancelo jigs down the left, reaches the byline, and whistles a shot-cum-cross through De Gea’s legs and across the face of goal. There’s nobody there to poke home. De Bruyne tries to recycle possession down the right and is bowled over in a pincer movement launched by Fernandes and Ronaldo. The latter is booked for a late slide. 88 min: Jesus tears down the right and into the United box. He goes over the leg of Telles and demands a penalty. He’s not getting one, Telles having got a small nick on the ball. Just a corner. 86 min: A City corner out on the left. The ball drops to Stones, who swivels, six yards out, and sends a low shot wide left. City could have scored quite a few more today. 85 min: “City have destroyed Manchester United in a peaceful way,” Gary Neville lyrically sighs on Sky. “It’s a calm annihilation.” 83 min: The away section blasts out a chorus of Ole’s at the Wheel by KC and the Sunshine Band. The second time that’s happened here in a fortnight. 81 min: Space for Foden down the inside-left channel. He reaches the edge of the box and drives low and hard across De Gea. He beats the keeper, but the ball grazes the bottom of the right-hand post and out for a corner. So close to the killer blow. 80 min: The biggest cheer of the afternoon from the United fans comes as Van de Beek replaces Fred. It’s not entirely clear which side of that equation they’re happier about. 78 min: The Old Trafford crowd are beginning to sound their displeasure. City are running down the clock without too much trouble here. 76 min: Cancelo’s low shot is deflected through a thicket of players to Gundogan, who floats a chip across the face of the United goal, left to right. De Bruyne meets the dropping ball with a spectacular volley ... spectacular only in the sense that he sends a full shank spinning into the crowd in the slapstick fashion. 74 min: A City free kick out on the left, McTominay having bundled into Gundogan. Ronaldo clears Foden’s cross. “It seems like whoever lost that Man Utd vs Tottenham game was going to end up with Conte as manager,” writes Jon Collins. “United may have got the three points but watching this I think that longer term Spurs may have got the better deal.” 73 min: Shaw walks off very gingerly, assisted by United’s medical men. Telles takes his place. 72 min: Shaw goes down again. He’s surely got to go off now. 71 min: City continue to stroke the ball around. United forced to chase more shadows. 69 min: ... but gathers himself and opts to stay on. Telles, preparing to come on in his stead, puts his bib back on. 68 min: Shaw is down, having come second best in an aerial challenge with Rodri. He looks a little groggy ... 66 min: Gundogan should trap a long pass along the inside-left channel. He doesn’t get the ball under total control, though, and the chance for a one-on-one with De Gea is gone. He slaps the ball into the side netting instead. United get away with one. Then Rashford comes on for Greenwood. 65 min: Cancelo beats Wan-Bissaka in a 50-50 with absurd ease, and the Old Trafford faithful are quick to tell their player what’s what. The first second-half rumblings of annoyance. 64 min: City have re-established their control of this game. An awful lot of passing going on, as they pull United this way and that, presumably with a view to getting the hosts all tuckered out. 62 min: Foden whistles a low cross into the United box from the left. Gundogan hopes to bundle home from close range, but Lindelof reads the danger and knocks out for a corner. Nothing comes of the set piece. 61 min: City draw some triangles in the middle of the pitch. Patient probing. 59 min: City aren’t quite as fluid as they were in the first half. By way of illustration, Gundogan sends a simple pass straight out of play. Greenwood then comes in from the right and drags a low, weak shot wide right. 58 min: Ronaldo performs one of his trademark stepovers out on the left wing, a soft-shoe shuffle that draws Silva into a rash sliding tackle. Into the book he goes. 56 min: It’s City’s turn to sit back. Rope-a-dope tactics? United have no choice but to go for it, but they’re leaving space behind them. 54 min: De Bruyne and Silva combine to slip Gundogan into the United box down the left. From the tightest of angles, he manufactures a cross-cum-shot that somehow twangs off the crossbar and away. That was nearly as farcical as the second goal. 52 min: That state of affairs hasn’t stopped Pep from leaping around the technical area in a very animated fashion. United are enjoying a bit of sterile possession in the middle of the park, and he’s clearly far from happy about it, giving his team the what-for. 50 min: This second half hasn’t quite got going yet. 48 min: Greenwood tears down the right and is unceremoniously blocked by Cancelo, who is booked for the deliberate obstruction. Fernandes takes the resulting free kick, and curls across the front of the six-yard box. Inexplicably, nobody in red attacks it, and the nearest man Ronaldo was offside anyway. 47 min: City stroke the ball around the back for a while, back in the old routine. United get the ball rolling for the second half. No more back three: Bailly is replaced by Sancho as Ole rolls the dice. The arrival of Sancho is met with a round of applause. It’s still tipping down. Half-time entertainment. On Sky, Roy Keane is slowly coming to the boil, and may be worth listening to after the match, depending on how this pans out. “I give up on these players. These are international footballers! I give up. Unless United do something drastic, it’ll be another four or five.” Half-time postbag. “I could have sworn I just read the words ‘Ronaldo leads a press’” - Ian Copestake. “Without the benefit of TV coverage may I ask, did you mean to write this: Ronaldo leads a press on the City back line” - John Little. You’ve got me doubting myself now. Half-time advertisement. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. United trudge off to boos again. Strange goal, this. Cancelo, in space on the left, curls towards the far post. The United defence hesitates en masse. Shaw lets the ball bounce on the right-hand corner of the six-yard box. At full stretch, he pokes towards the bottom right. The ball slaps De Gea’s chest, and the keeper bundles clumsily into the goal. Silence, before everyone realises the ball has gently rolled into the back of the net. 43 min: Wan-Bissaka sticks out a leg to intercept, only to concede a corner. City don’t do anything with their gift. 42 min: BREAKING NEWS: It’s raining heavily in Manchester. 40 min: Wan-Bissaka drives down the middle and slips a ball down the right channel to release Ronaldo into the City box. Ronaldo welts towards the bottom right. Ederson parries, and the flag goes up correctly for offside anyway. For all City’s dominance, United have had a couple of good chances to equalise now. Ronaldo, looking along the line, should have held his run there. 39 min: Silva busies himself down the right, beating two men and threatening to break into acres of space. McTominay sticks out a telescopic leg and stops him just in time. 37 min: Gundogan shimmies into a little pocket down the left and looks for Jesus in the middle with a dinked cross. Maguire clears. This is a full-on rearguard action. It’s not totally clear how United have restricted the damage to a single goal, De Gea’s antics notwithstanding, but here we are. 36 min: City are in total control again. Old Trafford is a significantly quieter place now. 34 min: De Bruyne slaps a shot towards the bottom left. De Gea saves again. From the resulting corner, Cancelo drives goalwards. Silva tries to poke the ball past De Gea, but the keeper is in Octopus Mode this afternoon and isn’t about to be beaten here. What a one-man show this is by De Gea! 33 min: Foden is the total boss of Wan-Bissaka down the left. He whips a low cross into the six-yard box. Lindelof nearly pinball-flippers another own goal into the bottom left. De Gea saves his blushes. 32 min: United are sitting very deep again, perhaps having thought twice about pressing. Probably wise. 30 min: De Gea follows one stunning save with another. From the corner, he fingertips Cancelo’s rising drive over the bar. Nothing comes of the next corner, but United are hanging on again. 29 min: Yep. Foden romps into acres down the left, Wan-Bissaka nowhere to be seen. His low cross is met by De Bruyne, whose shot is blocked but spins to Jesus, to his right. Jesus looks certain to score, the right-hand portion of the net unguarded. He whips goalwards, but De Gea appears out of nowhere to tip over. A sensational save! 28 min: That’s encouraged United to come out and play a bit. Ronaldo leads a press on the City back line. But there’s more space for City to play in, once they beat it. United playing into City’s hands? 26 min: ... and all of a sudden, United nearly score! Shaw curls into the box, low and hard from the left. Ronaldo meets the ball on the penalty spot and screeches a first-time effort goalwards. Anywhere other than straight at Ederson, and it was 1-1. But the goalie saves, and Greenwood can’t deal with the rebound that comes flashing at him at warp speed. So much better from United! 25 min: Ronaldo drops deep in the hope of getting something going for United. A rare period of possession in City territory ends when Wan-Bissaka’s cross from the right fails to beat the first man. Better, though. Baby steps. 23 min: De Bruyne and Cancelo work their way down the left, Wan-Bissaka having gifted them possession. They win a corner. Nothing comes of that, but United are giving the ball away an awful lot, and there are the beginnings of a few murmurs in the stands. 21 min: Maguire is slightly fortunate to get away with a light rake on De Bruyne as the pair high-kick at a loose ball. Just a free kick, nothing more. 20 min: Gundogan shimmies out of a tight spot in the centre circle and slips a pass down the right for De Bruyne. United, having pushed upfield en masse, find themselves light at the back. They’re very fortunate that De Bruyne, who had options either side, slips while in full flight. 18 min: De Bruyne very nearly releases Foden with a clever flick down the left channel. Just a bit too much on the pass. Goal kick. Before De Gea can take it, the crowd give their team a huge roar of encouragement. They need it. 17 min: Fernandes screams at his own defence, urging them to calm down and push upfield a little bit. He’s extremely agitated, and could do with considering his own advice. 16 min: Wan-Bissaka comes through the back of Foden and concedes a free kick just to the left of the United box. Foden gets back up and discusses tactics with De Bruyne. The latter takes; United manage to get it clear. This is all City at the minute. Only seven percent of play so far has taken place in City’s final third. 14 min: De Bruyne crosses from a deep position on the right. The ball very nearly drops to Foden at the far post, but United breathe again as it sails out for a goal kick, just a few inches too high. 13 min: A neat exchange between Fernandes and Ronaldo gets the home juices flowing, but Fernandes then gifts the ball to Jesus, who romps up the other end and wins a throw near the corner flag. Nothing comes of it, but United are struggling to bust out of their own half. City have enjoyed 72 percent of possession so far. 11 min: It’ll be interesting to see if United change their gameplan, having sat back for the most part during the opening exchanges, much good that it did them. Far too early to panic, but they’ll need to step out at some point. 9 min: That’s United’s worst fears realised, then. An early chance missed, followed by the ultimate sucker punch up the other end. Shades of the Fernandes miss and the Keita goal in that game. The Old Trafford masses are suddenly quiet and jittery. 7 min: Walker is given an absurd amount of time to line up a cross from the right. He whips one to the far post. Gundogan can’t quite force home. Lindelof half clears. Cancelo strides down the left and fizzes a low cross into the six-yard box. Bailly slides in, and slices the ball over De Gea and into the roof of the net. 5 min: Fred slips Ronaldo into a bit of space down the left. Walker forces Ronaldo to turn tail, but then Jesus comes across and clumsily, needlessly bowls him over. Free kick. Everyone lines up on the edge of the box. Shaw curls one in, a fine delivery. Maguire wins the header, but can’t get it on target from eight yards. He should have worked Ederson at the very least. It was a great chance. 3 min: Silva cuts into the United box from the right and looks for the top-left corner. He’s miles off. Goal kick. 2 min: City spend the opening couple of minutes passing the ball around the back. Cancelo suddenly hits long for De Bruyne who can’t control. Ronaldo tries to counter but is stopped unceremoniously by Walker. A breezy start. City get the 186th Manchester derby underway ... but only after the knee is taken, to more warm applause. A huge roar. They’ll be kicking towards the Stretford End in this first half. Before kick-off, the teams gather around the centre circle to remember the fallen ... and commemorate the recent passing of former United assistant Walter Smith. Both managers lay wreathes pitchside. The Last Post is met with a sustained around of warm, heartfelt applause. RIP. The teams are out! United in red, City sky blue, all exactly as it should be. A scorching atmosphere, the crowd of over 75,000 inside Old Trafford giving it plenty. Pantomime boos for City as they emerge from the tunnel; a huge ovation for the home side when they turn up. The Stone Roses blaring from the speakers. This is the one all right. Manchester derby coming right up! Pre-match entertainment. While away the countdown until kick-off with this retro Joy of Six. Pre-match postbag. “The name Fred is the real-life equivalent of Morris-Dancing Fiver’s regular appearance in the Fiver’s England squads. But how in the name of Sir Alex Ferguson does he manage to get on the team sheet too?” - Justin Kavanagh. “I too am anticipating a psychedelic game today. Shame Trippier can’t be here but there wouldn’t be mushroom for him in United’s seven-man defence” - Dean Kinsella. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer speaks to Sky Sports. “Unfortunately Edinson didn’t make it, but Marcus was cleared this morning and he is available to part join us if he needs to. Everyone knows what Mason can do, it’s a good chance for him, he’s looking forward to his job. It’s a local derby, we know what it means for everyone, we know what it means for the table, if we get three points you’re equal, if they get them we’re too far behind to be happy. You have to use [results like the Liverpool 5-0] as motivation, because you can’t make those mistakes again. I liked the attitude and focus this morning. We all know we’re up for a difficult game and we’re ready for it.” Pep Guardiola talks to Sky. “This is not the first important game or derby game the players have played in their careers, nor the first time they are here. But it is important to be emotionally stable. The players are professional, they like playing football for this type of game, it is normal. We want a left foot on the left side, a right foot on the right side, basically that is the reason why [Grealish is on the bench]. In the bad moments, stick together, in the good moments enjoy, be clinical.” He’s also asked what the key to winning derby matches is, and flippantly says something about scoring four goals in the first ten minutes. He seems pretty relaxed. United make three changes in the wake of the 2-2 draw at Atalanta. Raphael Varane has a hamstring injury, Paul Pogba is still suspended, and Marcus Rashford drops to the bench. Back in: Victor Lindelof, Fred and Mason Greenwood. There’s no Edinson Cavani; he’s picked up a knock. City also make three changes, after their 4-1 victory over Bruges. Jack Grealish sits this one out on the bench, alongside Riyad Mahrez, while Aymeric Laporte is suspended after his red card against Crystal Palace. Kevin de Bruyne, Ruben Dias and Gabriel Jesus return to the starting XI. Manchester United: de Gea, Lindelof, Bailly, Maguire, Wan Bissaka, Bruno Fernandes, McTominay, Fred, Shaw, Greenwood, Ronaldo. Subs: Martial, Rashford, Lingard, Dalot, Sancho, Henderson, Alex Telles, Matic, van de Beek. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Stones, Dias, Joao Cancelo, Gundogan, Rodri, Bernardo Silva, Gabriel Jesus, De Bruyne, Foden. Subs: Ake, Sterling, Grealish, Zinchenko, Steffen, Fernandinho, Mahrez, Carson, Palmer. Referee: Michael Oliver (Northumberland). We’ve been here before. Manchester United go into battle at Old Trafford against big rivals, buoyed by a sensational Cristiano Ronaldo performance against Atalanta. Last time round, Paul Scholes peeled back the paper, examined the cracks, predicted chaos against Liverpool, and look what happened. This time, it’s his fellow BT pundit and erstwhile team-mate Rio Ferdinand’s turn to light the warning flare. “They can’t have that second-half performance,” Rio said in the immediate wake of Ronaldo’s smash and grab in Italy. “If they go out with that second-half performance against Manchester City, they get slapped again by three, four, five.” So this could be another painful afternoon for United, as they welcome the champions of England. Especially as the home side has only won three of the past 16 Manchester derbies, the away team winning ten. On the other hand, United are unbeaten in four against City in the league; they’re unpredictable to the point of being psychedelic, the sort of team that follows up a 5-0 home defeat with a 3-0 away win; and then there’s Ronaldo. Good luck, then, confidently predicting the outcome of this. Not least because there’s a fair chance it could be a high-scoring cracker. Let’s hope so, anyway. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!A coterie of the best-known faces in art has returned to the banks of the Thames, ready for public scrutiny this month. Paul Cézanne’s card players have been in Norway, while a bandaged Vincent van Gogh has been visiting Amsterdam. Claude Monet’s image of a sun-drenched tree on a beach in Antibes took a summer trip to Hull. Now back home together, they are hanging in the Courtauld Gallery in Somerset House, on the Strand in central London, after a three-year refurbishment that has let in light and created space. The building work, estimated to have cost about £57m, including arranging the loan of exhibits to other galleries, has brought the large first-floor Great Room, the setting for Britain’s first Royal Academy summer exhibitions, between 1780 and 1836, back to its original stately grandeur. The gallery and its academic institute have been based at Somerset House since 1989, displaying a collection the core of which was once owned by textile industrialist Samuel Courtauld. He co-founded the institute that bears his name only 90 years ago, bequeathing his entire store of international art to the nation on his death in 1947. The man now in charge of the collection is art historian Ernst Vegelin van Claerbergen (below), the Dutch-born, English-educated head of the gallery. He follows former notable directors of the past associated with the institute, such as Peter Lasko and the Soviet spy Anthony Blunt. The Observer asked Vegelin to pick out a few of his favourite images from the walls of the Courtauld. Among them are several beloved works, together with a blast of anarchy from the avant-garde vorticist movement created by a British female artist with a reputation that is on the ascent. Édouard Manet: A Bar at the Folies-Bergère (1882) Am I allowed to have the Manet? The bar? I can say, hand on heart, it never ceases to intrigue and excite me. We are most famous for our impressionists, and this is one of the most famous of those. It was acquired by Samuel Courtauld himself for £22,600, the most he ever paid for a painting, or at least equal top with Renoir’s La Loge, which he bought the year before. It is now going to be at the centre of our display in the reclaimed Great Room, but we had quite a lot of discussion about how to present it. We didn’t want our visitors to see it immediately they enter the gallery. We knew that the barmaid, Suzon, would dominate the space, so we have put the painting around the side. She looks directly at you, the viewer, making you part of the painting. The gold band that runs behind is the frame of the mirror and laid out in front are sophisticated mandarins, peppermint liqueur and unopened champagne bottles. The two white globes are thought to be early electric lights. The great puzzle remains her reflection, which he has moved from the logical position. It’s a dislocation that catches the eye. People also wonder about her expression. Now it is interpreted as looking bored or alienated, but that’s quite a contemporary lens. In the past people felt she was more enigmatic or even jolly. She is a later equivalent of the Mona Lisa. Manet painted it in 1882, the year before he died, so it is a summation of his career as a painter of modern life. It was painted for the Paris salon, the annual state show, which was always extremely crowded. He designed it to stand out. Manet refused invitations to join young artists in other shows, because he believed the revolution in art needed to come from within the establishment. Helen Saunders: Composition with Figures, Black and White (1915) Now a drawing. They are always compelling for their immediacy and somehow much more approachable than a fully completed complex painting, which it can be hard to imagine someone creating. The drawing process is clearer to us. We have 7,000 drawings in total, and we’ve just received a wonderful gift of 25 modern and postwar drawings. The one I’ve picked is a black-and-white pen-and-ink example by a member of the vorticist movement, Helen Saunders. In 2016 we were given 20 of her drawings, the largest group of her work in any collection. She is a very interesting artist, and overlooked for decades. In recent years she has come to the attention of scholars and curators and, hopefully, now also the public. She started off attached to the Bloomsbury group and to the artist Roger Fry, then switched allegiance to a more radical group: the vorticists. They were led by Wyndham Lewis and only really operated for two years. They were determined to communicate a sense of modern life with machinery, and show the importance of the 20th-century city. Saunders signed her name on the movement’s 1915 manifesto, printed in its magazine, Blast, but spelled her name differently because she didn’t want her family to know of the association. I have picked a very characteristic work of hers. A pen and ink that is a very tough-edged abstraction with geometric shapes. It seems to be a group of figures, and there are two abstract figures at the top, but they may be machine forms, and there are rays of light going downwards. It is a really accomplished piece of work which is completely uncompromising in its abstractions. An exhibition in the Pompidou Centre in Paris this year featured her work, but there is going to be much more to say about Helen Saunders. Lucas Cranach the Elder: Adam and Eve (1526) I came to know this picture 30 years ago when I first visited the Courtauld, and it’s one that has stayed with me: more even than the Cézannes, Van Goghs and Monets. It’s very seductive and beguiling. It has a sophistication to it as there is no sense of moralising or condemnation of this dramatic moment for the whole of humanity. There is not a cloud in the sky, and Cranach has obviously delighted in depicting all the animals, clearly drawn from life – except for the lion, which appears to have been copied, with the result that it’s rather timid and sweet and pet-able. And then there is Eve’s quite fantastic great spray of curly hair. And Adam is scratching his head, as if he is thinking, “This is wrong, but I can’t resist this apple.” The serpent is already slithering through the branches above them and the grapes are there as a symbol of the eucharist, the blood of Christ and the suggestion of redemption. There are multiple versions of this work but this is very much the finest. Pieter Bruegel the Elder: Landscape with the Flight into Egypt (1563) Rubens admired his friend Jan Brueghel’s father and collected his works. He owned about 10 paintings, although they are very rare. We have one of those. This is a delightful landscape, with the holy family in the foreground, but almost secondary to the beautiful panoramic background. They are fleeing persecution and being led by Joseph, with the Madonna cradling the Christ child. The group have just passed a pagan shrine and you can see that it has toppled, which aligns with the legend that when the true Christ passed by, all pagan symbols would fall. And to the left at the bottom of the picture we can see they are going to have to navigate a gorge via a bridge. This is an indication of the arduous journey they are going to have. Pieter Brueghel the Younger was one of the first northern artists to cross the Alps, in about 1604. And it was said that he swallowed all of the mountains and brought them back to spill them out in Antwerp. In his landscapes he uses the formula of painting in brown at the front, then green in the middle and blue for the background, further away. It gives wonderful perspective. It is very nice to think that Rubens had this painting hanging in his home and that it was important to him. It was first owned by Cardinal Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle, quite a tough guy who was minister of the Spanish crown in the Netherlands. In fact, we also have a portrait of him in the gallery. Peter Paul Rubens: Family of Jan Brueghel the Elder (c. 1613-15) I love this. It has an immediacy that speaks across 400 years. As a husband and a father myself, the personal element is something I relate to. And my love of the picture is also born of my admiration for Rubens, both as a collector and as one of the greatest artists ever to pick up a brush. He brings everything with him from the Renaissance and then looks forward to what art was to become. We have 25 of his paintings, 201 original letters and an inventory handwritten after his death, much of which will now be on display in one room. But this painting, made in 1615 in Antwerp, somehow covers his full range. It’s a portrait of the wife and children of his friend Jan, son of the painter Pieter Bruegel, and it’s about family and friendship. Interestingly, he does not show his friend as a painter, but as a father, although the two friends worked together, with Rubens painting the figures and Jan Brueghel the landscape. It’s a very touching depiction of the children. The daughter, Elizabeth, is gazing up at her mother, while the boy, Peter, is wearing almost a cavalier outfit. I have a 13-year-old son, so it would have been more realistic for me, I suppose, if he’d been in shorts, holding a football, off to the park. This is such an ingenious composition, with Catharina, the wife, with her stiffer neck ruff, at the heart of the picture, while her husband has his arm protectively around her and their son. The image comes together around this affectionate knot of hands, with the son touching, or indicating, his mother’s bracelet. This piece of jewellery seems to have meant a lot to the family, as it appears with them in other portraits, some painted by Jan himself.Aside from being first lieutenant in Robert Plant’s band, the Sensational Space Shifters, guitarist Justin Adams boasts a notable history producing luminaries like Malian group Tinariwen, Gambia’s Juldeh Camara and, most recently, Puglian ensemble CGS (Canzoniere Grecanico Salentino). Hence this sparky duet with CGS singer, violinist and percussionist Mauro Durante. Recorded straight to tape with no overdubs, Still Moving proves a thrilling, spontaneous affair, switching between the laments and love songs of southern Italy and the gritty blues of North Africa and North America. Adams is an astonishing player, able to summon a mood of angst with a few reverberating chords of desert blues before a jolt into John Lee Hooker boogie, as he does on opener Dark Road Down, where the two men raise voices against a war-torn world of “trouble and pain”. Durante delivers an aching version of Amara Terra Mia, a big Italian hit, a paean to an elemental world of night sky and olive groves. Still Moving describes a Mediterranean sea trek, with days of rowing to an inhospitable shore; half Homer, half modern migrant. There’s a blazing rock-out on Calling Up, and, somewhat oddly, a version of Little Moses from the Carter Family’s country Bible. A bravura performance.Pardon me for a moment while I shed a few crocodile tears. The proximate cause of this grief is the news that the revenues of Snap, Facebook, Twitter and YouTube are down by an estimated $9.85bn in the second half of this year. Just to put that in context, as I write, the stock market valuations of the first three of these behemoths are $86.9bn, $930.36bn and $44.07bn respectively. YouTube is harder to estimate because it’s part of Alphabet, its holding company, but since that’s valued at $1.93tn (that’s trillion, by the way) we may safely assume that YouTube’s revenue decline was, as engineers say, “in the noise”. And yet all these outfits were complaining loudly at the injustice that had been done to them by one of their peers – Apple. Why so? Well, back in April, the iPhone manufacturer introduced its grandly named app-tracking transparency policy via a tweak to its mobile operating system, which forced iPhone apps to ask for permission before they tracked the behaviour of users to serve them personalised ads. Predictably, most users declined to be tracked, which meant that those who had hoped to target them were left floundering. After all, the supposed USP of surveillance capitalism is that it enables advertisers to direct messages at people who might be disposed to receive them. So, after Apple tweaked iOS, many of them switched to advertising on Android and – this is the really delicious bit – to Apple’s own growing advertising business! While the sound of moguls grinding their teeth is music to any columnist’s ears, there is, however, one sobering thought that emerges from this little farce. It is that it also provides a vivid illustration of the exercise of corporate power in a digital age. At a stroke (or at any rate a change to the operating system code), Apple had been able to take away almost $10bn in revenue from four of its fellow tech giants. This was the exercise of formidable power. The great unsolved problem of our time is how to deal with – and where necessary curb – the unaccountable power of these giants. The first step on that road is to reach a collective understanding of what kind of power they actually wield. And for that we need a taxonomy. In an earlier era, the political theorist Steven Lukes proposed one. There were, he said, three kinds of power: the ability to compel people to do what they don’t want to do, the ability to stop them doing something they want to do and the ability to shape the way they think. This last one was useful in addressing the power of influential media owners (Rupert Murdoch, for example) in the old media ecosystem. But although it still applies in some ways to social media, it’s less useful for the networked ecosystem we now inhabit; we need another category. “Platform power” is one possibility. The tech giants all possess it to a greater or lesser degree. In Apple’s case, for example, it owns and controls two important platforms – ie, software systems on which other agents can build businesses: they are the operating systems on which its devices run and its app store, which decides what apps are allowed on Apple devices. Google owns several platforms – a search engine and its associated advertising marketplace, the Android mobile operating system, YouTube and Google cloud services. Facebook (whose holding company is now rebranded as Meta) also owns several – Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp; Twitter owns, er, Twitter; Amazon owns its marketplace and cloud services; and Microsoft owns the Windows/Office platform and a fast-growing cloud service, Azure. The difficulty is that there’s no single regulatory tool for controlling the abuse of platform power. In Apple’s case, for example, there are good arguments for the view that the change to its mobile operating system that so discombobulated Snap &amp; Co was legitimate: it offered users a choice as to whether they wanted to be tracked or not and they decided that they didn’t. But with its app store, there are grounds for regarding its mandatory levy of 30% on apps’ revenues as monopolistic price-gouging or rent-seeking. For democracies, though, the trickiest questions about platform power arise when they become part of society’s critical infrastructure. As social media platforms have turned into key components of the public sphere on which democracy depends, so their power to include or exclude voices has taken on a new significance. Just think of what happened when Trump was suddenly banned from Facebook and Twitter, but also remember that the same power to exclude or “de-platform” could be deployed against voices of which we approve. And there’s no proper appeal process. Then there’s Amazon, which really has become part of the critical infrastructure of many democracies, as we found during the pandemic. This is not just about home deliveries, either, but about the functioning of states, as the recent revelations about Britain’s security services becoming reliant on Amazon’s cloud services have demonstrated. Once upon a time, the first thing revolutionary coup leaders had to do on assuming power was to secure control of the TV stations. Next time, all they’ll have to do is nationalise Amazon and declare mission accomplished. What I’ve been reading New frontiers Hey, Facebook, I Made a Metaverse 27 Years Ago is a lovely essay by Ethan Zuckerman in the Atlantic about his attempt to build a metaverse and what Facebook’s bid to create one means. Zero hour Historian Jill Lepore’s New Yorker review/essay, The Next Cyberattack Is Already Under Way, is on Nicole Pelroth’s book about the cyberweapons arms race. History boys Much of What You’ve Heard About Carter and Reagan Is Wrong is a really interesting post by Noah Smith on his Substack blog debunking the traditional narrative about the former US presidents.In August 2012, while sailing off Sweden in his 28-metre yacht the Bequia, Jes Staley took a series of calls that left him with the impression he was about to become chief executive of Barclays. The American had been in discussions with the outgoing Barclays chairman, Marcus Agius, and his successor. Staley was passed over for the post at the time, and wouldn’t be appointed to the top job for another three years. While this gave him more time for sailing, in 2015, he made one trip he may wish he hadn’t: to see convicted sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein on his private Caribbean island. That visit was at the centre of the scandal that last week saw Staley fall on his sword after a run-in with City of London regulators. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Prudential Regulation Authority had started investigating Staley’s dealings with Epstein. The late financier, who died in prison in 2019, had been a client when Staley was running JP Morgan’s private banking division, but the two men stayed in contact after Staley left the bank and after Epstein was convicted of procuring a minor for prostitution in 2008. “Obviously I thought I knew him well, and I didn’t,” Staley told reporters last year when the inquiry was made public. “With hindsight … I deeply regret having had any relationship with Jeffrey Epstein.” The investigation’s findings have yet to be released, but Staley’s resignation suggests regulators were not happy with his ties to the disgraced financier. Staley has already decided to challenge, rather than accept, the regulator’s judgments. Staley’s arrival in 2015 was meant to herald a fresh start for the beleaguered bank. Barclays had ousted two bosses in less than four years, and a third was under investigation over a deal with Qatari investors. It needed an experienced pair of hands to revive its investment bank and restore its wider reputation, particularly in the wake of the Libor scandal. Enter Staley, then 58 and the first outsider to lead Barclays in nearly a decade. His strong track record included 30 years at JP Morgan, where he was once seen as a credible successor to boss Jamie Dimon. Staley declared he was ready and willing to clean up Barclays’s image. “I feel keenly we must continue to strengthen trust in Barclays,” Staley said in a memo after his appointment. He promised a “cultural transformation” and an end to the kind of behaviour that led to the Libor scandal and forced his predecessor Bob Diamond to resign. He said he wanted to foster a “collaborative, not adversarial” relationship with the City watchdogs. Barclays had become what author Philip Augar called a “full-throttle capitalist machine” – a far cry from its roots as a Quaker bank founded on London’s Lombard Street 300 years earlier. Staley’s declared ambition was to “restore Barclays to its rightful standing – successful, admired and well regarded by all”. But in his six years as chief executive, Staley added three more controversies to the mix, and arguably left the bank nursing more wounds than he was able to heal. The Epstein investigation was not his first run-in with the FCA. In 2018, Staley was fined almost £650,000, and ordered to repay £500,000 of his bonus, for having attempted to unmask a whistleblower in 2016. Staley was found to have deployed the bank’s internal security to try to discover the author of letters to the board flagging a new hire who was a former friend of Staley’s at JP Morgan. Even the US postal service was unwittingly enlisted to try track down the whistleblower, who Staley feared was trying to “maliciously smear” his co-worker. This caused embarrassment for the bank, which, until last year, had to report annually to regulators on its handling of whistleblowers. Investors expressed anger both about the incident and about the board’s unanimous backing for Staley. Barclays’s chairman at the time, John McFarlane, said his chief executive had merely made a “mistake.” A second controversy emerged in late 2017, when Staley caused a rift between private equity giant KKR and Barclays by backing his brother-in-law in a complicated legal dispute with the buyout house. While Staley argued that he was involved in a personal capacity, rather than as chief executive of Barclays, it strained the bank’s relationship with a long-time client and raised further concerns over how private matters were affecting his work. In the wake of these scandals, one shareholder went so far as to declare at the subsequent annual general meeting that, particularly following the whistleblower scandal, Staley’s role as chief executive was “irrevocably tarnished”. Then chairman John McFarlane dug his heels in, insisting that Staley did “not deserve to resign”. Unlike in Diamond’s case, Staley’s alleged misjudgment had not drawn the kind of public and political pressure that would potentially force a high-profile resignation. What’s more, Staley was making better progress on turning around the group’s investment banking arm than Diamond’s replacement, Antony Jenkins, had. Staley has been riding a strong investment banking cycle, which helped push the bank’s year-to-date profit to an all-time high of £6.9bn in September, but even so, analysts have praised his success in helping solidify and diversify the Barclays model. “The most significant mark he left on Barclays is having transformed it into a global corporate and investment banking powerhouse,” said John Cronin of stockbroker Goodbody. Barclays has this year overtaken Credit Suisse in terms of investment banking revenue, and outlasted activist investor Edward Bramson, who for years pushed for a winding-down of its investment banking activities. Staley’s reputation has undoubtedly been called into question. While he joins Diamond and Jenkins in the list of recently ousted chief executives, only time – and the outcome of his battle with regulators – will decide whether he is remembered for harming or restoring Barclays’s fortunes. • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to clarify that Barclays’s requirement to report to regulators annually on its handling of whistleblowers ended last year.I still beat myself up about how much of an idiot I was over so many years. I’d always seen having children as a key part of my purpose on this planet, believing that creating new life was part of my biological destiny. It was fundamental to how I navigated the world. I’m slightly jealous, in truth, of those who don’t have that imperative. My wife Anya, for instance, just enjoys life as it comes. It was August and she and I were on an idyllic holiday in Denmark. My brother came to see us, keen to deliver some news. We walked down to the end of the garden and, looking out across the Baltic Sea, he told me his partner was pregnant. It’s astonishing how quickly my brain went into overload. Even as my arms raised up to hug my younger brother, I was thinking: oh shit. Not at this joyful information – for him I couldn’t have been happier. Rather, I was immediately asking myself: how has he got round to this before me? Christ, I thought, Anya and I are both nearly 40. What on earth had we been waiting for? Anya’s clock was ticking. My clock was ticking. I’d failed to recognise my needs, and somehow forgotten about the passage of time. I’d always assumed we’d have a large litter, but in an instant I realised the prospect of that was all but gone. Of course, I’d wanted to keep up my adventures and was nervous about the responsibilities that would come with fatherhood. But having children had always been a priority. My wife and I had long had the opportunity. But for some reason we hadn’t taken it. As I pulled my brother close, all this came crashing down. I’m so pleased they got pregnant when they did or I might not have considered it until retirement. I talked to Anya, and we agreed to start trying. She’d be pregnant in no time, I thought, and, filled with excitement, we cracked on protection-less that very night. A few months in, we’d made no progress. It was strange given we were old enough, I thought, to know what went where. Resolutely, we entered the world of fertility consultants – tube and egg checks, and testing sperm. The process was pretty shit, quite frankly. Certainly a ball-ache. What was surreal, is that by nature I’m a pessimist. My glass is only ever half full. Yet I entered this with total confidence, convinced the tests would all go well. Once completed, we sat down for the results. “I won’t make any bones about it,” the specialist informed us, “you are basically infertile.” Conceiving, she said, would be impossible. We had no chance of having children. It was the starkest of messages and I could hardly take it in. I had loads of sperm, she explained, but their morphology was terrible, the shape and structure deformed. I had 0% normal sperm. Nothing. Their mobility was no better – they uselessly swam around in circles without an egg-breaking hope. I’m a mission-oriented, goal-focussed person. Often the projects I work on are complex and overwhelming and it’s my job to make sure problems are overcome. As I listened to her prognosis I felt powerless, our future slipping out of my hands. Receiving this information, I was totally unequipped. It was a long walk back, in every sense, to our flat in north London. I was in a daze, as if I’d been drugged. I was so disconnected I couldn’t mentally associate myself with my failure of a body. The sunny park looked like a film set with tons of people pushing prams. You never notice them more than when you’re desperately trying for a child. I didn’t speak to anyone about how I was feeling. I don’t think it was shame or embarrassment, I just didn’t recognise the importance of talking at the time. I started to drink too much. Lovingly, Anya dragged me back to my senses. Together, we started to process the news. We’d try alternative techniques, get a second opinion. We looked online, but found little obviously reliable information. It felt like entering the Wild West, a place where medical research hasn’t quite caught up. Conception is a fundamental, primal act, but the science around it is still so uncertain. There’s so much guesswork, unproven theories and chance. It’s like a fertility casino, and we rolled the dice. Some “experts” we visited had ridiculous suggestions: have sex every day; every three days; do it upside down. When you’re desperate you’ll try anything. It felt like an industry trying to muddle its way through a healthcare crisis, as its patients are too. Reading more about the subject saw my frustration turn to anger – fertility is on a downward spiral and we’re being poisoned by the modern world. Some experts believe the sperm counts of western men have fallen by more than 50% over recent decades and that their defectiveness is on the rise. Meanwhile, others believe the number of miscarriages is increasing and that egg quality is in steep decline. One of the most significant problems affecting fertility is endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), which can mimic and interfere with the hormones that regulate and run our bodies. EDCs are used in plastic and thousands of products, including cosmetics, toys, clothes, soft furnishings, pesticides and the linings of tinned foods. They’re everywhere. Usually they’re not even listed on labels. Yet for decades study after study has shown they pose an existential risk. We’re poisoning ourselves out of existence, and our consumer capitalist democracies seem incapable of stopping it. It’s a reality of our health and wellbeing that should fill us with rage and fear. In time, I came to terms with our situation. I thought a lot about the horror I’d seen in all my travels. Yes, this was traumatic, but I’d witnessed unimaginable suffering in others. Once I arrived at acceptance, I started to transform parts of my life. Many experts had told us that with dedication our prospects might not be quite so bleak. I went on a health kick, cutting out some of the things I’d always felt made life worth living. Gradually, we saw my sperm’s scores improve. The transformation in my sperm’s morphology once I lived a healthier, cleaner lifestyle convinced me there needs to be intervention to stop us poisoning ourselves out of existence. Mother Nature took pity on me, helping me see off the chemicals I’d spent a lifetime consuming. In less than a year, enough of my boys became healthy enough to have a shot. It was time, we were told, to try IVF. For Anya, this would mean enduring invasive treatment. My job would be short and simple. I tried to remain considerate of that fact. Because Anya and I had conflicting priorities, I suggested we used a 0-10 point system that I often use to help quantify mine and others’ beliefs and desires. Say we’re filming in South America and have 60 seconds to decide whether to join a drugs raid with local police: I ask everyone to make a snap judgment for how positive they feel about proceeding. Whether out on location, or sat in the living room, I use the same method. The higher you score a statement, the more you agree. We played the game. She was enthusiastic, but I needed children more than her. I recognised the physical suffering of both IVF and a potential pregnancy (and the rest of it) for her. In return, she recognised fatherhood was a necessity for me. We decided to give it a shot. On a crisp, sunny afternoon in early spring 2011, we walked out of the Royal Free in London, holding our newborn baby. For a moment I’d felt like security would stop me. We didn’t have a certificate, we’d not been trained. Stepping out into the real world felt an elemental moment. It was a total and utter delight. After all we’d been through, I’d presumed this moment would never come. I tried to keep a sense of perspective – refraining from announcing our offspring to every stranger on the street. Nine months earlier, we’d been incredibly lucky when our first round of IVF had succeeded. For weeks, we’d assumed it hadn’t: Anya wasn’t tired, tender or nauseous. Hope had slipped away. But then, somehow, one spartan embryo had prevailed. Now I’ve written a book, Journeys to Impossible Places, in which I recount my trips to many corners of the world – and it would have been dishonest not to include my journey to fatherhood, too. Having a conversation with my son – now 10 years old – about what to include was scary. He has strong opinions. I was worried something I’d written would upset or embarrass him. Thankfully, he was up for sharing. I found talking to him cathartic, too. Reflecting on what the experience taught me, I’ve certainly become more determined to regularly assess what I want, whether from life or specific situations. If I decide pursuing something is important, I try to act urgently and aggressively – full throttle – rather than be half-arsed. I know I might not make it, but I give those desires everything I’ve got. Mostly, I’ve been instilled with a sense of urgency. It’s so easy to be seduced into thinking we’re timeless and eternal, with all the time in the world. Time ticks by fast. My priorities had always been family and travel, and I presumed we’d have forever. Suddenly you’re middle-aged and the end of the pier is in sight. Looking back at the experiences and adventures I’ve had, there’s been beauty and danger, thrills and the unknown. To say that the most normal, natural act of having a kid is the hardest, most moving and exhilarating button-tweaking journey I’ve taken is quite something. I can’t believe I put it off for so long, I feel like such a fool. Journeys to Impossible Places by Simon Reeve (Hodder, £20) is available from guardianbookshop.com for £17.40. The Lakes with Simon Reeve airs Sundays at 9pm from 14 November on BBC TwoThe mountains that will be the setting of the Alpine events for the forthcoming Winter Olympics in Beijing boast spectacular scenery and breathtaking runs, but lack just one vital ingredient: real snow. Between January and March this year, the National Alpine Ski Centre in Yanqing, about 55 miles north-west of Beijing, had just 2cm of snow. London, Paris and Madrid all recorded greater snowfalls, according to data compiled by the website worldweatheronline.com. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) now faces mounting questions about the environmental cost of the Games, which open on 4 February, including claims the alpine runs were constructed in a protected nature reserve. It has been calculated that Beijing 2022 will need about 49 million gallons of water to create the required artificial snow. “These could be the most unsustainable Winter Olympics ever held,” said Professor Carmen de Jong, a geographer at the University of Strasbourg. “These mountains have virtually no natural snow.” She said artificial snow was water- and energy-intensive, damaging soil health and causing erosion. IOC officials warned in the bid evaluation report in June 2015 that Yanqing, the venue for downhill skiing and slalom, and Zhangjiakou, the venue for cross-country skiing, ski jumping and snowboarding events, had meagre annual snowfalls. “[They] have minimal annual snowfall and for the Games would rely completely on artificial snow,” they said. Stockholm, Oslo and Munich withdrew bids because of the costs, or failing to win public support. About 200 snow cannons will create ribbons of artificial snow across the mountainside in Yanqing. A network of pipes and trenches will supply water from a reservoir to the snow-making machine. While real snow is formed in clouds from clusters of tiny ice crystals, artificial snow is made from water droplets freezing into beads of ice. It typically means a harder piste and is often favoured by professional skiers for being fast and “hyper-grippy”. It is not the first time the IOC has chosen an Alpine events venue with more rock than snow. It chose Pyeongchang, South Korea, for the last Winter Olympics, where the cold but similarly arid climate also required vast quantities of artificial snow. Beijing has scarce water resources, but said in its bid there would be adequate supplies from stored run-off and existing reservoirs. Justin Francis,a member of the UK government’s Council for Sustainable Business and chief executive of holiday firm Responsible Travel, said: “This is the world’s showcase of winter sport and it’s extraordinary to host it in a place dependent on artificial snow. The Olympics inspires us about sport, but also about doing our bit to sustain the planet. This is the ideal platform and it’s the wrong message.” There are also concerns about the ecological impacts. The IOC evaluation report said the site would be adjacent to the 4,600 hectare Songshan National Nature Reserve, but in August 2015 the science journal Nature reported scientists’ concerns that the ski area fell within the park. The journal highlighted an internet post by the scientist Wang Xi, from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, which included a map showing the start and end of the alpine runs within the protected reserve. The post was reportedly clicked 240,000 times and forwarded more than 1,000 times before it no longer appeared online. A local mayor in Yanqing later said the park’s boundaries had been redrawn and none of the Olympic runs were in the extended nature reserve. Beijing published its sustainability report for the Games last year, pledging to meet the goals set out in the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It said it would use renewable energy for the venues and recycle water resources. “We shall give priority to ecological and resource conservation, environmental friendliness, and contribute to a beautiful environment,” it said. Richard Butler, emeritus professor in tourism at Strathclyde University, said: “The 2022 Olympics shows clearly how misused and now useless the term sustainable really is. It is used for whatever anyone wants and has become meaningless. “Clearly money, power, influence and politics came together to award the games to an area without sufficient snow.” Climate change means that ski resorts increasingly rely on artificial snow. According to a study by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 2007, global warming could jeopardise as many as two-thirds of all ski areas in the Alps. It warned of the impact on water supplies and local ecology in trying to use snow cannons to halt the retreating snowline. Martin Bell, an Alpine skier who competed in four Olympics, said modern innovations helped ensure artificial snow was more environmentally friendly. “Snow-making is now part of the sport and you just have to make sure it’s done in a careful way,” he said. “As competitors, we would always love to race in the Alps with beautiful villages and the church bells ringing, but we understand the sport needs to spread and become a truly worldwide sport. And going to China will help.” The IOC said: “Locations for Winter Games depend on a number of considerations, not just snowfall. A series of water-conserving and recycling designs have been put into place to optimise water usage for snowmaking, human consumption, and other purposes. Yanqing is rich in water resources in comparison with neighbouring areas. “Beijing 2022’s mission is being green, open, inclusive and clean. Beijing 2022 will use renewable energy for all competition venues.” The Beijing Organising Committee for the 2022 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games did not respond to a request for comment.Joe Biden saluted a “monumental step forward as a nation” on Saturday, after House Democrats finally reached agreement and sent a $1tn infrastructure package to his desk to be signed, a huge boost for an administration which has struggled for victories. “This is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America,” Biden said, “and it’s long overdue.” There was also a setback, however, as Democrats postponed a vote on an even larger bill. That 10-year, $1.85tn spending plan to bolster health, family and climate change programmes, known as Build Back Better, was sidetracked after centrists demanded a cost estimate from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). Biden said he was confident he could get it passed. Walking out to address reporters at the White House, the president began with a joke at the expense of his predecessor, Donald Trump. “Finally, it’s infrastructure week,” he said. Under Trump, the administration’s failure to focus on infrastructure amid constant scandal became a national punchline. “We’re just getting started,” Biden said. “It is something that’s long overdue but long has been talked about in Washington but never actually been done. “The House of Representatives passed an Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. That’s a fancy way of saying a bipartisan infrastructure bill, once-in-a-generation investment that’s going to create millions of jobs, modernise our infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our broadband, a range of things turning the climate crisis into an opportunity, and a put us on a path to win the economic competition of the 21st century that we face with China and other large countries in the rest of the world.” The House approved the $1tn bill late on Friday, after Democrats resolved a months-long standoff between progressives and centrists. The measure passed 228-206. Thirteen Republicans, mostly moderates, supported the bill while six progressive Democrats opposed it, among them Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York. Approval sent the bill to the desk of a president whose approval ratings have dropped and whose party struggled in elections this week. Biden said he would not sign the bill this weekend because he wanted those who passed it to be there when he did so. “We’re looking more forward to having shovels in the ground,” Biden said. “To begin rebuilding America. “For all of you at home, who feel left behind and forgotten in an economy that’s changing so rapidly, this bill is for you. The vast majority of those thousands of jobs that will be created don’t require a college degree. There’ll be jobs in every part of the country: red states, blue states, cities, small towns, rural communities, tribal communities. “This is a blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America, and it’s long overdue.” This week, Democratic candidates for governor lost in Virginia and squeaked home in New Jersey, two blue-leaning states. Those setbacks made leaders, centrists and progressives impatient to demonstrate they know how to govern a year before midterm elections that could see Republicans retake Congress. At the White House, Biden said: “Each state is different and I don’t know but I think the one message that came across was, ‘Get something done … stop talking, get something done.’ And so I think that’s what the American people are looking for. “All the talk about the elections and what do they mean? They want us to deliver. Democrats, they want us to deliver. Last night we proved we can on one big item. We delivered.” The postponement of a vote on the spending bill dashed hopes of a double win. But in a deal brokered by Biden and party leaders, five moderates agreed to back the bill if CBO estimates of its costs are consistent with numbers from the White House and congressional analysts. The agreement, in which lawmakers promised to vote by the week of 15 November, was a significant step towards shipping the bill to the Senate. Its chances there are not certain: it must pass on the casting vote of Vice-President Kamala Harris and with the approval of Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, centrists who have proved obstructive so far. The spending bill “is fiscally responsible”, Biden said. “That’s a fancy way of saying it is fully paid for. It doesn’t raise the deficit by a single penny. And it actually reduces the deficit according to the leading economists in this country over the long term. And it’s paid for by making sure that the wealthiest Americans, the biggest corporations begin to pay their fair share.” Republicans have highlighted what they say will be the bill’s effects on dangerous economic inflation. “According to economists,” Biden said, “this is going to be easing inflationary pressures … by lowering costs for working families.” He also said: “We got out of the blue a couple of weeks ago a letter from 17 Nobel prize winners in economics and they determined that [the two bills] will ease inflationary pressures not create them.” Biden acknowledged that he will not get Republican votes for the spending bill and must “figure out” how to unite his party. Friday was an exhausting day for Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker. She told reporters: “Welcome to my world. This is the Democratic party. We are not a lockstep party.” Biden said he was confident he could find the votes. Asked what gave him that confidence, the president alluded to his legislative experience as a senator and vice-president, saying: “Me.” On Friday night, Biden and his wife, Jill Biden, delayed travel to Delaware as the president worked the phones. Pramila Jayapal of Washington state, leader of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, told reporters Biden even called her mother in India. It was unclear why. “This was not to bribe me, this is when it was all done,” Jayapal said, adding that her mother told her she “just kept screaming like a little girl”. Associated Press contributed to this reportA British national has been arrested in Ireland on suspicion of making threats to kill a sitting Labour MP. A 41-year-old man was detained in the Cork suburb of Douglas on Saturday and brought to the Brideswell Garda station for questioning. The Irish Examiner reported that the threat was understood to have been made during a phone call to the MP on 18 October, only three days after the killing of Conservative MP David Amess in Essex. The arrest was made as gardai executed a search warrant at a residential property at 7am on Saturday. The raid involved 10 officers, who seized a number of electronic devices at the address. A Garda spokesperson said: “During the course of the search a number of electronic items were seized and one man, 41, was arrested on suspicion of making threats against a person from outside of this jurisdiction.” The man has been detained under section 4 of Ireland’s Criminal Justice Act. The arrest comes amid heightened concern over the security of MPs following the fatal stabbing of Amess as he held a constituency surgery in Leigh-on-Sea in Essex on 15 October. A man, Ali Harbi Ali, 25, has been remanded in custody charged with murdering Amess. Amess was the sixth serving MP to have been killed since the second world war and the first since Jo Cox was murdered in her constituency by a far-right extremist in 2016. The 41-year-old had been the Labour MP for Batley and Spen for just over a year when she was repeatedly shot and stabbed by Thomas Mair just a few days before the Brexit referendum. MPs have reported widespread fear and anxiety since Amess died. Last week, police arrested a man accused of making threats against the Labour deputy leader, Angela Rayner. She has since spoken out about how terrifying the threats were. Last month one former minister told the Observer: “All my surgeries are by appointment and we don’t announce location and time in advance. I suspect it will have to be this way.” Another Tory MP said: “I only do a conventional appointment-only surgery once a month now, but most Saturday mornings I do street surgeries in the middle of high streets and farmers’ markets, where anybody can approach me and councillors – and that is what is so important about them.” In October the home secretary, Priti Patel, told the Commons that the threat level against MPs has been raised to “substantial”. She said police would now work with MPs to review the security they receive. Making a statement on MPs’ security after Amess’s death just a few days earlier, Patel urged them to take the “change in risk seriously” after a review by the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre.Ole Gunnar Solskjær denied the clock is ticking on his tenure as Manchester United manager after the 2-0 dismantling by Manchester City at Old Trafford, which followed Liverpool’s 5-0 rout of his side in their previous home game. An early Eric Bailly own goal and a second from Bernardo Silva just before half-time consigned United to a fourth defeat from 11 Premier League matches, prompting questions whether Solskjær felt like he is living on borrowed time. “No. I don’t start to feel that,” he said. “I am in good communication with the club. As long as I am here I want to do what I can do to improve this, I want the best for Manchester United. We have been through this a few times [in his three years in charge]. “Since the last game we played here it has been a very difficult period and we have gone away from what we used to be, won at Tottenham with a different system. But, systems or style, we still need to be on the front foot more. I can’t look at myself and say this is how I want Man Utd to play.” Solskjær did concede the past two home losses were a brutal realisation how far United are from being an elite team. “We started to look a proper team at the end of last season and we have to get back to that,” he said. “We had a couple of good results before this – Atalanta and Tottenham – and today was a big step back. “We still don’t trust ourselves with the ball and we don’t find the angles and sometimes that is also the team you play against. We sometimes made the wrong solutions, sometimes the right solution but the wrong execution. “It is very disappointing and it feels like after last week we have made a step or two forwards results-wise and then a big step backwards. It is a way of losing we don’t like. When you lose a game against a good team you want to see a better Man Utd team than that.” The win at Spurs is United’s only league victory in five weeks. “We have had a difficult spell,” Solskjær said. “The result against Tottenham was good but it was not what we want to look like. We want to be on the front foot, to be more aggressive.” The 48-year-old believes the international fortnight is arriving at the right time. “When you lose a game of football there is no worse feeling,” he said. “For us it is all about Watford. We have to come out against Watford like a hurt animal. The short answer is it has come at a good time for us.” City now have 23 points. A delighted Pep Guardiola said: “There is more to come. The city is blue and we know how important that is. It was a solid performance and a deserved victory. Apart from a few minutes in the second half when we lost some stupid balls, we were really good. So, no disappointment. I am so demanding. I know our standards. I am very pleased. “This is the game we needed to play because if you attack quickly against United and you lose the ball then you will be attacked even quicker.” Guardiola was asked about Solskjær’s pre-match claim that United are Manchester’s biggest club. “For our fans City is the best club in Manchester and for red fans United,” he said. “Only we can say we have done really well, winning a lot of titles and being there all the time.”Rishi Sunak says his tax and spending plans, outlined in the budget, will boost the outlook for private sector jobs, wages and growth. The Bank of England’s most recent review of the economy begs to differ. It might appear that the recovery is strong and that companies can barely keep pace with customer demand. Sadly, appearances can be deceptive. If anything, the archetypal mainstream UK business – the one that stays out of the limelight, doesn’t attend award ceremonies or even bother to join the local chamber of commerce – will continue to look and behave like a zombie, staggering along with the same old equipment and outmoded technology. These are the firms that kept workers furloughed up to the last day of the government’s job subsidy scheme in September before deciding whether to make them redundant or not. Mostly small in size, they are simultaneously the bedrock of the business community and a drag on innovation in what is now rightly seen as the only worthwhile economic utility – green growth. Sunak spent much of the budget talking up the rebound from Covid and promising to deliver an economy built on research and development with the practical benefit for workers of higher productivity and higher wages in years to come. This reward for voting Tory and backing Brexit will also, Tory strategists believe, keep people voting Conservative at the next election and ease their growing fears that hard Brexit was a major mistake that will damage the economy. Yet looking ahead to 2023 and 2024, when Covid is expected to be no more than a mild irritant, the UK’s forecasts for business investment and GDP growth are among the lowest in the developed world. According to the Bank of England’s latest predictions, business investment will jump next year by 17%, to make up for a 13% fall over 2020 and 2021. In 2023, business investment growth falls to 1% and in 2024, the presumed year of the next election, it goes into reverse, tumbling by 4%. Much of the initial rise can be attributed to Sunak’s “super deduction” on private sector investment, offering 130% tax relief against purchases of new equipment. Due to run out in 2023, it sought to encourage a rush of spending that would bring momentum to his plan for investment in a more innovative, high-skill economy. According to Sunak’s supporters, he was strapping rocket boosters to the side of the economy. A more accurate image might be a sparkler borrowed from one of this weekend’s Bonfire Night revellers: GDP growth will slump back to 1.5% in 2023 and 1% in 2024, according to the Bank of England. The Office for Budget Responsibility, the Treasury’s independent forecaster, agrees with the Bank that investment will rise next year before falling into negative territory at -1% in 2024. The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) says its members think the super deduction policy is a dud and the rate of growth will peak at 6.5% next year before falling, though not quite below zero. Some business leaders are also concerned that the hike in corporation tax from 19% to 25% in 2023 will play an important role in deterring investment. The BCC’s chief economist, Suren Thiru, says the continuation of a decade or more of low investment is probably connected to the uncertainty surrounding so many of the government’s economic plans, from “levelling up” the regions to reforming business rates. There are statements of intent from ministers about the need for change, he says, but no one has a clue as to how these plans will be implemented. In aggregate, businesses have more cash in reserve than they did when the pandemic started, but there is a huge divide between large firms that found their goods in high demand over the past 18 months and those that have suffered shock after shock – first lockdowns, then labour shortages and more recently the prospect of spiralling inflation. Which brings us back to the long tail of indebted zombie firms that the Bank of England’s former chief economist, Andy Haldane, said went some way to explaining the UK’s long-running productivity gap with the rest of the developed world. This type of firm probably won’t go bust. And it may provide a generous income for its owners. But there are no mega pay rises for workers on offer here, if only because these firms don’t think they can afford to innovate more than is absolutely necessary to stay in business. They will answer the jobs-shortage question by not doing so much work, or by asking customers to delay their plans – building up backlogs, which is what we see in the data at the moment. The only compensation for workers at these firms is cheap credit – which goes some way to explaining why the Bank of England has yet to find a good time to raise interest rates.Winding along the wintry footpath at Audley End House and Gardens in Essex, visitors might be forgiven for thinking they had entered a fairytale kingdom. Glittering strings of festoon lights decorate trees, the reflection of thousands of sparkling bulbs dance on the surface of the River Cam and the formal gardens are bathed in ethereal colours. The grounds, designed by Capability Brown and maintained by English Heritage, are one of dozens of venues across the country playing host to magical family-friendly light trails this winter – a trend that is becoming increasingly popular. Deprived of revenue in the pandemic, more and more stately homes, parks and gardens are turning to light trails to boost income over the winter and provide much-needed cheer. The National Trust said its winter light trails were “incredibly popular” last year at venues such as Belton House in Lincolnshire and Gibside in Tyne and Wear. So much so, in fact, this year the organisation has added Polesden Lacey in Surrey, which will be lighting its Edwardian gardens, and Killerton in Devon, which will display more than a million lights on its illuminated trail. Katherine Hamlett, the National Trust’s project manager for the winter illuminations, said there was something “inherently festive” about the trails. “Not only do they provide some much-needed festive cheer, but every single event provides valuable income for the participating properties, helping to keep these gardens and parks special for generations to come.” English Heritage has been running illuminated events since 2017 across its historical sites and has also seen a steep increase in their popularity. Emma Fernandes-Lopes, its head of historic properties for the east of England, said they were particularly designed around families. This year’s events at Audley End and Eltham Palace in London will feature elements such as projections, soundscapes and even a fire pit, complete with marshmallows. “It’s definitely a bit of magic,” Fernandes-Lopes said. “I’ve been there with my own children and just seeing their faces light up when the tree starts talking to them and telling them jokes is really quite special. So it’s definitely about making those memories together, as well as really seeing some of these historic properties after dark. It’s really a unique experience for people to be able to come in through our gates at that time of night. “It’s just a real wow factor for a lot of people. We have families and first-time visitors but also a lot of our members come back and enjoy it by dark because again it’s a different experience that brings people together.” And while there has been a general increase in visitors booking to see light trails, the pandemic has definitely boosted it, Fernandes-Lopes said. “They’re really starting to gain real popularity, particularly this year, because families are looking for an opportunity to go out and about together rather than to stay indoors.” There is no shortage of events around the UK, with some kind of light trail or festival in most towns and cities over the winter. But tickets are selling fast and booking in advance is essential, she added. Though popular in Europe for decades, the UK is really only just coming round to light festivals and trails, according to Libby Battaglia, artistic director of Light Up Trails, which is running Christmas at Cowdray, an illuminated interactive walk at the Cowdray estate in the South Downs. She said the UK was “quite behind because we’ve always had a preference for fireworks”, but added: “I think because of the environment, that’s fading away. For example, the French have had a light festival in Lyon since 1852, so they’re ahead in that way, but it is growing. And it’s probably more than likely because it’s so accessible and it appeals to lots of different generations.” She said British festivals started in northern English cities such as Manchester, Liverpool and Leeds, and have trickled down south, with audiences more than doubling in just a few years. Leeds’s Light Night, a free event that happens every October over two evenings, is attended by 150,000 people a year and Manchester Lightopia, a ticketed lantern festival, expects a similar number this year. On a smaller scale, Battaglia has seen her projects grow dramatically. The Light Up Poole festival she runs has risen from 20,000 visitors to more than 50,000 in a couple of years. Events usually take a year to plan but shortages of lorry drivers and difficulties bringing equipment from overseas has made the past couple of years a little more difficult, Battaglia said. Last year lighting that was supposed to arrive in October eventually came in February. “But all of our lighting has arrived now for this year, so we are very happy about that.” She added: “Now we can’t wait for people to come and see.”Around the early days of the pandemic, I joined the many readers who devoured Station Eleven, Emily St John Mandel’s novel, which begins with a quick-spreading global virus that ends up wiping out the bulk of humanity. It was a hit when it was first published in 2014, but it experienced a boost in sales, much to the surprise of its author. “I don’t know who in their right mind would want to read Station Eleven during a pandemic,” she said. Now it has been turned into a television series, starring Himesh Patel and Mackenzie Davies, among many others. The trailer, released last week, begins with a scene in which Patel’s character stocks up on food and water in an already deserted supermarket. “Is this because of that thing?” asks a stunned checkout worker in a Santa hat. I wondered whether, at this stage of the pandemic – hard months ahead in the UK, according to Jonathan Van-Tam, our own Santa hat looking perilously askew – the thought of watching a drama about a virus that brings about the apocalypse still held any appeal. After the initial flurry of Zoom-based dramas and phone-shot one-offs that appeared at the very start of lockdown, there have been a couple of attempts to directly reckon with the pandemic on British television. Dennis Kelly’s Together followed Sharon Horgan and James McAvoy through the horrifying thick of it; Jodie Comer and Stephen Graham took on the care home disaster in Jack Thorne’s devastating Help. I found that deciding to watch them required a degree of steeling oneself beforehand. It felt unfamiliar, to have to work up to watching a drama and, ultimately, both were upsetting and infuriating, as they intended to be. They asked for endurance and rewarded it. Maybe reward isn’t quite right. But they asked for more from the audience and they got it. In New York, the Metropolitan Opera is currently staging Wagner’s Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg, which is almost six hours long. “There is always an appeal for huge events,” its general manager, Peter Gelb, told the New York Times. It is certainly bold of him to put on its longest opera during a pandemic while many theatres are considering shorter plays with no intervals, to get bums back on seats. Whether the risk will pay off remains to be seen. But I wonder if we will emerge from this, when we eventually do, with a different kind of resilience and an appetite for art and culture that asks more of us. Station Eleven is a brilliant story and has the potential to be an outstanding series, if we have the strength to look. Lady Gaga: suffering for art has gone too far Lady Gaga, who plays Patrizia Reggiani in the Ridley Scott-directed, eagerly awaited, knitwear-advocacy fashion biopic House of Gucci, gave a fantastically freewheeling interview to British Vogue about her role. “I lived as [Reggiani] for a year and a half,” she said, “and I spoke with an accent for nine months of that.” (Oh to have overheard her ordering a cup of tea at the local cafe.) She said that towards the end of the shoot she had “some psychological difficulty” as a result; she went for a walk, she explained, and thought she was on a movie set. I have met actors who go full method, to the extent that they will only speak in their character’s accent and, often, it is hard to keep a straight face when witnessing it. I have never before encountered a woman who does it; it always struck me as self-indulgent and commitment-free to check out of real life for such an extended period of time. Despite the thespy, airy-fairy comedy factor, though, it speaks to a bleak fantasy of performance or art requiring suffering to seem real and surely not even a fabulous film should require that. Steve Buscemi was a Halloween treat for all his fellow kids Mariah Carey marked the end of Halloween as only she could, releasing a video of herself with a candy-cane-striped baseball bat, pulverising a pumpkin as the bells of All I Want for Christmas begin to chime. There is a brief window in which a Halloween postmortem is acceptable. Evaluating celebrity Halloween costumes is on a par with watching the most prestigious red-carpet events. It’s better than a gown or a tux because it’s a window into that person’s psyche or at least into the psyche of the assistant they paid to create the look for them. This year has been a self-referential one. The most intriguing trend was well-known people dressing as themselves. I like it. It is, at least, eco-friendly, preferring recycling over panic-purchasing a flimsy plastic skull mask. Cast your minds back to 2011, when Sophia Grace and Rosie, two tiny children from Essex, became world famous after a shaky clip of them performing Nicki Minaj’s Super Bass in tutus went viral and got them on The Ellen Show. Now, 10 years later, at 15 and 18, they’ve gone (mildly) viral again, for dressing as themselves in their viral days. But king of the costumes was Steve Buscemi, who not only dressed as himself, but as a meme of himself. His line, “How do you do, fellow kids?”, from 30 Rock, is an internet classic and he reportedly recreated the look for his neighbours in Brooklyn, complete with backwards baseball cap and “Music Band” T-shirt. It sets a high bar for next year. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistBook of the Week: 1,000 Years of Joys and Sorrows (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Start the Week (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Promenade The Shift Podcast Network Previously on… Succession Acast Firecrotch &amp; Normcore Acast In 2013, Benedict Wong played the Chinese artist and activist Ai Weiwei at the Hampstead theatre, London. The play was about the 81 days that he spent in isolated detention in 2011, having been arrested by government officials at Beijing airport. He was kept in a small, brightly lit room (the lights never went off) and two guards were with him constantly. I went to see the production and Wong was fantastic: clever, sarcastic, defiant, until Ai’s inevitable breakdown. Last week, Wong read Ai’s autobiography, 1,000 Years of Joys and Sorrows, for Radio 4’s Book of the Week. It’s hardcore stuff, plainly told. Ai’s father, a gentle poet, fell foul of the “anti-rightist” authorities during the 1950s; subsequently, he was subjected to “reform through labour” and expelled to Little Siberia, near the border with Russia and Pakistan. Ai, aged around 10, went with him and he and his father spent several years living in an almost unbearable situation. “My mind was often as bare as the room itself, empty of imagination, empty of memories.” His dad, initially given the relatively fulfilling job of pruning trees, proved to be too good at it for the vengeful authorities and was demoted to cleaning the primitive toilets. At one point, the young Ai and his dad were living in little more than a hole in the ground. Wong, reading Ai’s words, plays the artist with dignity, changing his natural Salford tones into a voice that resembles the real Ai’s, but refined for reading aloud. Another lovely performance. Before the first episode from the book, Ai himself appeared on Start the Week. Host Tom Sutcliffe, a master of the deft, well-informed interview, led us through some of the book, eliciting some interesting extra elements. Ai talked about living in the hole: “Funnily enough, that give me a sense of safety-ness [sic],” he said. “Because we are not on the same level as the rest of the world and, in the winter, it’s warm and in the summer it’s cooler. It’s like a hiding bunker.” He has a picture of it as his screensaver on his phone (what a detail!). Ai was on with Lea Ypi, a professor of political theory who grew up in Stalinist Albania, and pianist Kirill Gerstein, whose childhood was spent in the former Soviet Union. All three were interesting on the idea of freedom, especially the contrast between the “freedoms” of differing political systems. Ai described arriving in New York with just $30 to his name. His lack of a job meant he found himself more stymied than when he lived in China. Ypi remembered Albania immediately post-communism. Previously, the government prevented Albanians from leaving the country to visit other places. Afterwards, “we had freedom of exit”, she said., “but not freedom of entry”. Albanians weren’t welcomed by other countries. (As a complete side point, Sutcliffe’s – and Wong’s – careful delivery contrasts with Amol Rajan’s radio voice. Rajan is right for the Today programme in terms of knowledge and interview style, but at times he can be very hard to understand, constantly gabbling and swallowing his words. On Wednesday morning, as he bantered with Nick Robinson about the daily papers, I had to give up.) A very different kind of speaking voice on Promenade, a new independent podcast that explores memory and storytelling. Andy Gaffney elicits lovely single-voice interviews (apart from one, which features Dave and Cathy from The Cinemile) from people who simply remember a particular time in their life, triggered by a “thing”: the sound of the sea, the Strokes’ first album. Each episode is short: between four and 16 minutes; an evocative description of the speaker’s granny’s home triggered by Imperial Leather soap is the shortest. The opener is a moving tale of long-distance love and each one is beautifully produced, a little shining gem. If you’re a Succession fan, here are two podcasts to sate your addiction between episodes. Try the upbeat camaraderie of Previously On…’s show (the strand also offers analysis of Peaky Blinders, Stranger Things, Game of Thrones, Watchmen), last week featuring Grace Dent and Chris Mandle alongside host Jamie East. And I enjoyed Geoff Lloyd and Sara Barron’s Firecrotch &amp; Normcore. Nicely produced and full of jokes, this is so lovely, in fact, that writer Lucy Prebble and Arian “Stewy” Moayed recently recommended it on Twitter. Just room to say that I was made a fellow of the Radio Academy last week. This is a massive honour and a direct result of the space that the Observer gives me to review audio properly. Also: no critic exists without an audience, so thank you for reading! (Yes, it’s gone to my head. I’ll be better by next week.) • Miranda Sawyer is only the second critic (after Gillian Reynolds) to be awarded a Radio Academy fellowship. It was presented to her last week by 6 Music DJ Stuart MaconieIn May, Medical Research Council (MRC) Phd students were invited to enter the Max Perutz science writing award 2021 and write a compelling piece about their research for the non-scientific reader. From the many entries received, the 10 that made the shortlist covered diverse topics, including dementia, childhood adversity, the role of genes in schizophrenia and the use of hypnosis to treat psychosis. The essays were judged by: the Observer’s Ian Tucker, the Science Museum’s science director, Roger Highfield; Prof Fiona Watt, executive chair at the MRC, Andy Ridgway, senior lecturer in science communication at the University of the West of England in Bristol, the author and broadcaster Gaia Vince, and the researcher and mental health advocate Dr Furaha Asani. At a virtual ceremony last month, the £1,500 prize was presented to the winner, Vicky Bennett from the University of Bath, for her article about her research into repurposing drugs to treat urinary tract infections. Here we publish the winning article, described by Roger Highfield as “a gallant way to make unglamorous research interesting.” The winning essay I’m a biomedical research scientist. My laboratory essentials are a white coat, bubbling liquid, and the occasional explosion. I make groundbreaking discoveries every day. Crowds gather to marvel at my experiments and their life-saving implications. This is at least my mum’s impression of my PhD so far. The reality of my current situation seems somewhat different. My shiny white lab coat was at first a wonderful addition to my wardrobe, but the many tanks of infected urine on my workbench are far from glamorous. (In fact, shiny white lab coat + infected urine = smelly yellow lab coat). Instead of crowds of admirers, “the wee area” of our shared lab space is actively avoided. The consequences of any kind of explosion are not worth contemplating. Welcome to the world of urinary tract infection research. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are not particularly pleasant. They occur when bacteria from poo come into contact with and enter the external opening of the urethra, the tube that allows urine to flow from the bladder to the outside of the body. If bacteria colonise the urethra, they then have direct access to the bladder. This is the ideal environment for them to multiply and spread upwards to infect the kidneys, or even enter the bloodstream. For those lucky enough not to have experienced a UTI, the frequent urge to urinate and a painful stinging or burning sensation when passing urine are characteristic symptoms. UTIs are common for all ages, but obvious anatomical differences mean that women are more frequent sufferers, as a shorter urethra reduces the distance bacteria must travel to reach the bladder. With up to 60% of adult women suffering at least one UTI in their lifetime (compared to 12% of men), many see them as an awkward but inevitable part of life. Data on transgender experience of UTIs is limited, but advice sites report they can be an issue for genital tuckers and trans men taking testosterone. Sufferers have even gone so far as to describe their experiences in song form. See Love song for my UTI by YouTuber Lex Croucher for one of my favourite examples. A short course of antibiotics will clear most infections. But the number of bacteria resistant to antibiotics is increasing. Someone with an infection which was once curable in a few days may now try several different antibiotics before finding one that works. And even if your symptoms do clear up, it may be that the bacteria have not been fully eradicated, with around 30% of infections returning within six months. Many people must accept a life of chronic recurring UTIs and near-permanent symptoms. Every UTI also has the risk of developing into a life-threatening kidney or bloodstream infection. This risk increases with age, and for those with underlying health conditions. The ever-growing threat of antibiotic resistance means that chronic and severe infections are becoming more common. Even that well known mythical cure that is cranberry juice will not have any effect against multidrug-resistant bacteria. So, the solution is to find some new, better antibiotics, right? Something that kills bacteria quickly and is hard for bacteria to become resistant to. This essentially is the aim of my PhD project. I am trying to identify specific parts of bacteria that would make good targets for new antibiotics to attack. I will then use a computer modelling system to identify existing drugs which could be used in a new way to hit these targets and kill the bacteria. These come from huge databases of millions of drugs used for any purpose in medicine, not necessarily existing antibiotics. This is a process called drug repurposing. If successful it will reduce the time and cost associated with new antibiotic development. This leads us back to my urine tanks. In my research group we work with a bacteria called Proteus mirabilis, a common cause of catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs). Urinary catheters are the most commonly used medical devices. The catheter is a long flexible tube inserted through the urethra into the bottom of the bladder and is connected to a urine collection bag outside the body. They are used in people of all genders with medical conditions that make it hard for the bladder to empty naturally, as well as before or after some types of surgery. Depending on the situation, the catheter could be temporary or permanent. But the presence of a catheter makes it easier for UTIs to develop. Bacteria grow much more easily on the catheter surface, and the tube provides a direct pathway for them to enter the urethra and the bladder. As the bacteria build up, they will eventually block the tube and prevent urine leaving the bladder. This causes urine to collect in the bladder, where it can flow backwards towards the kidneys, increasing the likelihood of life-threatening kidney and bloodstream infections, as well as causing a huge amount of pain from the urinary retention itself. We recreate this situation in the lab by using catheters inserted into replica glass bladders. A pump system pushes urine through the bladder and into the catheter at body temperature so we can monitor the effects of our experiments in as realistic a way as possible. We infect the glass bladder and leave the bacteria to grow on the catheter surface, where the buildup of bacteria will eventually block the tube and stop urine from entering the collection bag. A key aspect of these experiments is reproducibility and reliability of results. Real urine is very variable depending on what someone has been eating or drinking, therefore I spend a day each week making up five-litre tanks of artificial urine to use in my experiments to ensure consistency. This involves mixing water with urea and various salts such as potassium and sodium chloride. It even smells like the real thing. The time taken for the catheter to block determines the success of different drugs. These could be tested in several ways: either by being flushed into the bladder through the catheter, dissolved in the urine, or applied as a coating to the catheter before it is inserted. The longer the time to catheter blockage, the more promising the treatment. And you would not believe the anticipation and excitement caused by watching urine slowly drip through a bacteria-encrusted catheter. Of course I am not yet 12 months into my three-and-a-half-year project, and there is a long, long way to go before handing a patient a drug which will cure their infection. However, I really hope that my research will support the development of new antibiotic treatments to help patients with CAUTIs, chronic UTIs not treatable with existing drugs, and anyone who is fed up with that burning sensation when they pee.With 56 minutes gone, as Manchester City’s players pinged and tickled the ball around, 2-0 up and basically doing a yoga workout, a team conga in the Manchester United half, Jadon Sancho went to press Kyle Walker, looked behind and saw Luke Shaw 40 yards away watching with an expression of vague interest. Sancho raised his arm and began to shout a complaint. He reined himself in. The forward is 20 years old and yet to carry out a single significant act in a United shirt. He has though, played at the Dortmund school of science. He trained with Pep Guardiola. He has a basic modern footballer’s understanding of positions, the stuff you learn from Fifa 21 or screenshots on Twitter from a Papua New Guinean blogger. Sancho could see it. His manager? Well, he was standing 30 yards away, motionless in skinny black suit and club anorak, staring out with that familiar look of bafflement, a man feeling the day slide away from him once again, still there at the wheel, still crashing in the same car. It would be flattering to describe this as a traumatic experience for Manchester United. This? This was nothing. Once again Ole Gunnar Solskjær was bullied and joshed and ragged by the away section. Once again United produced their secondary formation, the parking of the executive bus, with seven defensive players from the start – but with no fibre, no substance, nothing to sustain this team beyond the gold leaf tomahawk steak up front. At times you wondered, what was the point of this game of football? Did it ever stand a chance? Alas, the Manchester derby, transformed in the Solskjær era into an extended exercise in how to lose slowly. City were excellent. But they were also barely stretched in any part of the pitch, reeling off 15 shots at goal, dominating every metric, and enjoying surely the easiest Manchester City victory in the modern history of this fixture. And so here we are again. The run of games that seemed likely to decide the trajectory of this third Solskjær season now reads: horrifying 5-0 defeat to Liverpool; 3-0 revival against a half-dead Tottenham; heroic 2-2 mess against Atalanta And now this, a sitting down by a genuine team, properly managed. Lads, it’s not Tottenham. The lack of plan was at least different to the lack of plan against Liverpool. But the effects were the same, despite that beefed-up centre, with the same sense of United’s players as atomised units, the midfielders faced with huge open spaces in front of them, always trying to block or slide or fill that void, where a modern team operates as a drilled, shared matrix of resistance. City were driven on by a wonderful performance of creative left full-back play from João Cancelo, who is out on his own in that role right now. Guardiola had fielded a team of central midfielders and started the game with four of them stood in a deep line between the red shirts, nobody even pretending to be a centre-forward, the birth of the false, false nine. Cancelo made the opening goal, a man who just seems to have that goal-voodoo in his boots, timing, placement, range, and also luck. His cross from the left induced something horrible from Eric Bailly, who drew back his right foot – too far, too wildly- and sliced the clearance across David de Gea and into the top corner. The game pretty much died at that point, with United already in full Deontay Wilder knockout-artist mode, staggering around the ring, holding on, gassed and puffing, sustained only by the vague hope of landing a golden punch. The second City goal, just before half-time, was made by a fine bit of play from Bernardo Silva, skimming a pass out to Cancelo, then scampering on to take the return. And also by a terrible piece of defending from Shaw who stood still, calm, a little dreamy, as Silva crept in behind and deflected the ball into the net off De Gea, a pickpocket’s goal. De Gea could be seen attacking the tunnel as he walked off at the break. It felt a little jarring. Really? Now we’re punching the wall? So mild, so passive, so stuck within the limits of their own plan, it felt at times as though there was nowhere for Solskjær’s iteration of United to go after this. The manager has tried to play in a more “progressive” way, and seen his team eviscerated. On Saturday, he went back into that comfortable shell. But really, what is the point of assembling all this talent and playing like that? How have we reached this creative and intellectual dead end? United are in a weird place. This whole process is in danger of becoming a real-time experiment. What if you just didn’t sack the manager? What if you allowed the process to carry on, past mild under-performance, into hard under-performance, into humiliation, and then – well, what? Something, it seems, that looks a bit like this, a kind of zombie-ball. Albeit, one that seems to have a little way still to stagger.The House select committee investigating the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January is poised to issue subpoenas to top Trump lieutenants involved in attempting to subvert the 2020 election results from a “command center” at the Willard hotel in Washington, according to a source familiar with the matter. The subpoenas, which could be issued as soon as next week, reflect the select committee’s interest in events at the hotel just across from the White House, where Donald Trump’s most loyal aides plotted to keep him in office. The select committee is targeting about 20 individuals connected to the Trump command center at the Willard, among them the legal scholar John Eastman, who outlined ways to deny Joe Biden the presidency, the source said. The subpoenas seeking documents and testimony are aimed at obtaining the legal advice offered to Trump on how he could manipulate events on 6 January to stop certification of Biden’s election win, the source said. House investigators are moving to pursue Trump lieutenants who gathered at the Willard to uncover the “centers of gravity” from which Trump and his advisers conspired, the source said – and whether the former president had advance knowledge of the Capitol attack. The select committee appears to be seeking a full account of what transpired in several suites at the Willard in the days leading up to 6 January and during a final “war room” meeting the night before the Capitol attack. The select committee is targeting Eastman after it emerged that he outlined scenarios for overturning the election in a memorandum presented at a White House meeting on 4 January with Trump, former vice-president Mike Pence and Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows. At that meeting, according to a source close to Trump, Eastman ran through the memo that detailed how at the joint session of Congress on 6 January Pence might refuse to certify electoral slates for Biden and thereby hand Trump a second term. The former president seized on Eastman’s memo and relentlessly pressured Pence in the following days to use it to in effect commandeer the largely ceremonial electoral counting process, the Trump source said. Trump was not successful in convincing Pence to reject Biden’s election win – an outcome top Trump aides blamed on the then vice-president’s chief of staff, Marc Short, the Trump source said – and Congress certified Biden as president after the Capitol attack. Eastman has distanced himself from the memo, telling the Guardian the scenarios he outlined were not intended as advice. He also told the National Review he wrote the memo at the request of “somebody in the legal team” who he could not recall. But Eastman appears to be a witness of importance, given he regularly attended meetings at the Willard with Giuliani and former Trump chief strategist Steve Bannon, acting effectively as a liaison with the White House, the Trump source said. Eastman undermined his attempts to distance himself from the memo last week after he told the activist reporter Lauren Windsor that Pence declined to overturn the election, even though he had provided the legal reasoning, because “Pence is an establishment guy at the end of the day”. The select committee is also considering a subpoena for Giuliani, the source said, since the former New York mayor and Trump lawyer led the legal effort from the Willard that involved trying to find and publicize allegations of electoral fraud. Giuliani pressured state legislatures to challenge Biden victories and, even as the Capitol attack unfolded, cajoled Republican members of Congress to object to states’ electoral college votes, the Trump source said. A spokesperson for the House select committee declined to comment about the targets or scope of forthcoming subpoenas. Neither Eastman nor a lawyer for Giuliani immediately responded to requests for comment. The new line of inquiry centered on the Willard comes after the chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, last week told reporters that he intended to subpoena Eastman, before later revealing that he had signed about 20 subpoenas. Thompson said on Friday that he had hoped to issue the subpoenas to Eastman and other Trump lieutenants, but the timeline slipped as Democrats became consumed with crisis talks before the House passed Biden’s $1tn infrastructure package shortly before midnight. The select committee remains in the evidence-gathering phase of its inquiry and has conducted interviews and depositions with more than 150 witnesses, according to the vice-chair of the panel, Liz Cheney. “It is a range of engagements – some formal interviews, some depositions,” the Wyoming Republican said. “There really is a huge amount of work under way that is leading to real progress for us.” Several former Trump officials, including Bannon, have resisted subpoenas. A former justice department official, Jeffrey Clark, on Friday refused to answer questions at a deposition, citing attorney-client privilege. In a statement, Thompson raised the possibility of holding Clark in contempt of Congress. “Mr Clark’s complete failure to cooperate today is unacceptable,” he said. “We are willing to take strong measures to hold him accountable to meet his obligation.”This was the moment when Romelu Lukaku’s ankle injury caught up with Chelsea. They were crying out for a ruthless finisher for much of a ridiculously one-sided contest and, although Thomas Tuchel complained about misfortune after seeing Matej Vydra come off the bench to earn a point for Burnley, deep down he will know the blame lay squarely with Chelsea’s misfiring forwards for failing to step up in Lukaku’s absence. The statistics verged on the comedic. Chelsea finished with 25 shots, seven of them coming inside the first 15 minutes alone, but only one of them went past Nick Pope. Callum Hudson-Odoi, Ross Barkley and Kai Havertz were all guilty of some poor misses and the longer it stayed 1-0, the likelier it became that Sean Dyche’s pugnacious team would find a way to make the league leaders regret their profligacy. Chelsea, their lead over Manchester City now only three points, should never have found themselves vulnerable to that late sucker punch from Vydra. It should have been a rout once Havertz had put the European champions ahead with his first league goal since August; instead it ended up as a reminder of why Lukaku was bought for £97.5m from Inter in the summer. The Belgian surely would have finished Burnley off before half-time and, while Chelsea have mostly coped well without the striker since losing him to an ankle injury suffered against Malmö last month, they will be glad to have him available again after the international break. “That’s football,” Tuchel said. “They were lucky but that’s why everyone loves the game because it’s possible to win matches like this. It can happen, sometimes unfortunately like today, that somebody else steals some points and is lucky.” Tuchel was correct to point out that Burnley, who are two points below 17th-placed Leeds, were fortunate. Equally Chelsea, who were also without the hamstrung Timo Werner in attack, were not mature enough. The hosts had threatened to overwhelm Burnley from the start, the tone set by Hudson-Odoi ripping through on the right to test Pope early on, but they could not make their superiority count. Andreas Christensen headed wide from a Hudson-Odoi cross, Pope denied Havertz and Barkley fired wide. The tension grew as the half wore on, Burnley’s full-blooded approach to defending leading to a few spiky exchanges between the two benches. The main flashpoint came when Tuchel erupted at Andre Marriner’s refusal to award Chelsea a free-kick after a collision between Barkley and James Tarkowski. Tuchel was in full Basil Fawlty mode, leaping around his technical area, his wiry figure contorted with rage, although it did feel as if he was taking a risk by engaging in a running back-and-forth with Dyche. “It was just two staffs trying to win a football match,” Burnley’s manager said. “It’s nothing to do with me being hard. I’m not hard. I’m a normal bloke.” Chelsea needed to be more composed. They kept probing, Jorginho and N’Golo Kanté rotating the ball in midfield, Burnley escaping again when Pope denied Reece James. Then Havertz, deputising for Lukaku, cut out a wayward pass and set off on a powerful run down the left, only for his momentum to send him hurtling over the advertising hoardings behind the goal and into the crowd. There were a few anxious moments before Havertz emerged, looking a little groggy after receiving some treatment, but the blow seemed to do him some good. He returned ready for battle and soon had a reward for his endeavour, giving Chelsea the lead after creeping between Ben Mee and Tarkowski before meeting James’s beautiful cross with a header. Chelsea were desperate to build on Havertz’s fourth goal of the season. Thiago Silva nodded against the woodwork at the start of the second half and Havertz was wasteful after fine work from Hudson-Odoi on the right, firing over from close range. More chances came and went. Hudson-Odoi, who was not consistent enough in the final third, dribbled through before being denied by Pope. Jorginho’s goal‑bound drive was headed away. Barkley, who toiled after being handed his first league start of the season, smashed a shot over and immediately made way for Ruben Loftus-Cheek. The repeated let-offs gave Burnley confidence. For once Chelsea’s forwards could not count on their defence to bail them out. The visitors pushed forward and almost equalised when the substitute Jay Rodriguez headed just wide at the near post. The warning signs were clear and Chelsea paid the price when Ashley Westwood crossed, Rodriguez headed on and Vydra lifted the loose ball over Édouard Mendy with 11 minutes left. Tuchel could not believe what he was watching. He responded by throwing on Christian Pulisic and Mason Mount, but Chelsea had completely lost their way as an attacking force. How they missed Lukaku.Premier League: Wilfried Zaha and Conor Gallagher put talk over their international futures to one side to fire Crystal Palace to a 2-0 victory over Wolves with a little help from VAR. Premier League: “The game could hardly have been more one-sided and yet Thomas Tuchel’s side somehow found a way to blow it, their profligacy punished when Matej Vydra came off the bench to burgle a late point for Sean Dyche’s defiant Burnley side,” writes Jacob Steinberg from Stamford Bridge. Premier League: A magnificent solo goal from Mathias Normann and Teemu Pukki’s penalty secured a first win of the season for Norwich City and moved them off the foot of the table. Premier League: “After the 5-0 humiliation against Liverpool, this was another Theatre of Screams occasion for Ole Gunnar Solskjær, another big game when the gap to the very best yawned like a chasm, when his Manchester United team were an incoherent mess.,” writes David Hytner from Old Trafford Jamie Jackson’s player ratings from Old Trafford Solskjær: “This isn’t how I want us to play” Barney Ronay on the Manchester derby: “At times you wondered, what was the point of this game of football? Did it ever stand a chance? Alas, the Manchester derby, transformed in the Solskjær era into an extended exercise in how to lose slowly. City were excellent. But they were also barely stretched in any part of the pitch.” La Liga: Barcelona have blown it against Celta Vigo in their first game since the appointment of Xavi Hernandez as their new manager. Leading 3-0 at half-time, they shipped three goals in the second half to come away from the game with just a point. Liverpool old boy Iago Aspas popped up to equalise for Celta Vigo with a late, late, late equaliser in the seventh minute of added time. Championship: The man who has managed more games than anyone else in English professional football – 1,603 – has parted company with Middlesbrough by “mutual consent” after his side’s draw at West Brom today. Meanwhile at St Andrews, Reading have come from a goal down to lead Birmingham City 2-1 in today’s delayed kick-off. FA Cup first round: Hats off to Northern Premier side Buxton, who have knocked out York City of the National League North. From the sixth tier, Kidderminster have knocked out Grimnsby from a division above. Seventh tier sides Bowers &amp; Pitsea, Harrow Borough, Hayes &amp; Yeading and Horsham have all been knocked out In a replica of last year’s first round, Sunderland have gone out to Mansfield Town by a 1-0 scoreline at the Stadium of Light. National League South outfit Guiseley have lost by a similar scoreline to League One side AFC Wimbledon. Aberdeen 0-2 Motherwell Hearts 5-2 Dundee United St Johnstone 0-0 St Mirren View the Scottish Premiership table Bournemouth 4-0 Swansea City Barnsley 0-2 Hull City Birmingham City 1-0 Reading (late kick-off) Blackburn Rovers 3-1 Sheffield United Cardiff City 2-1 Huddersfield Town Coventry City 3-2 Bristol City Luton Town 0-1 Stoke City Millwall 1-1 Derby County Nottingham Forest 3-0 Preston Peterborough United 0-1 Fulham West Brom 1-1 Middlesbrough Blackpool v QPR (5.30pm) View the Championship table Manchester United 0-2 Manchester City Chelsea 1-1 Burnley Crystal Palace 2-0 Wolves Brentford 1-2 Norwich City Brighton v Newcastle United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Premier League: Wilf Zaha and Conor Gallagher scored the goals as Palace won their second league game in a row. Championship: Cardiff City look to have scored a late winner against Huddersfield, with Kieffer Moore heading home his second of the game at the back post to make it 2-1 to the hosts. Premier League: Norwich City lift themselves off the bottom of the table with their first win of the season, consigning Brentford to their fourth defeat in a row. Newcastle go bottom and are the only team in the top fligfht who have yet to win a game. They play Brighton in this afternoon’s late kick-off and Scott Murray has the latest ... Championship: Bournemouth go 4-0 up against Swansea City, while the 10 men of Coventry have taken a late 3-2 lead over Bristol City. Premier League: An outstanding draw for Burnley at Stamford Bridge. Kai Havertz put Chelsea ahead in the first half, but Matej Vydra came off the bench to equalise for the visitors, who had a couple of chances to nick all three points at the end. Chelsea 1-1 Burnley: A long ball from Pope, Chelsea’s two defenders each leaves the other to deal with it and Matej Vydra steals in to try to lob Edouard Mendy. Wide. Chelsea 1-1 Burnley: Oof! Jay Rodriguez is played in behind the Chelsea defence but doesn’t have the pace to bear down on goal before he’s shepherded wide by a defender. Scottish Premiership: Aaron McEneff makes it Hearts 5-2 Dundee United at Tynecastle. Premier League: Conor Gallagher extends Palace’s lead against Wolves, his shot from the edge of the penalty area taking a deflection off Conor Coady on it’s way past the wrong-footed Jose Sa. Championship: Callum O’Hare equalises for 10-man Coventry City against Bristol City to make it 2-2 at the Coventry Building Society Arena. At the Cardiff City Stadium, Kieffer Moore heads Cardiff level with Huddersfield Town. Premier League: Matej Vydra stretches to poke home a Jay Rodriguez knockdown across the edge of the six-yard box. Burnley are level against the league leaders! Scottish Premiership: It’s Hearts 4-2 Dundee United, with Stephen Kingsley extending the home side’s lead at Tynecastle. Championship: Aleksandar Mitrovic nods Fulham ahead against Peterborough with his 14th goal in nine games. He’s on 20 for the season already. FA Cup: Charlton go a goal up against Havant &amp; Waterlooville, while it’s now Halifax 7-4 Maidenhead at the Shay. Harrogate have just equalised against non-League Wrexham. Premier League: It’s as you were, although Wolves have a free-kick in a dangerous area. Premier League: Wolves have been awarded a penalty but there’s a VAR check to see if Joel Ward’s foul was inside or outside the penalty area. Championship: Ian Poveda scores at Ewood Park to give Blackburn Rovers a two goal buffer over Sheffield United - it’s 3-1 in Lancashire. Meanwhile at the Hawthorns, Grady Diangana has equalised for West Brom against Middlesbrough. At the City Ground, Lewis Ground has scored his second of the afternoon to make it Nottingham Forest 3-0 Preston. Scottish Premiership: Kevin Van Veen shoots on the turn to double Motherwell’s lead over Aberdeen with his second goal of the afternoon. Championship: Jaidon Anthony makes it Bournemouth 3-0 Swansea City at the Vitality Stadium, where Swans super fan, comedian and friend of the Guardian Football Weekly podcast Elis James is unlikely to be enjoying his birthday treat. Premier League: After a long wait for an offside VAR check, Wilf Zaha puts Crystal Palace one up with his fourth goal of the season. Chelsea 1-0 Burnley: Nick Pope gets down to save brilliantly from Callum Hudson-Odoi, whose low effort from close range looked goalbound. FA Cup: It’s Halifax 6-4 Maidenhead in the game of the round so far and there are still 29 minutes to go at the Shay Stadium. Scottish Premiership: Dundee United score their second of the afternoon against Hearts through Nicky Clark but still trail by the odd goal of five. Premier League: Rico Henry slides in to score at the far post to pull a goal back for Brentford. Tim Krul should have done better there, misjudging the cross. Championship: Ben Brereton Diaz scores to put Blackburn 2-1 up against Sheffield United. Scottish Premiership: Motherwell are one up against Aberdeen courtesy of Kevin Van Veen’s opener on 50 minutes. Meanwhile at Tyncastle, Ben Woodburn has scored his second of the afternoon to put Hearts 3-1 up against Dundee United. Championship: Down to 10 men, and trailing by a goal, Coventry City win a penalty against Bristol City. Matt Godden scores to make it all square with his fifth goal of the season. Crystal Palace 0-0 Wolves: Wilf Zaha appeals for a penalty after being fouled by Max Kilman. It goes to a VAR check but Wolves get away with it. Chelsea 1-0 Burnley: Kai Havertz fires over from seven yards out after running on to another inch-perfect Reece James cross from the right. Championship: Bournemouth double their lead against Swansea City, with Dominic Solanke scoring his second goal of the afternoon to make it 2-0 at the Vitality Stadium. Chelsea 1-0 Burnley: Thiago Silva connects with a cross from the right, his header isn’t clean but takes a deflection off a Burnley defender and hits the post. Brentford 0-2 Norwich City: Brentford have a Bryan Mbeumo goal disallowed for offside. FA Cup first round ... AFC Wimbledon lead non-League Guiseley by the only goal of the first half, while Charlton are being held 0-0 by Havant &amp; Waterlooville from the Conference South, 64 places behind the League One side in the league ladder. FC Halifax lead Maidenhead 4-3 at half-time, Wrexham lead Harrogate by 1-0 while Lincoln are being held by non-League side Bowers &amp; Pitsea, who are 98 places below them. Portsmouth lead Harrow Borough by the only goal of the game, while Sunderland are trailing Mansfield Town 1-0 at the Stadium of Light. And in Spain ... Barcelona are off to a flyer under Xavi Hernandez and lead Celta Vigo 3-0 after 40 minutes. Ansu Fati, Sergio Busquets and Memphis Depay have got the goals at the Estadio Balaidos. Scottish Premiership half-times Aberdeen 0-0 Motherwell Hearts 2-1 Dundee United St Johnstone 0-0 St Mirren Championship half-times Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea City Barnsley 0-1 Hull City Birmingham City 1-0 Reading (late kick-off) Blackburn Rovers 1-1 Sheffield United Cardiff City 0-1 Huddersfield Town Coventry City 0-1 Bristol City Luton Town 0-1 Stoke City Millwall 1-1 Derby County Nottingham Forest 2-0 Preston Peterborough United 0-0 Fulham West Brom 0-1 Middlesbrough Blackpool v QPR (5.30pm) Manchester United 0-2 Manchester City (result) Chelsea 1-0 Burnley Crystal Palace 0-0 Wolves Brentford 0-2 Norwich City Brighton v Newcastle United (5.30pm) Championship: Millwall and Derby County exchange quick-fire goals at the Den. Derby opened the scoring through Festy Obesele but Millwall equalised within two minutes through Scott Malone. Crystal Palace 0-0 Wolves: Wolves have a half-hearted appeal for a penalty turned down but have to settle for a corner instead. Chelsea 1-0 Burnley: Ross Barkley tries his luck from distance for Chelsea but sends his effort high over the bar. Championship: The goals are flying in around the Championship, where Jack Colback has just scored to double Nottingham Forest’s lead against Preston. Championship: Blackburn Rovers have been denied a clear penalty and had a goal disallowed in their game against Sheffield United. They equalise through Reda Khadra, who is on loan from Brighton and is helped by a big deflection. In the delayed kick-off at St Andrew’s, Scott Hogan has given Birmingham City an early lead against Reading. Meanwhile at the Hawthorns, Josh Coburn spanks one home to put Middlesbrough one up against West Brom. Championship: It’s Barnsley 0-1 Hull, with George Honeyman opening the scoring at Oakwell. Meanwhile at Kenilworth Road, Jacob Brown has put Stoke City one up against Luton Town. Premier League: The floodgates are open at Stamford Bridge, where Kai Havertz has recovered sufficiently with his brush with Joe Public to head home an unbelievable cross from Reece James. It was on a plate and Havertz guided a terrific header to Nick Pope’s right. Championship: Lewis Grabban has put Nottingham Forest a goal up against Preston with a spot-kick at thge City Ground. Chelsea 0-0 Burnley: Kai Havertz is on the floor the wrong side of the advertising hoarding behind the Burnley goal after being shoved off the ball and into the crowd while sprinting down the inside left. He is eventually extricated with the help of fans and the Chelsea medics and looks OK, if a little winded. That could have been nasty. Premier League: It’s nosebleed time for Norwich as they go two up courtesy of Pukki’s spot-kick. Brentford 0-1 Norwich: Norwich have a penalty at the Brentford Community Stadium, where Charlie Goode looks to have prevented a clear goalsacoring opportiunity for Teemu Pukki. He gets away with a yellow card. Championship: Bournemouth are a goal up against Swansea at the Vitality Stadium, where the in-form Dominic Solanke has slid the ball home. FA Cup: Doncaster Rovers beat Scunthorpe United by the only goal of the game at Glanford Park to advance to the second round. Chelsea 0-0 Burnley: Big news from Stamford Bridge, where Burnley have got the ball out of their own half and won themselves a corner. Nothing comes of it. Crystal Palace 0-0 Wolves: There’s not a lot to report from Selhurst Park, where Odsonne Eduoard has come closest to scoring. His shot on the turn was saved by Jose Sa in the Wolves goal. Championship: Luxembourg international Danel Sinani fires Huddersfield Town ahead at Cardiff City, who have taken one point from the last 30 available. Brentford 0-1 Norwich City: Tim Krul keeps Norwich ahead, doing well to block a close range effort from Christian Norgaard. Chelsea 0-0 Burnley: Chelsea continue to pile the pain on Burnley but the deadlock remains unbroken. Ross Barkley, making a rare start of Chelsea, sends a volley wide. Chelsea 0-0 Burnley: Chelsea are battering Burnley and miss another chance to get their noses in front from a corner. Chilwell played the ball to Hudson-Odoi, whose cross was flicked inches wide of the far post by Andreas Christiansen. Moments latewr, Nick Pope is forced into action again, putting the ball out for another corner. Antonio Rudiger heads over from the subsequent set-piece. Premier League: Matthias Normann gives Norwich City their first Premier League lead of the Premier League season with his first goal for the club. The Norwegian waltzes unchallenged into the Brentford penalty area and slots into the corner. Chelsea 0-0 Burnley: Nick Pope has just pulled off an excellent save from Callum Hudson-Odoi, who shot from a tightish angle. The Chelsea midfielder fired wide of the far post on the follow-up. Championship: Rhian Brewster has scored his first league goal for Sheffield United at the 35th time of asking, volleying his side ahead against Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park after just two minutes following good work down the wing by BIlly Sharp. Well, most of them are. Kick-off in Birmingham City’s game against Reading at St Andrews has been delayed by 30 minutes due to unspecified “technical issues” at the ground. Premier League: Manchester United suffered another humiliation at Old Trafford, going down to a Manchester City side that went in two goals up at the break and spent the entire second half toying with their hosts and bitter rivals. WSL: Chelsea have held on to beat Aston Villa 1-0 in Walsall courtesy of Jessie Fleming’s goal. The go level on points with Arsenal at the top of the Women’s Super League. Premier League: Don’t be fooled by a scoreline which doesn’t even come close to doing Manchester City’s dominance justice. They have completely embarrassed their neighbours at Old Trafford, barely giving them a kick of the ball in the second half after going in at the break with a two-goal lead. Bernardo Silva took advantage of some slapstick defending just before the break to double their advantage after Eric Bailly had shinned the ball into his own net early doors. If this doesn’t mark the end for Ollie Gunnar Solskjær, it’s difficult to know what will. We’ll have a report from Old Trafford shortly. Manchester United 0-2 Manchester City: We’re into the final three minbutes at Old Trafford, where Manchester United are being slaughtered 2-0 by neighbours who appear to be taking pity on them, perhaps in the hope of keeping Ole Gunnar Solskjær in a job. “A calm annihilation,” says Gary Neville of the second half on Sky Sports. Following the knockings with Scott Murray ... Brentford: Fernandez, Jorgensen, Jansson, Pinnock, Canos, Janelt, Norgaard, Jensen, Henry, Mbeumo, Toney. Subs: Thompson, Goode, Forss, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Bidstrup, Roerslev, Stevens, Cox. Norwich City: Krul, Aarons, Gibson, Omobamidele, Williams, Dowell, Normann, Lees-Melou, McLean, Rashica, Pukki. Subs: Rupp, Gilmour, Placheta, Tzolis, Sorensen, Sargent, Gunn, Giannoulis, Idah. Referee: Jarred Gillett (Australia) Crystal Palace: Guaita, Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, Gallagher, Kouyate, McArthur, Zaha, Benteke, Edouard. Subs: Butland, Milivojevic, Tomkins, Olise, Ayew, Schlupp, Clyne, Kelly, Riedewald. Wolves: Jose Sa, Kilman, Coady, Saiss, Nelson Semedo, Neves, Joao Moutinho, Ait Nouri, Trincao, Hwang, Jimenez. Subs: Hoever, Daniel Podence, Moulden, Boly, Silva, Ruddy, Dendoncker, Traore, Cundle. Referee: Graham Scott (Oxfordshire) Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, James, Kante, Jorginho, Chilwell, Barkley, Hudson-Odoi, Havertz. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Pulisic, Loftus-Cheek, Chalobah, Saul, Mount, Ziyech, Azpilicueta, Sarr. Burnley: Pope, Lowton, Tarkowski, Mee, Taylor, Gudmundsson, Westwood, Brownhill, McNeil, Cornet, Wood. Subs: Cork, Barnes, Hennessey, Roberts, Rodriguez, Collins, Pieters, Vydra, Long. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands) Newcastle United: The Mirror is reporting that Eddie Howe’s apparently imminent appointment as Newcastle manager is in doubt because his potential new employers have not agreed a deal for him to bring in his own backroom staff. As I recall, that was the deal-breaker which led to him turning down the Celtic job. Women’s Super League: A bad weekend for Aston Villa is showing no sign of improving. Following the defteat of their men’s team at Southampton last night, Aston Villa’s women are a goal down against Chelsea in today’s early kick-off. Jessie Fleming’s first-half strike has the champions ahead with less than half an hour to go. Premier League: Adam Armstrong scored the only goal of the game at St Mary’s last night as Southampton consigned Aston Villa to their fifth consecutive league defeat, ramping up the pressure on Dean Smith. Ben Fisher was there for the Guardian ... FA Cup: Scunthorpe United host Doncaster Rovers in the day’s early kick-off and the visitors from League One have just gone a goal up against the side from a division below. Scunthorpe’s Ryan Loft has put the ball into his own net. FA Cup first round ... The lowest ranked team left in the competition, AFC Sudbury from the Isthmian League Division One North (English football’s eighth tier) were knocked out by their League Two neighbours Colchester United last night. There are no fewer than 32 FA Cup first round matches today and we’ll be sure to bring you news of any giantkillings that take place this afternoon. Meanwhile in Spain ... Six years after playing his last game for Barcelona, Xavi Hernandez is back at the Camp Nou as manager. The club he joined as a 12-year-old play at Celta Vigo today, where the action kicks off at 3.15pm (GMT). Today’s Premier League fixtures Manchester United 0-0 Manchester City Chelsea v Burnley Crystal Palace v Wolves Brentford v Norwich City Brighton v Newcastle United (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Today’s Championship fixtures Bournemouth v Swansea City Barnsley v Hull City Birmingham City v Reading Blackburn Rovers v Sheffield United Cardiff City v Huddersfield Town Coventry City v Bristol City Luton Town v Stoke City Millwall v Derby County Nottingham Forest v Preston Peterborough United v Fulham West Brom v Middlesbrough Blackpool v QPR View the Championship table Today’s Scottish Premiership fixtures Aberdeen v Motherwell Hearts v Dundee United St Johnstone v St Mirren View the Scottish Premiership table Following last night’s defeat at the hands of Southampton, Aston Villa boss Dean Smith has been handed the Premier League Manager In Crisis baton but may have the heat taken off him by Ole Gunnar Solskjaer depending on the outcome of this afternoon’s Manchester derby. It’s not looking good for Manchester United, who have been absolutely battered in the first half and find themselves extremely lucky to be only two goals down to the team in blue from down the road in this afternoon’s early kick-off. Eric Bailly opened the scoring, slicing a Joao Cancelo cross into his own net, before some slapstick defending from Harry Maguire, Luke Shaw and the otherwise excellent David De Gea allowed Bernardo Silva to double City’s lead just before the break. Once the all important local bragging rights have been claimed at Old Trafford we have three three o’clock games ahead of Newcastle’s intriguing late afternoon visit to Brighton. They’re all in London, where Chelsea hosat Burnley at Turf Moor, Crystal Palace welcome Wolves to Selhurst Park and Brentford take on Norwich City. We’ll bring you team news, build-up, all the major talking points and post-match reaction from the top flight and beyond.This was always destined to be a day when the number of points accrued by England felt a relatively minor detail. Given the endless talking points in the buildup – the Covid-19 uncertainty, a new home captain and fly-half, long queues around the stadium, a delayed kick-off – it was to the credit of all concerned that a capacity Twickenham crowd departed feeling optimistic about what may yet lie ahead this autumn. There may well be more mileage in the Owen Farrell saga, with the captain’s post-Covid availability apparently under discussion with Public Health England, but here was evidence of some fresh English momentum and useful youthful impetus. While an ill-disciplined and ponderous Tonga were often their own worst enemies, England will be quietly encouraged before Australia’s impending visit next Saturday. If two tries apiece for Ben Youngs, Jonny May and Jamie George stood out alongside a classy display from the man of the match, Henry Slade, there was no mistaking the feelgood vibe as Marcus Smith skipped over for a 72nd-minute try that underlined the bizarre logic of the Harlequin not starting the game after Farrell’s enforced withdrawal. Freddie Steward, all 6ft 5in of him, also looked a rock-steady pylon at full-back while Adam Radwan has the feet to supply some dance hall style to any team. The champagne moment, though, unquestionably belonged to the stand-in captain, Courtney Lawes, whose last-gasp cover tackle on Telusa Veainu late in the first half completely rewrote the traditional rules of how much ground a 6ft 7in, 32-year-old back-five forward should theoretically be able to cover. Not that there was ever any doubt which moment would generate the biggest cheer of the day. Smith’s arrival off the bench in place of the starting 10, George Furbank, did not totally transform the course of the game but by the end he was completely running the show, putting the replacement hooker, Jamie Blamire, away for a cracking late score as England, who scored 11 tries, including a late debut effort from Alex Mitchell, finished with a genuine flourish. It will do little to hush the argument about who should wear England’s No 10 jersey going forward. Surely this was an obvious opportunity to start with Smith, rather than ask him to deliver a late cameo? Or maybe not. Eddie Jones, the head coach, has never been the type to bend like a palm tree even in the face of gale-force public opinion. Overall, though, this was a positive start to England’s autumn, notwithstanding the 68th minute red card for the calculated elbow to Smith’s head that led to the replacement Viliami Fine being sent off. Slade looked revitalised alongside Manu Tuilagi and, at first glance, the arrival of Martin Gleeson as England’s new attack coach is showing some distinct early promise. There is much more evidence of England backs showing real aggressive intent with their running and carrying and more clarity about what they are seeking to do. The upshot was five first-half tries, the first for Radwan arriving inside three minutes. Replays suggested some off-the-ball obstruction from Furbank played a part but the Newcastle winger is the kind of player who could step his way through a crowded phone box. The roar Jamie George emitted after finishing off a 13th-minute maul try was further evidence of the Saracens’ renewed hunger, which was collectively reflected across England’s performance even before May led the defence a merry 29th-minute dance on the left and Slade, after a couple of earlier near misses, nailed the conversion The visitors’ day took a further turn for the worse when their left-wing, Solomone Kata, was sent to the sin-bin for clumsily taking out May out in the air. In his absence, England helped themselves to a couple more tries. A bullocking run from Ellis Genge supplied the momentum from which the supporting Maro Itoje scored his side’s fourth and a rejuvenated Youngs sliced through a defensive gap for a fifth just before the interval. Youngs cheekily stripped the ball off Sione Vailanu to race away for his second within 10 minutes of the restart and thereafter it was free-running carnage. May’s high-leaping first-half tribute to Chris Ashton – the May-Fly? – looked painful but his hunger for tries was further illustrated by a stretching effort on the hour mark, his 35th try in 67 England appearances. With the gaps in the defence widening, even the isolating Farrell would have been suitably impressed by the sight of Smith romping away for his own score and giving England another attacking dimension. Though with Tonga’s head coach, Toutai Kefu, recovering from the injuries he suffered in an horrific attack on his home in Brisbane in August, even the heavy punishment the visitors endured late on has to be seen as strictly relative.Al Smith may not be the first British playwright to ask “What’s in a name?”, but this weekend he had cause to ponder Shakespeare’s famous line. Smith, the author of a new play coming to the Royal Court theatre this week, had given a lead character the name of Hershel Fink. But publicity for the production prompted angry complaints about Jewish stereotyping. In response, the famous venue on Sloane Square in London has now apologised and agreed to change the name, admitting that it was “unconscious bias” that had led to the Silicon Valley billionaire in the work being given this identity. In an official statement, the theatre management added that the character in Smith’s play, Rare Earth Mettle, which stars former Doctor Who actor Arthur Darvill, is not Jewish and that there is no reference to his faith or Jewishness in the show. Among those to question the planned use of the name Hershel Fink were Adam Lenson, the director and producer, and David Baddiel, the writer and comedian. “The Royal Court claims they didn’t realise ‘Hershel Fink’ was a Jewish name. Hmmm. Somehow it just sounded so right for a world-conquering billionaire,” Baddiel posted on Twitter. This February, Baddiel’s new book, Jews Don’t Count, argued that antisemitic bias is the one prejudice that remains largely unpoliced in the “culture wars”. Lenson was also critical on Twitter about the Royal Court taking “a character so clearly based on Elon Musk” and giving him “an obviously Jewish name”. He added: “Casually making a Silicon Valley billionaire Jewish perpetuates antisemitic stereotypes and will cause ideological harm.” Laura McGrady, who is a writer, questioned the venue’s claim to be unaware of the connotations of the name. “If I’m believing that no one noticed the problem here … which, I’m not. I’m not believing that at all. Then am I supposed to believe that writers give characters names from specific cultures or origins without even noticing? Seems a reach to me.” Set on a salt flat in South America, Rare Earth Mettle is a campaigning piece about the damage inflicted by powerful tech industries. The original Fink character was the chief executive of an electric car company and has been compared to Elon Musk in interviews with Smith. The Royal Court said: “We are grateful to the members of the Jewish community who got in touch with the Royal Court to communicate the name of one of the characters in Rare Earth Mettle is antisemitic. “For clarification, the character is not Jewish and there is no reference to being Jewish in the play. We acknowledge that this is an example of unconscious bias and we will reflect deeply on how this has happened in the coming days. We and the writer are deeply sorry for harm caused. In response to our learning the writer has changed the name, as of last night.” Smith, who has written for Holby City and EastEnders, as well as for radio, penned the recent acclaimed ambulance service-based series of dramas, Life Lines, for BBC Radio 4. He said that he had deliberately aimed at a wide array of targets while writing Rare Earth Mettle, covering racism as well as many of the challenges facing both the global economy and ecology. Baddiel ironically paraphrased Smith’s ambition on Twitter: “I’ve written a play. Everything – particularly now and particularly about ethnicity – gets relentlessly discussed. Except as regards one ethnicity apparently.” And he commented: “It’s still a very instructive Jews Don’t Count episode.” But Baddiel later recognised that the theatre and playwright had subsequently done the correct thing in responding to public dismay and changing the name.Mary Gaitskill, 66, is the author of This Is Pleasure, a novella about a #MeToo scandal in the New York book industry, as well as three novels and three story collections, including her 1988 debut Bad Behaviour, whose story Secretary was the basis of the 2002 film starring Maggie Gyllenhaal in the title role as an office junior in a sadomasochistic relationship with her boss. Her new book, Oppositions, is a collection of essays dealing candidly with subjects that include rape and child abuse: reviewing the US edition, the Boston Globe praised her “gift for traversing taboo territory with a subtlety that’s sometimes downright Jamesian... [she] draws on her personal experience to crack the veneers of the social codes and sexual ambiguities we all navigate”. Gaitskill, who grew up near Detroit and ran away in her teens to San Francisco, spoke to me from upstate New York. These essays might have been titled Against Simplicity… I get very disturbed when I feel something is being presented in an overly broad way. I have a nuanced mind, for better and worse. For a writer, it’s generally good. For a person who has to sit on a school board or judge a court case, it probably isn’t. Fortunately, I don’t do those things. You like to continually reconsider your point of view. I do, but it’s actually ineffective. A lot of people, I’ve learned, read the first few pages, and if you’ve said something they don’t like, they don’t get past it. They don’t take in what you’re saying on page 10. They’re just furious at you for what you said on pages one and two. You picture the book getting hurled across the room during a piece in which you say Lolita is about love… I had said Lolita was about love in an earlier essay; a friend said, you can’t say that, and I was like, “but I think it’s true”. I don’t think it’s ideal love, it’s twisted love, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t love. Probably the majority of Americans who know of that book would say: “Yes, in real life Humbert should go to jail, but he’s obviously a fictional character and I’m interested to read about him.” That seems simple, but for more intellectual people, or people who are loud on Twitter, I think it’s become contentious. The same essay talks about your feelings when you were molested by a family friend at the age of five. A lot of women who love Lolita have had some kind of experience like that. I might live long enough to regret writing about it, but it felt right at the time. Men, and I’m sure some women, too, molest children: that is the really raw thing that gives Lolita its power, in addition to its artistic beauty. It’s absurd to talk about the book in purely intellectual terms. Brian Boyd [the Nabokov scholar] said it’s about a defence of children. Come on! Nobody in their right mind would read it like that: it’s too erotic, and that’s what makes it more complicated. Another essay explores your difficulty in describing an encounter you had in the 1970s, which you talk about having previously spoken of as rape, although you felt “the truth is not at all clear, then or even now”. Your honesty about this seems intended to complicate our ideas about sexual responsibility. That was written even before we really got where we are now [since #MeToo] but I think the one thing I said that still applies is that probably a new word, or many new words, should be invented for different kinds of sexual cruelty or violence. People sometimes say rape when they mean something else. A lot of bad things can happen that aren’t rape, but rape is rape. Did you write This Is Pleasure to make that point? I wrote it in less than a year – for me that’s really fast – and I wrote it partly out of my own confusion [in the wake of #MeToo] and because I really felt strongly that I needed to: there’s something way too clearcut in public about a situation that is not clearcut. I watched it unfold to some extent about a friend of mine. He did do some things that were disrespectful, but it was strange: on the one hand, my instinct was to defend him. There was a petition saying that if anybody hires this person, you should boycott them – that’s overstepping. It’s one thing to decide “I don’t want to deal with this person”, but to be telling other people that they shouldn’t or you’re going to suffer? That’s just wrong: it’s telling other people what to think, and how to feel. Remember the Polanski scandal, way before #MeToo? Most people I knew actually supported him: “Yes, he shouldn’t have done that, but he’s a great artist…” I was so disgusted and angry. And I like Roman Polanski. Chinatown’s a great movie. Rosemary’s Baby’s a great movie. I don’t care. He should have gone to jail. I never felt like watching his movies after that, but I’d never go online and demand that nobody else does. What did you think when Blake Bailey’s Philip Roth book got pulled? I thought it was ridiculous, but his cruel treatment in that really ugly biography of John Cheever [in 2009] – a great writer and, frankly, better than Roth – was so shitty that I had no sympathy for him really. What have you been reading lately? I’ve just finished All the King’s Men by Robert Penn Warren, which I’d never read before. It’s very old-fashioned but it’s a great book about American politics. It’s based on the governor of Louisiana, who started idealistic and became a brutish Trumpian figure. Before that, I read Mario Vargas Llosa’s The Feast of the Goat – I loved that – and I’m about to start New People by Danzy Senna. Which authors inspired you to write? In my early 20s, Colette, then Flannery O’Connor, and, later, Nabokov, except I didn’t think I could do that. O’Connor was probably more impactful for being closer to me in sensibility, but you aren’t really aware of your own work being shaped: you make conscious choices but I think things happen that are deeper than that. • Oppositions: Selected Essays is published on 11 November by Serpent’s Tail (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA night of success and sadness in Sharjah ended with the team that won going out and the team that lost going through, but for England progress to the T20 World Cup semi-finals came at a cruel cost. The loss of this match at least for them was incidental, but that of Jason Roy is much more serious. There is only so much misfortune that a title-chasing team can survive and it may transpire that England limped across that line as Roy was carried from the field 25 balls into their run chase with an apparently serious muscle injury. “It’s difficult to assume anything,” Eoin Morgan said of his prognosis. “Obviously we’re all hopeful that he comes through in some manner or there’s some remedy to get him through one if not two games, but we have to do what’s best for Jason, and then the team.” Already without two superstars and certain starters in Ben Stokes and Jofra Archer when they arrived in the United Arab Emirates, England lost Sam Curran before the tournament began, Tymal Mills on the first of their two visits to Sharjah, now Roy in their second, and their preparations for the most important games of the tournament must include significantly remodelling their team. South Africa had batted excellently, albeit against some ordinary bowling and occasionally sub-par fielding, to reach 189 for two and give themselves a chance of progressing. This being the last game of the group, the completion of their innings prompted some intensive net run rate calculations and an England reply of multiple targets. In the end a leg-bye off Tabraiz Shamsi in the 11th over took them to 87, enough to secure a place in the semi-finals; a Moeen Ali six off the same bowler took them to 110, which guaranteed first place in the group; and finally Liam Livingstone struck a succession of brutal blows to knock South Africa out. Kagiso Rabada started his third over, and England’s 16th, knowing his team were seven runs from elimination, with England in effect four down, given Roy’s injury. Had what happened at the start of the 20th over occurred just a little earlier a different, miraculous story might have unfolded. Instead what followed was a hat-trick of a very different kind. Rabada’s first ball was thrashed over midwicket and out of the stadium by Livingstone, a six measured at 112m and declared the biggest of the tournament. His second cannot have been far short – it was hard to tell as it, too, was swallowed by the darkness beyond the stadium’s roof. The third was hammered down the ground for six more. Confirmation that South Africa’s battle had been lost had been swift and savage, and suddenly, for the first time since Roy’s injury slammed the brakes on an excellent start, they were at real risk of losing the match. Rabada’s next over, the last of the innings, kept that particular threat at bay. England required 14 to win but Chris Woakes, Morgan and Chris Jordan fell to the first three balls, and an ultimately disappointing World Cup campaign ended for South Africa with a celebration. Australia’s emphatic victory over West Indies in Abu Dhabi had left them with no choice but to go for broke here. After Morgan won the toss and inevitably chose to field, their first task was to do what no other side in this group had managed: avoid haemorrhaging powerplay wickets against England, and accelerate through the innings rather than being forced on to the defensive. When Reeza Hendricks became the third right-handed opener to be dismissed during Moeen Ali’s second over of an innings in this competition – a niche statistic, to be sure, but interesting particularly because Moeen’s purpose when bowling in the powerplay is to target left-handers – the game seemed to have set down a familiar path. But that brought Rassie van der Dussen to the crease, and he had a different direction in mind. He and Quinton de Kock added 71 for the second wicket, but it was after Aiden Markram arrived that the innings truly caught fire. Markram scored a 25-ball 52, and he and Van der Dussen, who ended with 90 off 60, scored 103 runs off the last 52 balls. Morgan suggested South Africa’s score was “reasonable, around par”, and remarkably, despite everything, England nearly chased it down. “When your premium batsman goes down and you [still] go into the last over needing 14 you’re in a pretty good position,” he said. “There’s still certainly belief there.” Their belief may survive, but the key question now is whether their title chances have been hobbled along with their opener.That’s all from me, thanks for reading. England and Eddie roll on to next week’s date with the Wallabies. Bye for now. Our man on the scene at Twickenham is Robert Kitson, and here is his match report: Eddie Jones speaks: “It was a good positive performance, we went out there to play with a more aggressive mindset, the game lends itself to that with quick ruck ball at the moment, and I think we achieved that. “It’s a project, each game we want to improve a little bit, and by the time we get to the World Cup, we want to be the best team in the world. “You can only play against what the opposition do ... we probably left four tries out there ... I liked the effort in the second half, those games are difficult to play, when you’re in front, the crowd expects you to win, and they go for more pints than they watch rugby ... we only got half a Mexican wave today, so we were pretty pleased with that.” Will Farrell be able to play next week? “We don’t have to worry about that ... he’s got a Covid situation, when we find out [if he can play], we’ll work it out.” Will George Ford be getting a call up? “I don’t know whether you’ve seen my selection notes, or not ... I can go and get them if you want? [laughs] We’ll be hopeful Owen’s available [next week]. We’ll make a selection after Sunday to see what we need for the next game.” On Australia: “They’ve had three or four months together, they are improving, they are well-coached by [Dave] Rennie ... but they’ll have a different team [with no Quade Cooper or Samu Kerevi] ... they’re a strong team and we’ll have to play really well ... We got a bit careless at the breakdown at times today, and Australia are a team that really test you at the breakdown. “I thought there wasn’t a bad player out there for us ... when you play Tonga, who were struggling a bit, it’s hard to make an assessment ... [Sam] Underhill should be alright for next week.” And finally, he is asked by Mark Durden-Smith if there is anyone in the England camp who tells Jones things he needs to work on: “All the time mate ... I yell and scream at them, and then they go.” Grant Doorey, Tonga’s acting head coach, speaks to Amazon Prime: “Fundamentally, you’ve got to focus on the core reasons, and it’s discipline ... you can’t compete with those sorts of [penalty] statistics ... we need to make sure we give ourselves an opportunity to use the possession we work so hard for. “The gulf is obvious, but the more opportunity we get to play games like this, the more motivated we get to ‘close’ those games ... we’ve got to raise our standard and I think over time we will manage to do that. “We’d love to create more pressure ... it’s a pretty hard game to play without the ball. Fundamentally the key thing is our discipline, we need to be more disciplined.” Tonga gave away nine penalties to England’s nine, two free-kicks to England’s none, and of course they had two men yellow-carded, and one sent off. Presuming Owen Farrell has to isolate for 10 days with his case of Covid-19, Lawes will presumably captain the team again next week against Australia. Courtney Lawes, England’s captain for the day, speaks to Amazon Prime: “Little bit to work on, but it’s great to be back here with all the fans, the atmosphere was unbelievable, and it was nice to get a few points at the end and bring a bit of entertainment. “I kind of knew if ‘Faz’ [Owen Farrell] couldn’t play that I’d be the first choice [to be captain], so I just slotted in, and did what I could. It’s obviously amazing, I didn’t know if I would get the chance [to captain England at Twickenham] ... Really proud, especially with this group of boys, and to put on a performance like that.” And looking ahead to the match against Australia, next week: “I think it’s going to be a great game, of course I believe we can go toe to toe with anyone really, there are a few things to fix up, and hopefully you’ll see a better England next week.” Henry Slade, the player of the match, speaks to Amazon Prime and is asked how much fun that was to play in: “It was awesome. We’ve been trying to bring a bit of new life to our attack, and I think you saw that a little bit today ... we’ve been spending a lot of time working on the attack. He says the new players brought into camp have made a positive impact, and adds: “We’ve got a good mix of youth and experience ... I think we’ve got a good balance at the moment.” Tonga tired, predictably, but England played some nice stuff there and will consider it a job well done. It was 11 tries that Eddie Jones’s men scored, in the end. Slade was excellent, and Smith caught the eye when he came on. And that’s that. Oh, beautiful work by the fly-half Smith, chucking a lovely dummy to account for one defender, breaking the line, and then producing a perfect offload to his left to the Newcastle hooker Jamie Blamire, who has a clear run to the line. Nick Mullins points out that Blamire has played three matches for England and scored five tries, which is some strike rate. Alex Mitchell sprints over, set up by Curry, but it’s pulled back for offside from a previous kick. The official attendance at Twickenham is 81,022. Now that’s a lovely try. From the restart, Slade gets hands on ball and burns off a would-be tackler on the outside, from inside the England 22. He has options to left and right, and carries the ball in two hands, having time to choose the best route to the try-line. Slade spots Smith on the inside, serves up a perfect pass, and Smith roars to the line. Lovely stuff and typically classy creativity from Slade of Exeter. The England pack, and Jamie George, rumble over for another try. That is George’s second five-pointer of the match, so he, Youngs and May all have two now. George is immediately taken off by Jones. Smith strikes a good conversion. One of the Tongan replacements, Viliami Fine, gets his marching orders soon after coming on. It was initially going to be a penalty for a high tackle by Fine on Radwan, and then he chose to try and elbow/shoulder Smith while they were on the floor. 68 min: Over on Twitter, Lee Calvert has brought my attention to this Welsh person, who is suggesting red cards all over the shop for England. ‘Jonny May stupid swan dive. Should be a red card at the very minimum’ ‘England player’s foot in touch there. Should be a red card at the very minimum’ 67 mins: Youngs, Genge and Sinckler come off for England. Mitchell, Marler and Stuart come on. 65 min: There’s a party atmosphere at Twickenham now, with three blasts of that somewhat irritating trumpet phrase coming over the PA in quick succession, naturally followed by cheers. There isn’t much to look at on the field if you like your rugby matches tense and close, but England are playing some reasonable stuff against these Tongan lambs to the slaughter. 63 min: Things are becoming a little more ragged for Tonga now. They are charged down in-goal, following a lovely jinking run by Curry for England, at the end of which he looked to Dombrant on his right shoulder. Spaces are opening up all over the field for England now. Youngs offloads to May, who angles his run to the try-line towards the posts. Hes tackled just before the line, but manages to reach over and dot down for his second try of the match. Smith converts. 58 min: Tonga begin to unload their bench with a couple of replacements, or finishers, as Eddie Jones would have it. Now Jonny May sprints into space on the left wing, and tries to sneak over for a try in the corner, before deciding to try and offload to a teammate inside him, but he is forced into touch. Mark Atkinson comes on for England in the centres, for his international debut, replacing Tuilagi. Eddie Jones recently described Atkinson as a man who is ‘desperate to get on the bus - everything’s falling out of his backpack’, with regards to his late international recognition. 54 min: Sinckler offers up a tremendous no-look pop pass to his teammate Genge in midfield. Tonga then win a penalty and have a bit of field position in the right-hand corner. But England then win put-in at the scrum five metres from their line, and then a penalty with a big scrum. Tonga have a scrum near halfway. The alert England No 9 Youngs rips the ball out of the hands of Vailanu, the No 8, and has a clear run to the try-line. That was careless by the Tongan back-rower. The conversion is missed again, Slade hitting the right-hand post. Furbank goes off and Marcus Smith comes on. 48 min: Marcus Smith is warming up. That’s probably the last thing this overworked Tonga defence needs. The match has been scrappy, in general, in these early minutes of the second half. England spin the ball out right around halfway. Fifita tries to intercept it one-handed, but pats it forwards as he does so, and the referee decides it’s a sin bin for denying the hosts that attacking opportunity which may well have ended in a try. On commentary, David Flatman says he thinks it was a genuine attempt to catch the ball, and I firmly agree. A bit harsh on Tonga but they will be down a man for 10 minutes. 45 min: Tonga take it through a few phases before Morath tries a diagonal grubber kick which is well gathered by an astutely-positioned England full-back Steward. 41 min: England are on the move immediately, Slade offering a nice offload to Tuilagi in midfield, and sending his centre colleague storming into space. But then, England win a penalty for a late tackle spotted by the TMO. They kick the penalty for touch, and have a very hand attacking platform, but get the lineout wrong, and Tonga win a scrum five metres out. Here we go. Thank you Lee and hello everyone. That was much as expected from England in the first half, and indeed Tonga, except perhaps the rather soft concession of the first try. Jonny May said a few weeks ago that his main job for the ‘old England’ was chasing kicks. Are we seeing a new England this afternoon? Not really, on the evidence so far, but they have been undeniably efficient against opponents that must be fearing a cricket score in the second half. Alex Dombrandt has come on in place of Sam Underhill. I’m handing over the commentary reins for this match over to my colleague Luke McLaughlin, who will take you through the second half. Half-time musings “Everything is proceeding as I have foreseen” as The Emperor would put it. Tonga were manful in their efforts to contain England in the middle part of the half; their scrum in particular going well. But slowly, inevitably, England are grinding their greater ability and preparation onto the game and scoreboard. Manu Tuilagi has been busy on his return to the team and some decent flashes from George Furbank have shown his talent. You have to fear for the Sea Eagles when England start to empty their bench, with Dombrandt’s carrying and Marcus Smith’s magic to torment the ever tiring defence. PEEEEEP! That’s the end of the first period and all is going as expected. 40+2 mins. Itoje takes a lineout catch and the ball is popped by George to Youngs darting up the blind side. He has too much pace for the increasingly knackered Tongan defence. Slade pushes the conversion wide. 39 mins. Penalty England in the middle of the park and time is off as Underhill is down after taking a bit to the head/neck/shoulder area. He’s sat up and chatting with the physios so looks not too serious hopefully. 37 mins. Telusa Veianu intercepts and flies up the right touchline! He runs firty metres, steps Steward one way, then the other but the Leicester fullback breaks the running stride just enough to allow the retreating captain Lawes to put in a huge covering tackle and dislodge the ball. A heartbreaker for Veianu, but great defensive work by Steward to slow him up and the lung-busting scramble effort by Courtney Lawes. 34 mins. Lawes pops the ball inside to Genge who busts through a weak tackle from Fisi’ihoi and gallops into open space in the 22 to bear down onto Veainu. He clatters the Tongan fullback and offloads to Itoje who smashes over and grounds it on the second effort. Slade adds the two. 32 mins. Solomone Kata clatters into Johnny May in the air and the ref is having a look at the replays. Kata had his eyes on the ball and was moving towards catching it, but May was six feet above him actually catching it. It’s yellow. 29 mins. England attack from around halfway. Some fast-hands from Furbank on the right set Tuilagi free who runs over one tackler before being halted by Morath. The ball is then worked left and Steward, joining the line from fullback, feeds May who finishes. Tonga can’t live with the England attack when it works coast to coast and back again like that. Slade converts. 26 mins. The England pack do a much less proficient job of the latest attacking lineout and the ball is cleared long and deep by Morath. Radwan brings it out and Tonga are penalised again, this time at the breakdown. The visitors have stemmed what looked like a developing tidal bore of England points in the first quarter. 24 mins. Vailanu, possibly shagged out from his big carry, does a horrible job of tackling Furbank and the England out-half is through the line and free. He’s hauled down and on the next pahse there’s a high tackle on Tuilagi. Penalty England and it’s sent to the corner again. 22 mins. Another strong Tonga scrum allows Vailanu to have a big 20 metre carry to put his side into the England half. They have a few more phases but it fizzles out as has been the case every time so far. 19 mins. Immediately from the restart Curry is pinged for a blocking run. Takalua ponies up once more and this time slots it from 40 metres. 17 mins. The tackle line is very keen from England and this time they are too mustard and caught offside. Takalua points to the posts, takes the kick himself and shanks it horribly. “Not quite” says a far too kind Nick Mullins on commentary. 14 mins. England have a penalty in the Tonga 22. They send it to the corner rather than kicking for posts and it’s a simple as you like catch-drive-try to George driving off the back of the maul. Slade pushes the conversion attempt just wide the other side of the posts. In his defence, both of the kicks so far have been from way out on the right touchline. 9 mins. After Tonga win a scrum penalty for Sinckler not holding his side up they are on the attack in the England half. It’s developing into something promising but the ball is thrown to Tuilagi by Sione Vailanu after a good break. Tonga’s scrum is a big positive so far. 7 mins. Tonga have a solid looking scrum in the middle of the park, bringing Walter Fifita is off his wing and bumps through an Underhill tackle. A few phases later the England flanker refocuses his shame at missing that one on smashing the ball loose in his next defensive effort. 3 mins. A rushed and pulled clearance from Morath gives England their first chance at an attacking lineout on the Tongan 22. The ball is thrown left through hands but the Sea Eagles defence repels a few carries. The ball then comes back all the way right to Adam Radwan who firstly steps a very weak Morath tackle attempt then forces himself over under pressure. Slade, on kicking duty today, pulls the conversion just wide. 1 min. Kurt Morath chips the ball forward into the arms of a jumping Maro Itoje and we’re underway The teams are out, the anthems are belted, the Sipi Tau is completed and we’re ready for kick-off... “George Furbank at 10 is nothing.” points out Christopher Dale, “I’ve seen Ayoola Erinle playing at centre.” Lest we forget; twelve years ago this month, England under Martin Johnson started this backline against New Zealand: Paul Hodgson, Jonny Wilkinson; Matt Banahan, Dan Hipkiss, Ayoola Erinle, Ugo Monye; Mark Cueto. AGAINST NEW ZEALAND! Due to the late arrival of the Tonga squad after some traffic issues, the game will now start at 15:25. Andy Bradshaw emails: “Afternoon Lee, Curry at 8 is baffling, I really can’t see why you’d take an excellent 6 with a great partnership with Underhill and play him at 8? The lengths Eddie will go to to not play Dombrandt and Simmonds.” I suppose if you’re going to try something, then Tonga at home is the place. However, I don’t know what Jones wants to see with Curry at 8 and Lawes at 6? With Billy Vunipola now gone, options at 8 need to be looked at, but that for me is Dombrandt as first look. I remain unconvinced by Sam Simmonds as an international loose forward. “What do we want?” asks PH on the email before answering, “Ben Youngs to pass the ball. And quickly!” Temper your expectations there. Although, Youngs is probably due his one very good game in five, as per his usual pattern. Pre-match prose for your consideration. Marcus Smith is a player everyone should get excited about. Andy Bull finds out more about his rise here. Given the inevitability of the result, what are you England fans out there hoping for today? A drop goal from Maro Itoje? You can email me or tweet if that’s your thing. Much ado about Covid in the build up. England captain and stand-off, Owen Farrell testing positive for the spiteful virus of our times on Friday meant Eddie did not name his starting lineup until 90 minutes before kick-off. And when he did finally name it Northampton’s George Furbank - usually a fullback - is starting at 10. Well well, clearly Marcus Smith’s minor leg injury is still a worry. Courtney Lawes takes over as captain and Mark Atkinson is promoted to the bench. Away from half-back, there are starts for Leicester’s impressive Freddie Steward and Newcastle’s young flyer Adam Radwan. In the forwards, Tom Curry starts at No 8 ahead of Alex Dombrandt. Alex Mitchell and Jamie Blamire will make their debuts from the bench. Tonga make nine changes, a reflection of the fixture today being inside the sanctioned Test window. England: Freddie Steward; Adam Radwan, Henry Slade, Manu Tuilagi, Jonny May; George Furbank, Ben Youngs; Ellis Genge, Jamie George, Kyle Sinckler, Maro Itoje, Jonny Hill, Courtney Lawes (captain), Sam Underhill, Tom Curry. Replacements: Jamie Blamire, Joe Marler, Will Stuart, Charlie Ewels, Alex Dombrandt, Alex Mitchell, Marcus Smith, Mark Atkinson. Tonga: Telusa Veainu; Walter Fifita, Mailetoa Hingano, Afusipa Taumoepeau, Solomone Kata; Kurt Morath, Sonatane Takulua (captain); Sigfried Fisi’ihoi, Paula Ngauamo, Ben Tameifuna, Halaleva Fifita, Tanginoa Halaifonua, Lopeti Timani, Mateaki Kafatolu, Sione Vailanu. Replacements: Siua Maile, Loni Uhila, Ma’afu Fia, Setofano Funaki, Onehunga Havili, Leon Fukofuka, James Faiva, Viliami Fine. England today start their Autumn campaign facing Tonga who are still reeling for being comprehensively put away by Scotland last week. Albeit, the squad the Sea Eagles will put on the field today is largely unrecognisable to the one mauled at Murrayfield. Eddie Jones has shouted his way to another new backroom staff as he begins the latest two-years-out Rugby World Cup cycle with new squad additions, but the starting line looks mostly familiar. This is the third time the teams have faced each other and the first time away from a World Cup. England have won all of them and by a margin of 40-odd points; even with all the Tongan changes, it’s difficult to foresee a different result today. Actually, that’s not true, its quite easy to see the result being much worse for the visitors.Eoin Morgan is asked what that result does for England. “I think it does a lot,” he says cheerfully. “We were right in it throughout.” Quizzed about Roy’s injury, he points out that England have coped with a few absences already – “Stokes, [Sam] Curran, Archer”. True, but today they did seem to miss Tymal Mills, and they were scruffier in the field than hitherto. “Very happy to top the group,” Morgan says, which is fair enough. “Finals are all about going and expressing yourselves, so we’re going to do that.” He isn’t asked about Liam Livingstone, but the semi should be easier now that England’s biggest hitter has found his groove. He may even be pushed up the order to form a pyrotechnic opening pair with Jos Buttler. Nasser Hussain points out an odd thing about the semi-final – England may not know till Monday where it will take place. “It’s Dubai if India get through, but if it’s New Zealand, it’s Abu Dhabi.” Ours not to reason why. Thanks for your company, your correspondence and your conspiracy theories, which were thankfully proved wrong. Do join me again on Wednesday for a World Cup semi-final in which England will take on Somebody, at Somewhere. ... is who will play England in the first semi-final on Wednesday. It’ll be New Zealand if they beat Afghanistan tomorrow. If they stumble, it’ll probably be India, whose final game is on Monday against Namibia, although the Afghans will be in the mix too. The second semi, on Thursday, is almost certainly Pakistan v Australia. An email comes in from Matthew Singleton. “In the only way I can,” he says, “I’m supporting England from across the gulf in Bahrain starting with a Somersby Cider followed by an Abbot Ale and finishing up with a Yorkshire Tea. I’ll be on a plane for the short hop next week if England get to the final (fingers crossed).” So England, Australia and South Africa all finish on eight points, with four wins from their five games. England are of the group, with a net run rate of 2.5 – still massive despite this defeat. Australia are second, on 1.2, and poor old South Africa are third with 0.73. They didn’t cash in against Bangladesh the way the Aussies did. Well, one crutch. The South Africans are giving him sympathetic hugs. They won this game because they put together big partnerships, whereas England kept losing wickets. 20th over: England 179-8 (Rashid 2, Wood 1) South Africa win by 10 runs, and go out on a high, squeezed out by Australia on net run rate. England lose for the first time in the tournament, and lose Jason Roy to a calf injury. You just hope they haven’t lost their momentum too. Rabada, who was awful for three overs, has now been immense for three balls. He digs the ball into this slow wicket and Jordan slaps it to long-off, where Miller takes another excellent catch. Morgan isn’t going to die wondering – but he too picks out the man on the rope, at deep square, and England have blown it. First ball of the last over, Woakes goes big ... but it’s down the throat of the man at deep midwicket, who clasps it to his chest – and, I think, manages to stay inside the Toblerone. Yes, that’s tremendous fielding. 19th over: England 176-5 (Morgan 17, Woakes 7) Pretorius is now on the podium among the World Cup wicket-takers, third equal with his team-mate Nortje on nine, behind only two leg-spinners (Zampa and Hasaranga). But now he blots his copybook with a no-ball, so Chris Woakes can’t be out first ball, rather like you or me playing cricket on the beach. And he cashes in with a six! Belted over long-off. Pretorius recovers, beating Morgan outside off, so England need 14 off the last over. As dead rubbers go, this could hardly be more alive. Pretorius starts his over with a slower ball, out of the back of the hand, and it does the trick as Livingstone hits this about 100 metres in the air. Miller, at long-off, is cool enough to wait for it and cling on. But Livingstone is back in business, which could be significant next week. 18th over: England 165-4 (Livingstone 27, Morgan 14) Some good tight deliveries from Nortje, but Morgan is equal to them – swatting for four, squirting for four more. Nortje retorts with a wide yorker and finishes with 1-34. England need 25 off two overs. “Fair enough then,” says Allan Down (see 2nd over). “I shall bundle up my cynicism and walk slowly away – and quietly enjoy the next round so much more than I had hoped.” 17th over: England 155-4 (Livingstone 27, Morgan 5) The other night on this ground, Eoin Morgan didn’t hit a four, or a sweep, for ages, as he clawed his way back to form. This time he plays the sweep first ball, off a seamer, and gets four right away! Livingstone adds an upper cut for four more, so England need 35 off 18 balls. The win predictor gives them a 31pc chance: it may not have done its research on Livingstone. Malan gets a slower ball and sends a top edge into the night sky. Kagiso Rabada, seizing the chance to recover from his mauling, takes a high-class catch, over his shoulder at backward point. England need 45 off 22 balls. 16th over: England 144-3 (Malan 33, Livingstone 21) Rabada returns, with SA needing a hat-trick, and now Livingstone finds his feet! A swing to leg, and that’s the biggest six of the tournament – 112 metres. Same again! Not quite so big, but that’s South Africa dumped out of the World Cup. And another one – straight back over Rabada’s head. By hitting four successive sixes, England have put Australia in the semis. Funny old game. 15th over: England 125-3 (Malan 33, Livingstone 2) Shamsi’s job is done, with the fine figures of 4-0-24-2. On comes Dwaine Pretorius, bearing dots, though Livingstone, with another inside edge, manages to go to his T20 World Cup career-best, and Dawid Malan, seeing the need for a statement, lofts the last ball for six. “To celebrate reaching the semis,” says Kim Thonger, “I’ve added the merest soupçon of champagne to my negroni and it’s perked me up no end. I’ve christened it the negroni (Delta variant).” Ha. 14th over: England 117-3 (Malan 26, Livingstone 1) Nortje is back, understandably as he is the only seamer to have taken a wicket today – and it was the big scalp, Buttler. Malan, glad to have some pace to work with, shuffles across and flicks for four. Livingstone gives Nortje the charge, which is bold as the ball is a 92mph snorter, but he survives. England need 73 off six overs; SA, to join them in the semis, need six wickets for 14 runs. Neither seems very probable. 13th over: England 112-3 (Malan 21, Livingstone 1) Eoin Morgan holds himself back, in the interests of right-and-left, and sends in Liam Livingstone, who has one run in the tournament so far. He meets his first delivery, from Shamsi, with an inside edge, and his second with a block, but manages to work the third away for a single, so he has doubled his tally already. SA need a collapse now. If this was a Test match, England might well be able to help. Nooo! Mo!!! Just after hitting a fabulously big six, Mo aims a drop-kick straight at long-on. 12th over: England 104-2 (Moeen 31, Malan 20) Moeen reached that milestone with none of his usual flair, but he makes up for it now. Markram returns to be greeted by a languid six over extra-cover, before Mo suddenly reminds us that he can do power too, belting a drive back past an astonished bowler. Winning the match is still a tall order: England need 86 off eight overs. 11th over: England 89-2 (Moeen 19, Malan 19) Malan, facing Shamsi, plays a reverse-sweep for two, then gets away with another nick and picks up three for it. And then Moeen gets England over the line into the semis with a scrappy single, possibly a leg-bye. They all count. 10th over: England 81-2 (Moeen 18, Malan 12) Off goes Markram, which is a surprise as he did well and had two left-handers to torment. Back comes Rabada, and Malan gets away with a bottom edge for four, dribbling away through the vacant slips. That gets Malan’s feet moving and he crunches a drive through the covers: by his standards, this is a fast start. And that’s drinks, with SA on top in the match, but England on top in the group. “Roy’s injury,” says Colum Fordham, “is a blow to England’s World Cup hopes, but at least we can take comfort from Buttler’s splendid form and Moeen’s experience of both the IPL and the Hundred where he has excelled as a batsman. This is a really good test for the England batting line-up ahead of the probable semi-final.” 9th over: England 70-2 (Moeen 17, Malan 2) Moeen is the only batsman left who’s in top form, so he decides to attack Shamsi. The results are mixed – a swish for four over square leg, a swing and a miss, a lofted cover-drive for two – but if Mo sticks around for another ten minutes, England will surely be in the semi-finals. 8th over: England 64-2 (Moeen 11, Malan 2) Seeing Shamsi’s success, Bavuma sends for Aiden Markram’s occasional off-breaks. Markram, who batted magnificently earlier, does well again, going for only three singles. 7th over: England 61-2 (Moeen 9, Malan 1) That’s a superb start from Shamsi, who has 1-2. The ball that got the wicket beat Bairstow for pace, Mike Atherton reckons. Not only have England lost three big stars: they’re all right-handers, so it’s all lefties now until Livingstone comes in. England need another 26 to qualify. “It’s fairly obvious,” says Kim Thonger, “that we’re going to be 86 all out, thus allowing SA and Oz through. Therefore, I deduce, it’s NegroniTime™️.” Not even umpire’s call – hitting leg stump! And one way or another, England have lost their three top-order blasters. It’s now down to Moeen, who tends to deal in cameos; Malan, who’s not the T20 force he was; Morgan, who has only just scratched his way back to form; and Livingstone, who’s had very little time in the middle. It’s Tabraiz Shamsi, it’s given, it’s leg-stumpish and it may well be umpire’s call. 6th over: England 59-1 (Moeen 8, Bairstow 1) Fair play to Bavuma, who not only held a rasping catch but brought Nortje back. The over started badly, with a six and a two, but went like a dream thereafter. At the end of the powerplay, England need another 131 off 14 overs. The man who never gets out has just got out! Buttler had just swing Nortje for six, but when he tried a flat-bat hockey shot over mid-off, he didn’t clear the man and the man was Bavuma, who has a safe pair of hands. Good catch, big wicket. 5th over: England 50-0 (Buttler 18, Moeen 8) Moeen came in because of some quick thinking from Buttler, who called for a left-hander to counter Maharaj and cash in on the short leg-side boundary. Maharaj goes wide outside off – and Mo chips him over extra-cover. It’s a no-ball, and the free hit produces a top edge, a dropped catch and two runs. It’s all happening. Jason Roy has hurt himself, badly, and he’s in tears. It looked like cramp at first, but is clearly worse than that – maybe a torn calf muscle. He’s being helped off the field, and his World Cup may well be over. Poor guy. Moeen Ali comes in at No 3. 4th over: England 37-0 (Roy 20, Buttler 16) Kagiso Rabada replaces Nortje – like for like, pace for pace. Buttler is seeing it big, stroking a cover drive on the up, then whipping to deep square. Roy glances to make it three fours off the over: 15 from it. “Geez,” says Alex McKay, picking up on my line about a crafty 131 (15:57). “Forget about country allegiance, if you don’t think this is a compromising issue to the integrity of the game, then the game will die. Structurally, no-one cares about the game any more. Bit pissed, it’s 3.10am here and I’ll leave you alone now. Just love this game so much and worry about it being ruined even further by the greed factor.” I was joking! I’m with you on the integrity of the game – and from the way England have set off, we can safely say that they are with you too. They’re itching to win this match. 3rd over: England 22-0 (Roy 15, Buttler 6) Roy isn’t going to let Maharaj have another good over. He lofts him for four over midwicket, then pulls for four more. 2nd over: England 12-0 (Roy 6, Buttler 5) It’s pace at the other end, from Anrich Nortje. He thinks he’s got Roy lbw, and is confident enough to review, but it’s too high – quite an achievement here in Sharjah, as Nasser Hussain observes. Roy is ready with a retort, stepping away and straight-driving for the first four of the innings. Jos Buttler follows up with the second, chipping over mid-off. “This is why casual fans of T20, such as myself, are only casual fans of T20,” says Allan Down. “Having allowed the run total they have, I imagine England now huddled over the computers trying to figure out how many runs they have to score to make sure they stay first and South Africa come second. And the old enemy Australia is sent packing. I hope Karma punishes them for their hubris.” Joking apart, I’m not sure we can make that assumption, can we? 1st over: England 2-0 (Roy 1, Buttler 0) It’s Keshav Maharaj, as Temba Bavuma gets the memo about spin, and he starts superbly, tying Jason Roy down. Game on. ... was ordinary, for the first time in this World Cup. Wood went for 47, Woakes for 43, and Jordan for 36, so the tally for the seamers was ugly, 0-126 off their 12 overs. The spinners did better – Moeen 1-27, Rashid 1-32 – which suggests Morgan may have missed a trick, for once, by not using Liam Livingstone. “England,” says Krisha Kumar on Twitter, “need to score 87 runs to qualify for the semi-finals, 106 to top the group, and 132 to knock out South Africa.” So a crafty 131 would get rid of the Aussies – but on this form, SA might now fancy their chances of going all the way. 20th over: South Africa 189-2 (van der Dussen 94, Markram 52) van der Dussen adds six more! It’s a big mow, which Jason Roy tips round the post when already over the rope. That brings up the hundred partnership in style. The last ball is only a single, so van der Dussen has to settle for 94 not out. These two have pillaged 71 off the last five overs, made SA favourites for this match, and given them a chance of squeezing into the semis. The word is that they have to restrict England to 130. See you shortly. Jordan puts one in the slot and Markram wallops it over long-off for six, to reach a scintillating fifty off 24 balls. 19th over: South Africa 173-2 (van der Dussen 86, Markram 44) Wood is bowling at what should be the easier end, with the long boundary on the leg side, but Markram isn’t bothered – he pulls for six, sending the fielder (Jonny Bairstow, I presume) over the rope as well as the ball. The partnership is 87, and both it, and the total, are SA’s highest of this World Cup. 18th over: South Africa 160-2 (van der Dussen 82, Markram 35) Woakes is done, with the most unWoakesian figures of 4-0-43-0. Back comes Jordan, and van der Dussen finally connects with that scoop shot of his, deflecting over short third man. A hundred is within his grasp, and he deserves one. “My motto:” says Andrew Benton, “never question a de Lisle on a de Kock.” Love it. “In fact, I’m such a fan of your writing skills that I’m reading in stereo! (whilst setting up a new laptop). Are England really the unstoppable force we like to think they are? I’m still waiting for the inevitable dismal batting failure, and I’m sure it’s coming – but in the semis there’s no second chance.” Ah, the sweet sound of English pessimism. 17th over: South Africa 150-2 (van der Dussen 77, Markram 31) Jordan hands over to Wood, who starts parsimoniously (dot, one). Markram take action, stepping away to somewhere near the square-leg umpire. Wood follows him – and Markram improvises a lofted square-drive over third man. That wasn’t a cricket shot, it was a drop-kick. He cuts a slow bouncer for four more to make it 59 off the past five overs. And this is already the highest score against England in this tournament. 16th over: South Africa 139-2 (van der Dussen 76, Markram 21) Woakes replaces Rashid, finds his usual immaculate length – and sees van der Dussen wallop it back over his head for six. Next ball, Woakes goes fuller, and van der Dussen hangs back and whips him for six more. He’s going for that 150! Morgan holds a conference and Mike Atherton lip-reads him saying, “Go wide.” Woakes does – short too – and restricts van der Dussen to a slap for two. A single brings some respite, but then Woakes bowls a full toss! And Markram clips it for yet another six. Even with a dot at the end, that’s 21 off the over. “This,” says Atherton, “is where England may miss Tymal Mills.” The partnership is 53 off 28 balls – great stuff. 15th over: South Africa 118-2 (van der Dussen 61, Markram 15) Jordan takes over from Wood, and van der Dussen steps away and tries a scoop over third man. If he’d connected, it would have been great. He tries again, going offside this time, aiming past short fine leg – and missing again. That’s a very good over from Jordan, in his quiet way. An email comes in from an address in Australia. “The fix,” says Alex McKay, “is in.” Ha. 14th over: South Africa 114-2 (van der Dussen 59, Markram 13) Markram sees that six and thinks he’ll have one too – a lofted on-drive off Rashid, who finishes with 1-32 off his four overs. This partnership has raced to 28 off 16 balls. 13th over: South Africa 103-2 (van der Dussen 57, Markram 4) van der Dussen, facing Wood, plays tip-and-run to reach fifty off 37 balls. Now he just needs to turn into Jos Buttler. And he’s threatening to – Wood’s next lifter is lofted into the stand with a nonchalant pull for six. That’s the way to bring up the hundred. 12th over: South Africa 91-2 (van der Dussen 49, Markram 1) Well bowled Rash – he’s got de Kock at last. Morgan gives him a pat on the back in the form of a slip for Aiden Markram. The breakthrough! Rashid lures de Kock into a big hit, deceives him with some dip, and leaves the rest to the safe hands of Jason Roy at long-on. That’s the end of a punchy partnership of 71 off 52 balls. 11th over: South Africa 85-1 (de Kock 34, van der Dussen 44) Ladies and gentlemen, it’s time for Mark Wood. He comes racing in with his usual enthusiasm – and gets ramped for six by van der Dussen. That was a great shot, but it gets Wood going. He sends a searing bouncer past van der Dussen’s ear, and then hits him on the back of the hand with a snorter. Ouch. “Pedantry, don’t we love it?” says Rob Lewis in Istanbul. “In the 3rd over, you start a sentence with small d for de Kock. Should that have been De Kock after a full stop? But what the hell do I know about it? As Mr Smyth constantly reminds us, Nobody Knows Anything...” Ha, true, nobody knows anything, but I do know a bit about Quinton de Kock’s middle name. I’ll give him an upper-case D when everyone whose name starts with a cap agrees to go lower-case in mid-sentence. Deal? 10th over: South Africa 73-1 (de Kock 32, van der Dussen 35) Rashid, curiously, has never got de Kock out in a T20 international, and he doesn’t change that now as de Kock plays a classy reverse sweep, along the ground, a real hockey shot. And that’s drinks, with South Africa doing well, but almost certainly not well enough. 9th over: South Africa 63-1 (de Kock 26, van der Dussen 33) On comes Chris Jordan, England’s unsung hero, often to be found advising the other bowlers from mid-off. He starts well, conceding only singles and having a good shout for LBW against van der Dussen. So good that England review and only umpire’s call gets in their way – it was a straight ball, but van der Dussen was more than 3m down the track. He celebrates by playing the shot he was just attempting – a tickle for four. 8th over: South Africa 56-1 (de Kock 24, van der Dussen 28) We have a bowling change! Woakes gives way to Adil Rashid, who ought to be a handful on this pitch. He gets off to a poor start as van der Dussen reverse-sweeps for four. Trying to follow up with an orthodox sweep, van der Dussen misses. There’s a noise, and Jos Buttler thinks he’s got a catch: England review, but there’s nothing on snicko. SA have done pretty well so far, going fast enough on a slow pitch, while also keeping their powder dry for the firework display they need. They’re the first team in this World Cup to lose fewer than three wickets to England in the powerplay. 7th over: South Africa 49-1 (de Kock 22, van der Dussen 23) Mo gets a fourth over and de Kock helps himself to a reverse sweep for four. After a few singles, Mo finishes with 1-27. 6th over: South Africa 40-1 (de Kock 15, van der Dussen 21) It’s the last over of the powerplay, and van der Dussen, facing Woakes, sees the need to make things happen. A flick off the pads slithers through Rashid at fine leg, and then a big mow over midwicket goes for six! He’s raced to 21 off only 15 balls. If he can add another 129 or so, South Africa will be in business. The England team, by the way, are wearing black armbands in memory of Alan Igglesden, a fine fast bowler for Kent and England and a highly popular figure in the dressing-room. 5th over: South Africa 26-1 (de Kock 13, van der Dussen 9) Moeen’s wicket earns him a third over on the trot. It goes for five singles, as if this contest has reached the quiet middle overs already. 4th over: South Africa 21-1 (de Kock 11, van der Dussen 6) Rassie van der Dussen has come in early, threatening to wreak havoc with The Guardian’s auto-correct: he’s only been there two minutes and already he’s appeared on my screen as Dissen and Russen. Apologies in advance for whatever he turns into next. Anyway he starts well, strolling across his stumps to ramp Woakes for four. “To answer Justin Horton’s question,” says Tom Hopkins, “if my arithmetic serves then if (say) South Africa make 200 England would need 95 to finish ahead of Australia. I think that would qualify as losing ‘quite badly’?” Ha, it would. And thanks for the single quotes, most thoughtful. 3rd over: South Africa 16-1 (de Kock 11, van der Dussen 1) Like Woakes, Mo has a commanding air about him at the moment. de Kock did manage one more wallop over mid-off, but that was a small price to pay for an early wicket. Oh dear. Reeza Hendricks, stuck on 2 after eight balls, goes for a big sweep and misses a straight one. 2nd over: South Africa 9-0 (Hendricks 2, de Kock 7) At the other end it’s Chris Woakes, who’s been bowling with such authority in this World Cup. He produces three dots and three singles, and his length is as immaculate as his hair. 1st over: South Africa 6-0 (Hendricks 1, de Kock 5) It’s Moeen Ali to get the game under way. Morgan fancies him to get Quinton de Kock, but it’s de Kock – fortified by taking the knee – who strikes the first blow, going inside-out to loft a one-bounce four over extra-cover. “Never mind South Africa’s chances,” says Justin Horton, “how badly – no matter how unlikely – would England have to lose in order not to qualify?” Put it this way: they’d have to send Nasser Hussain out there. Even if SA make it up the mountain, England will almost certainly still be top of the group. “The Wood decision does seem odd at first glance,” says Stephen Holliday, “but then again, maybe Morgan wants to test his ankle in a dead rubber rather than in a semi-final. And it’s probably better for him to have a few overs under his belt going into a semi.” True. And Wood’s skiddy trajectory should be just the job on this low slow surface. South Africa’s net run rate, from their four games so far, is 0.74. Australia’s has ended up at 1.12, thanks to David Warner’s domineering performance today. Our learned friends at Cricinfo reckon SA need to make 160 and then bowl England out for 100 to squeeze into the semis. Well, it’s possible. Wood for Mills is the only change for either side. South Africa 1 de Kock (wkt), 2 Hendricks, 3 Markram, 4 Bavuma (capt), 5 van Dissen, 6 Miller, 7 Pretorius, 8 Maharaj, 9 Rabada, 10 Nortje, 11 Shamsi. England 1 Roy, 2 Buttler (wkt), 3 Malan, 4 Bairstow, 5 Morgan (capt), 6 Livingstone, 7 Moeen, 8 Woakes, 9 Jordan, 10 Rashid, 11 Wood. Eoin Morgan resists the temptation to give South Africa a chance. “To judge from the team huddle,” Simon adds, “Mark Wood is back in the side tonight, replacing the injured Tymal Mills. I didn’t think they’d risk his ankle in a game that isn’t a must-win, but he was definitely getting congratulatory back-slaps for something.” Maybe he’s a Man City fan. The first email comes in and it’s from our man on the spot, Simon Burnton. “Apparently they’re using the same track that New Zealand and Namibia played on yesterday,” he reports. “I didn’t see that game but I’m told it wasn’t the best, with occasional inexplicably low bounce. More happily, the last time England played here, against Sri Lanka on Monday, it was an absolute raging furnace of an evening in Sharjah, but tonight is positively balmy, with a very pleasant gentle breeze. I expect this means less dew, and certainly less sweat, than there was that night.” Afternoon everyone and welcome to a World Cup match that matters far more to one side than the other. England, with their immaculate record so far, can afford a bad day; South Africa can barely afford a bad over. They need not just a win but a rout, to make sure they squeeze ahead of Australia, who seem to be cruising to victory over West Indies. When that game ends, South Africa will know just how much of a mountain they have to climb. Well, anything can happen in Twenty20 ... or so we thought until this tournament. There have been two broad surprises – West Indies flopping and India wobbling – but precious few matches have been upsets. Bangladesh and Scotland haven’t mustered a point between them, while England and Pakistan haven’t dropped one. This match is at Sharjah, where England toiled for the first ten overs against Sri Lanka’s spinners. But they still won.It is not often that England have played without Owen Farrell under Eddie Jones so perhaps the greatest significance of this overwhelming victory against Tonga is that maybe they have finally proved they can cope without him. Certainly, if Farrell’s absence was the talk of Twickenham beforehand, Marcus Smith’s eye-catching cameo ensured his was the name on supporters’ lips on the journey home. Farrell was, of course, ruled out here due to his positive Covid-19 test but there have been only three occasions in Jones’s previous 66 matches in charge when England’s captain was available for selection but overlooked from the squad. One was a World Cup warm-up match and the other two were in the autumn of 2017, when Farrell was limited to just one appearance, having had next to no time off since that year’s British &amp; Irish Lions tour to New Zealand. Farrell was, according to Jones, raging at the idea he should rest. He has not featured at all under Jones on only nine occasions and the last time the head coach saw fit to start Farrell on the bench at Twickenham was three years ago, against Japan. Such was the paucity of England’s first-half performance he was summoned at the interval. All be told, it is quite the burden Farrell bears and there have been times, particularly during this year’s Six Nations, when it has appeared to get the better of him. Perhaps it is also an over-reliance on the 30-year-old, and to put it another way, would England have played so badly in that match against Japan without the ominous presence of Farrell on the bench? Because here, without him, there really were glimpses of the “new England” Jones is searching for. That is not to suggest Farrell should be jettisoned from the squad and it should be said he has started the season superbly well with Saracens. But rather that Jones could perhaps appreciate that sharing the load can be a good thing. Maybe the penny has already dropped because Courtney Lawes was inspired by the captaincy. Lawes is part of England’s new-look leadership group as one of three vice-captains and excelled here, not least when hunting down Telusa Veainu with a remarkable tackle in the first half. Lawes’ Northampton clubmate George Furbank, meanwhile, performed manfully at fly-half after confirmation that he would be wearing the No 10 jersey arrived just before 2pm. It had, in truth, been widely known that he was being lined up if Farrell was unavailable. You sense he and his teammates knew on their way to the stadium, what with Farrell not being on the bus and all, and in truth it is likely they were aware far earlier than the time they got aboard. England, however, did not deign to tell their supporters until less than 90 minutes before the match kicked off. Jones spoke repeatedly in the buildup about the importance of a full crowd, how pleased he was, how fortunate his side were to have a bumper audience again but perhaps England ought to treat their followers a little better. Had this been a Six Nations decider or World Cup knockout match the secrecy would have been understandable. With the greatest respect to Tonga, however, this was not a match of such importance, and you cannot but wonder whether such secrecy would have surrounded someone upon whom Jones is not as reliant. Jones is rarely happier than when talking in cricketing analogies and Furbank was a handy player in his youth so perhaps the best way to describe his role at Twickenham was that of nightwatchman. He is a full-back by trade but a gifted footballer, talented enough to adapt to his new role, though his promotion to the starting lineup in Farrell’s absence was designed to protect Smith, who has not been able to train fully for most of the week, until the latter stages of the match. Accordingly, he survived a bit of rough stuff early on, put a mix-up with Manu Tuilagi behind him and proceeded to play the odd shot or two as the half wore on. One clever show and go created the space for him to cruise into midway through the first half and he showed his bravery when twice fizzing on swift passes with tacklers bearing down on him. He made way for Smith in the 52nd minute, allowing the Harlequin to weave his magic, bringing with him a frisson of electricity, some nice touches, a lovely try and a delightful assist with Tonga already well beaten and down to 14 men. His real test will come next Saturday against Australia, however, when Farrell is expected to still be missing. Farrell is too competitive to admit it but perhaps he and Jones may come to realise that it may be a good thing if England continue to learn they can live without him now and then.A mixed-race family has demanded an apology from Southwest Airlines, after a flight attendant flagged them as suspicious, wrongly assuming the white mother was trafficking her biracial child. Mary MacCarthy said her 10-year-old daughter, Moira, now “clams up” when they talk about how an airline employee and two police officers questioned them after their flight landed in Denver on 22 October. “The whole thing is based on what I believe to be a racist assumption about a mixed-race family,” MacCarthy told the Denver Post. After MacCarthy’s brother died, she and Moira traveled last-minute to Denver from Los Angeles – with a connection through San Jose – in order to attend the funeral. MacCarthy, a single mom, said her brother had been a father figure to Moira. McCarthy said she and her daughter were shocked and sleep deprived when they boarded the plane to Denver last, because they were in the final boarding group. Onboard, other passengers moved so they would not have to be apart. MacCarthy tried to sleep while Moira listened to an audiobook. When MacCarthy got off the plane in Denver and noticed the officers waiting, she said, she panicked, terrified another family member had died. But it turned out a flight attendant suspected her of human trafficking, after she and Moira boarded last and asked others to switch seats so they could sit together. The attendant claimed she never saw MacCarthy and Moira speak and that MacCarthy warned her daughter not to talk with the flight crew, NBC News reported. MacCarthy denied that and said she and her daughter were “deeply traumatized by the assumption that just because we don’t have the same skin color we’re involved in a very serious crime”. In video of the confrontation with police officers, Moira can be heard wailing while MacCarthy tries to explain why she and her daughter are traveling. “It’s OK, sweetheart,” MacCarthy tells Moira. “She doesn’t need to be scared,” an officer says. “Because you are not in any trouble whatsoever, OK?” MacCarthy later tells the officers and a Southwest employee Moira “has already unfortunately been traumatized by the police in her life”. A police report said the incident was “unfounded”, according to NBC News. But MacCarthy still received a follow-up call from a human trafficking unit investigator. “Had this little girl been white there would have been not a raised eyebrow,” MacCarthy’s lawyer, David Lane, told NBC. “So race was the only factor that triggered this call to the police. “It’s Southwest Airlines that I have an issue with. And I think this is a civil rights violation because they are causing a paying customer of theirs to have to undergo the trauma of being stopped by the police.” Southwest told NBC it was “conducting a review of the situation internally” and “will be reaching out to the customer to address her concerns and offer our apologies for her experience traveling with us”. A spokesperson told SFGate staff “undergo robust training on human trafficking”. Other mixed-race families have been flagged as suspicious while traveling. A man on another Southwest flight was suspected of trafficking his adopted Chinese daughter on the way home from a trip to Florida. A Black woman flying Frontier Airlines with her white adoptive sister was questioned in Dallas. MacCarthy told SFGate she travels with Moira’s birth certificate so she is “prepared for any questions”. She also said she understood the job of the Transportation Security Administration was to make sure they were “traveling under the proper circumstances”. But that was different from “being accosted by armed police and being told that we’ve been acting suspiciously”, she said. “That’s not the same thing at all.”The cost to Australian taxpayers to hold a single refugee on Nauru has escalated tenfold to more than $350,000 every month – or $4.3m a year – as the government refuses to reveal where nearly $400m spent on offshore processing on the island has gone. Australia currently pays about $40m a month to run its offshore processing regime on Nauru, an amount almost identical to 2016 when there were nearly 10 times as many people held on the island. No refugees and asylum seekers have been sent to Nauru since 2014, and with numbers of refugees held there dwindling – through resettlement to the US, transfer to Australia for acute medical care, abandonment of a protection claim, or death – the cost to Australia to hold each person has increased dramatically. In May 2016, Australia held 1,193 people on Nauru at a cost of $45,347 a month per person – about $1,460 a day or $534,000 a year. By August 2021, the number of asylum seekers and refugees held on the island had fallen nearly tenfold, but the costs of running the offshore program remained broadly static. In that month, there were 107 refugees and asylum seekers on Nauru at a cost to taxpayers of $464,486 a month for each person, or more than $15,000 a day. The average monthly cost in 2021 is $358,646 for every refugee and asylum seeker held on the island, equal to $4.3m per person each year, a Guardian Australia analysis of government figures provided to the Senate shows. The majority – 78 of those people – are refugees whose claims for protection have been formally recognised and Australia is legally obliged to protect them. Others are still awaiting a final refugee status determination, or have had their claim rejected. There are no women, children or family groups remaining among those held by Australia on Nauru. There are only single men, meaning services around maternal health, infant healthcare and childhood education are no longer being provided. A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs told the Guardian that “regional processing in Nauru remains a key pillar of Operation Sovereign Borders”. “Costs associated with regional processing have saved lives at sea, by providing ongoing deterrence against illegal maritime people smuggling.” But Labor argues Australia’s spending on Nauru is opaque. The government has declined to tell the Senate to whom it has paid nearly $400m to help run the regime on Nauru. Responses to Senate questions on notice show that from November 2017 to January 2021, the Australian government spent more than $1.67bn on “garrison and welfare” for those held on the island. The vast majority of that – nearly $1.3bn – was paid to its three “primary entities”: construction and facilities management firm Canstruct International; healthcare provider International Health and Medical Services (IHMS); and the government of Nauru. Canstruct was paid a little over $1bn to provide garrison and welfare services; IHMS received $138.3m to provide healthcare; and the Nauru government was paid $73.3m. The total cost to the three “primary entities” identified by the department was $1,272,681,862. But Australia’s total payments for garrison and welfare services on Nauru were $1,671,500,000, according to government figures, with an additional $398,818,138 paid to other individuals, organisations, or governments. Under questioning from Labor in the Senate, the department said it would not provide details on to whom that additional money was paid. “Payment data subsequently recorded in the Department’s Financial Management Information System is not disaggregated … and the manual intervention required to identify this level of detail constitutes an unreasonable diversion of resources.” Senator Kristina Keneally, the shadow minister for home affairs, said Scott Morrison’s government had serious questions to answer over the escalating costs of offshore processing on Nauru. “This is yet another example of Mr Morrison using taxpayers money as if it was Liberal Party money.” Keneally said the government’s response to the Senate that payments could not be detailed publicly was inadequate, arguing the Australian people “absolutely have a right to know how it has been spent”. “We are not talking about a missing tin of petty cash. This is $400m. Where did it go? Has it gone into the pockets of Liberal mates? Has it been lost? “The Morrison government either doesn’t know what has happened to this $400m or it doesn’t want Australians to know.” The Department of Home Affairs told the Guardian “the questions on notice seek different types of information, and as such are not directly comparable”. “The figures provided in response to various questions reflect payments made to suppliers on a cash basis with total expenditure accounted for on an accrual basis. As a result, the figures will not neatly total or realise month-to-month consistency.” The Guardian understands the “total” costs figure for Nauru captures all expenses related to regional processing there, including ancillary costs such as government administration, transport, road maintenance, utilities, staff accommodation, land leases, staffing costs and legal services. Canstruct contract scrutinised Canstruct’s large and growing contract – now worth nearly $1.6bn – to run the Nauru facility has attracted particular scrutiny. The Brisbane company, which is a Liberal party donor, helped build the Nauru detention centre, and started running the offshore regime on the island in late 2017. The original contract awarded to Canstruct for services on Nauru was worth just $8m in October 2017. But this was amended almost immediately, increased by 4,500% to $385m just a month after being signed. Since then, seven further amendments have escalated the cost to taxpayers to $1,598,230,689 a total increase of more than 19,300%, government tender documents show. The eighth and latest amendment to the contract was published this month, with another $179m to continue operating on the island until the end of 2021. The contract was awarded under limited tender, with “no submissions or value for money submissions received”, government tender documents show. Canstruct, or individuals or entities associated with it, has made at least 11 donations to the Coalition since 2017, according to state electoral disclosures. The company has previously strenuously denied any link between political donations and the awarding of any contracts. Asked about Canstruct’s Nauru operations, a spokesperson for the company said: “Unfortunately we are unable to comment on these matters. Please direct any questions to the federal government.” In September, the Australian government signed an agreement with the government of Nauru for an “enduring” offshore processing regime on the island. Australia’s offshore processing arrangement with Papua New Guinea will end on 31 December this year. In 2017, Australia’s detention centre on PNG’s Manus Island was ruled unconstitutional and the detention of people there illegal. Australia was required to pay more than $70m in compensation.In his dying words, Shakespeare’s Henry IV tells his son, the future Henry V, that he must divert the attention of the barons before they threaten his rule. “Therefore, my Harry, be it thy course to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels.” Like Plantagenet warlords, Conservative leaders need foreign quarrels lest the voters realise they have presided over the stagnation of British life. Real wages in 2024 will be just 2.4% higher than 2008, compared with a 36% rise in the 16 years before the financial crisis. We are a sluggish, depressed and declining country, where hard work brings few rewards and most people cannot get on, however strenuously they try. If the UK were a person, it would be a punch-drunk boxer, staggering round the ring. Henry V just invaded France to keep his subjects from turning on him. Boris Johnson needs a perpetual war with the entire EU. On Ireland and fishing, we can see the battle lines, but there are many more to come. The truth that supporters of Britain remaining in the EU never properly communicated was that Brexit can never end. The EU has a population of 445 million people and the UK has 68 million. In any economic fight, there can only be one winner. Disputes the dilettantes of the Johnson administration may not even have foreseen over financial services, data sharing and carbon pricing are on their way. Former Irish prime minister John Bruton therefore only got it half right when he said the other day: “I think there is a big incentive for the Conservative party to maintain conflict with the European Union.” Obviously, Johnson needs to bellow and growl. Opposition to the EU bound the conservative right, middle-class nationalists and working-class voters together in the 2016 Brexit referendum and 2019 general election. His career has taught him that conflict brings personal profit. The stories he made up about Brussels for the Telegraph in the 1990s turned him from a disgraced junior reporter into a Fleet Street star and finally into a prime minister. He presides over a wider right filled with men and women who have spent their lives hating the EU. They will not stop now just because we have left. To keep party members who are not so much Eurosceptic as Euroneurotic on side, to stop the right of the party destroying him as it destroyed the premierships of his predecessors, and to prevent a resurgence of Farageism, Johnson needs foreign quarrels to ensure his survival. When the battles are over subjects as inconsequential as Channel Island shellfish, few need care. Emmanuel Macron and Johnson can pose as tough guys to please their voters and sensible people can say the snobs are diverting the mob with scallops and circuses. When Johnson starts a fight over the jurisdiction of the European court of justice in Northern Ireland, however, he risks inciting sectarian violence, which returned last week, and the EU responding by suspending the Brexit trade deal and delivering yet another haymaker to our economy. It is hard to decide on the worst feature of Johnson. Rational people can reach different conclusions in good faith. But his willingness to endanger the peace in Ireland strikes me as the most repellent. Louise Haigh, Labour’s Northern Ireland spokesperson, describes it as a cynically political act designed to please his supporters in England without a care for the consequences in Belfast. Nothing better illustrates the collapse of the Conservative party from a great political movement into a toadying personality cult than the failure of his colleagues to stop him. However tempting it is to deplore Johnson, the UK’s debilitation is not only the fault of the fanaticism of its leaders but a consequence of Brexit itself. We could have a new prime minister tomorrow and our decline would continue. For example, after 2016, the EU’s indulgent attitude towards the City puzzled observers. Financial services are Britain’s last world-leading industry. EU countries clearly wanted a slice of the market and had an interest in stopping an intermittently hostile foreign state trading the continent’s wealth. Yet the EU was happy to allow City firms to carry on as before as long as they sent a token number of workers to the continent. Now, the European Central Bank is demanding large-scale transfers of capital and jobs. A City executive told the Financial Times his firm thought the ECB could not mean it when it told his bank to move hundreds more people to the EU. “Turns out they did mean that and they’re pretty good at enforcing it.” Finance is just the beginning. Researchers at the Centre for European Reform have a list of future fights. For the moment, the EU allows UK firms to store their European customers’ data. But neither the European parliament nor civil rights campaigners are happy about the privacy risks and are likely to demand change. Meanwhile, the EU could introduce a carbon border with the UK and tell British exporters to prove their goods have not damaged the environment or pay a tariff. Arguments over gene-editing technologies, food safety standards and state aid to industry all threaten to turn toxic. Johnson’s political imperative is to keep the right on side by inciting conflict. The UK’s economic imperative is to make whatever concessions are needed to stop the loss of European markets. That we would have to make concessions is indisputable because the EU is larger and stronger than we are. When the arcane arguments about trade deals and technical standards have finished, that is all you need to remember. In 1969, Pierre Trudeau, then the Canadian prime minister, told an American audience: “Living next to you is like sleeping with an elephant. No matter how friendly and even-tempered the beast, one is affected by every twitch and grunt.” The same applies to living next to the EU. It can hurt us without meaning to or noticing our pain. Mass delusion produced Brexit; a denial by millions of the UK’s true standing in the world. The right convinced the country that Britain was the elephant and the EU was the mouse. One day, we will pay for the mistake when it rolls over us. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistIn 2018, I was approached about writing a profile of Scott Morrison, the new prime minister. I read everything I could and talked to as many people as would talk to me. Then I began to cut and paste snippets into folders on my computer: “Immigration”, “Religion”, “Ambition”, “Mr Average”. I stared at these facts for a long time. Politicians are very often catalogued by their beliefs. This makes sense: it is arguably the most important thing about them. In Morrison’s case, it was hard to know what to say. He had, over a period of decades, said little definitive; on the occasions he had made clear statements, he had undermined them elsewhere. His language tended to the general, so that it was hard to take away anything clear. Finally, I had one of those moments that every writer hopes for, when you realise that what you thought had been blocking your way is, in fact, the thing you have been looking for all along. This apparent lack of definition was the defining characteristic of Morrison’s public life. The profile was published with the title Leave No Trace. I thought that was it for me and Morrison – and when a publisher asked me about writing a biography, I wasn’t keen. The man wasn’t that interesting, and I wasn’t convinced I could sustain an entire book about him. But then I had a similar revelation. The fact he seemed boring wasn’t an obstacle: it was the opening. Here was a man who was on display all the time, yet we knew so little about him – and nobody seemed to want to know more. And he had become prime minister! How had he pulled off this trick? Of course, no one can avoid leaving traces altogether. In order to write this book, I looked very closely at everything Morrison had said and done over decades in public life. Because he hadn’t done very much, this meant examining in detail what he’d said: the gaps, the contradictions, the startling swerves, the patterns. This close examination is precisely what Morrison does not want. The book that resulted is not a straight biography. My approach, at times, veered closer to literary criticism than political journalism. If that sounds odd, it’s worth remembering that, for most of us, politicians are not that different from characters out of books. What do we know about them other than what we are told by the people who craft the news bulletins that we watch and listen to, and who write the articles that we read? While I doubt Morrison would put it in those terms, this is something he understands better than any politician in the country. When there was first a hint that he might become prime minister, in 2015, he set about creating a very simple character: Sco-Mo, who cooks curries once a week and likes footy. To put this another way: he knew that the journalists who wrote the story of his life would need material, and he set about providing it. He gave them other elements, too: he was pragmatic and – this seems almost implausible by now – “authentic”. That was, more or less, enough to win him an election. This brought another implication with it. If each politician is like a character from a book, then journalists are, in effect, the collective authors of that book. Any examination of the character that Morrison had created would have to look closely at the journalistic habits that made his success possible. The notion of objectivity is important, but often is used as an excuse for uncritically repeating what politicians say. Too many in the media too readily treat politics as a game, with political cleverness admired more than substance. Along the way, I considered writing a different type of book. Every author does this. Every book that is written, like every life that is lived, has ghosts hovering behind it, of the things it might have been but, finally, was not. For a long time, I thought the aim of the book would be to discover the “real” man behind the performance. With time, I decided that this was, in a sense, searching for some sort of alibi for Morrison, as though what he had done in public did not matter. Hadn’t Morrison been visible to us for some time, provided you were willing to pay attention? What, at this stage, might dramatically shift our sense of him as a prime minister? That he was kind in private? Or, alternatively, what might we learn from discovering, say, that he had some secret religious belief that the climate crisis didn’t matter? What would that change? Establishing facts is important. But, as Eve Sedgwick argued decades ago, there are times when a hunt for the hidden story can distract us from seeing what is in front of us. While I did not ultimately write that other book, considering such questions gave me the final element of this one. If many of us have not been willing to look closely at Morrison, why is that? This tells us something about Morrison, but doesn’t it tell us something about ourselves as well? He fought his way to the top of some of Australia’s most powerful institutions. Then he convinced many Australians to vote for him. Why were many of us willing to accept the stories he told us and the image he presented? Looking closely at the ways in which Scott Morrison has succeeded – and the ways in which he has failed – can tell us a lot about politics, and journalism, and Australians. Whether most of us want to know those things is questionable. So much of Morrison’s career – the character he has created, his practised avoidance of scrutiny – has been built on the knowledge that, most of the time, we don’t. The Game – A Portrait of Scott Morrison, by Sean Kelly (Black Inc. Books), is out nowA microcosm of Australians’ reluctance to work on farms can be seen in Victoria’s Yarra valley. CEO of a group of strawberry farms, Miffy Gilbert, struggled to source labour for the current harvest, while her teenage son works as a shelf-stacker at a supermarket. Australians aren’t lazy, according to Gilbert, we’re simply spoilt for choice in a situation mirrored in most developed countries. “Australians are harder to get, because we’re lucky to have a lot of options in front of us as to what we do for employment,” says Gilbert. “When I grew up there was not a cafe or three on every corner like there is now.” Gilbert is also CEO of AusBerry Farmers, a collaborative farming effort between seven families in the Yarra valley. “If I said to him, ‘I’ve got seven farms, where do you want to work?’ There’s no way. It’s similar money to stacking the fruit and veg shelves in air-conditioned comfort versus sitting in a damp field for half a day.” The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences is predicting record production values for a second year in a row. The bureau is also reporting a shortage of about 22,000 workers across the country over the next quarter, with 16,000 of these in horticulture. Closed borders have exacerbated the shortage, as has the Australian-UK trade deal in June which removed the farm work requirement for about 10,000 British backpackers to extend their working holiday visas. Gilbert started sourcing labour almost as soon as the previous harvest finished. She thought she might scrape through. “But with border closures and the lockdown here in Victoria, we think we might be somewhere between 15% to 25% down.” “It’s probably a major issue during the first couple of months up to Christmas, when the picking is fast and furious, and there are larger volumes. “We’re lucky in strawberries that there are ways to manage the crop to reduce the peak so it might be 20% less, which you aren’t able to do with a lot of other crops.” More than $60m worth of crop losses have been self-reported by farmers nationally since mid-2020, but the actual figure is likely to be far higher. The federal government’s response has been two fold: try to attract Australians to take up farm work, in conjunction with overseas seasonal workers. An agricultural visa has long been on the horizon. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, promised in June to have the visa in place by the end of the year, after the announcement of the UK trade deal, but details remain vague. The other potential solution was an incentive of $6,000 for Australians to relocate for work. Former deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, even noted the Instagram opportunities for young Australians in regional locations. Earlier this year I picked grapes on a farm in Western Australia, after satisfying the requirements of the federal government’s relocation assistance to take up a job program, (since rebranded as AgMove). My correspondence with Harvest Trail Information Services (HTIS) began in mid-December 2020. Despite an extensive paperwork trail, I am yet to receive a cent of the incentive, despite picking my last grape more than seven months ago. Maddy Muller and Riley Harrington, originally from Bendigo, are in the same boat. “It’s been nearly six months since we finished fruit picking, and we haven’t received payment as yet,” said Muller. “I don’t think the process should be this tedious, especially as there was a real concern with the [labour] shortages.” Gilbert is optimistic about what the visa will offer, but says diversifying is key when it comes to sourcing labour. “We’re probably looking to spread our risk, and not have all our eggs in one basket. Our workforce are great people who all work really hard. We’d love to have some more backpackers, but there aren’t too many in this area. “We’re very optimistic about the agriculture visa and we’re already looking at what that looks like for us.” Not all are as buoyant. Deputy program director of migration at the Grattan Institute, Henry Sherrell, specialises in labour markets and immigration policy. While acknowledging the agricultural visa’s obvious benefits, Sherrell fears it also has the potential to expose migrant workers to the sort of exploitation parts of the industry have been infamous for in the past. “I think it has the potential to change things quite a bit, but I actually think for the worse,” he says. “I think the biggest risk is that exploitation becomes more common. This is a really, really big change, and I think it’s got a little bit of attention, but probably not quite the attention it deserves.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Australian Workers Union national secretary, Daniel Walton, is more blunt. “This visa will undermine the current Pacific labour scheme and the seasonal worker program. Apparently the meagre protections offered to Pacific Islanders under these programs are too luxurious, so the government is keen to offer a visa under which abuse is even easier. “It is crazy that Australia is apparently willing to trash our friendships in the Pacific so a handful of farmers can save a few bucks by treating workers like serfs.” The National Farmer’s Federation general manager of workplace relations, Ben Rogers, said in response to Walton’s comments: “Yet again, Mr Walton slurs the farming community with his arrogant and misguided dog-whistle claims.” “The ag visa will be very actively regulated and only available to farms which can satisfy the government that engage with their workers fairly and lawfully.” Sherrell believes that while it has been a tough few years for labour-intensive farms, there is light at the end of the tunnel. “This is a balancing act, and I worry that if we go too far down the path of trying to solve everything with more people and more visas, it will lead to more exploitation, and longer term, a less productive way of doing things. “I do think when the borders go back to normal, there’s going to be some pent-up demand for backpackers to come to Australia.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe Wallabies indicated they will need to change their game-plan on their tour of Britain in the absence of the influential Quade Cooper and Samu Kerevi, after so much of Australia’s impressive play in the Rugby Championship revolved around the former’s superb game management and the latter’s powerful ball-running and off-loading in the midfield. James O’Connor, who returned to the national team from injury via the reserves bench during the Rugby Championship, is an adequate replacement for Cooper, but Kerevi is seen as irreplaceable. With Cooper and Kerevi opting not to tour to rejoin their Japanese clubs, the Wallabies have been boosted by the addition of several France-based players, including second-rowers Rory Arnold and Will Skelton and utility back Kurtley Beale. Arnold will start for the Wallabies against Scotland at Murrayfield, while Skelton and Beale will come off the bench. Although he is a forward, not a back, the 2.03m and 140kg Skelton has the potential to play the role of a super-sized Kerevi. Skelton is one of the best ball-handling tight-five forwards in world rugby with an Arthur Beetson-like ability to draw in defenders and slip a pass away. The former Waratahs lock has the potential to do for the Wallabies’ forward attack what Kerevi did for the backs’ play, by getting across the advantage line and putting support players into space. And strange as it may sound, Skelton could even play Kerevi’s role at inside-centre. Despite his great height, Skelton is not a ball-winning lineout forward. Instead, he could position himself at second receiver in the backline at lineout time. Just like Kerevi, he could get across the advantage line in the midfield and put players away. The Wallabies may not want to adopt this tactic at every lineout, but it could be devastatingly effective inside the opposition 22, with Skelton charging down the Scottish channel. In this way the Wallabies’ game-plan would not have to deviate too much from that with Kerevi in the team, but it would still have to change somewhat, especially as Skelton is not starting at Murrayfield. In their unconvincing 32-23 win against Japan in Oita two weeks ago, the Wallabies attempted to cover for the absence of Kerevi by continually attacking down the blindside, but this was a largely fruitless exercise. Without Cooper’s long passing game the Wallabies may not feel quite as confident utilising the width of the field in attack. O’Connor has the ability to get the backline moving, but centres Hunter Paisami and Len Ikitau are ball runners rather than ball distributors. Instead of shifting the ball from one side of the field to the other the Wallabies may want to direct their play towards the middle and split their forces on either side of the breakdown. O’Connor and Paisami could stand on one side of the ruck, while fullback Andrew Kellaway and Ikitau could position themselves on the other, giving the Wallabies attacking options on both flanks. This is an old rugby league tactic that was introduced to union by former Wallabies coach, and current England mentor, Eddie Jones almost 20 years ago. It is bread and butter for Australia’s attack coach Scott Wisemantel, who spent many years working under Jones with Australia and England. And there are more options. When Beale is introduced into the game at either fullback or inside-centre, he will provide the Wallabies’ attack with x-factor – not in the same way as Kerevi, but still a handful for defenders. Cooper’s tactical kicking, which is an important part of any game-plan devised by head coach Dave Rennie, will certainly be missed. We can expect the Wallabies to kick a lot against Scotland, testing their back three, but whatever strategy employed, it will need to be on point or they will risk an upset loss against a bogey team. Since their controversial 35-34 win in the quarter-final of the 2015 World Cup, the Wallabies have lost two of the last three Tests they have played against Scotland, including a 53-24 thrashing in Edinburgh four years ago. It will be a special occasion for Rennie, who coached Scottish club Glasgow, and Rugby Australia’s director of coaching Scott Johnson, who held a similar position in Scotland. There have been reports Johnson is under pressure and a loss to Scotland, ranked seventh in the world, would certainly exacerbate any tensions that may exist. Coming off a 60-14 win against Tonga, the Scots are always tough to beat at home where they play with tremendous enthusiasm. They will come at the Wallabies like men possessed in the first 20 minutes and it is important the Australians deal with the situation. With players coming in and out of the squad, the Wallabies have been a team in transition all year, but, outside of the All Blacks, they have somehow managed to find ways to win, which is a positive sign for the clash at Murrayfield.“The skull acts as a bastion of privacy; the brain is the last private part of ourselves,” Australian neurosurgeon Tom Oxley says from New York. Oxley is the CEO of Synchron, a neurotechnology company born in Melbourne that has successfully trialled hi-tech brain implants that allow people to send emails and texts purely by thought. In July this year, it became the first company in the world, ahead of competitors like Elon Musk’s Neuralink, to gain approval from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to conduct clinical trials of brain computer interfaces (BCIs) in humans in the US. Synchron has already successfully fed electrodes into paralysed patients’ brains via their blood vessels. The electrodes record brain activity and feed the data wirelessly to a computer, where it is interpreted and used as a set of commands, allowing the patients to send emails and texts. BCIs, which allow a person to control a device via a connection between their brain and a computer, are seen as a gamechanger for people with certain disabilities. “No one can see inside your brain,” Oxley says. “It’s only our mouths and bodies moving that tells people what’s inside our brain … For people who can’t do that, it’s a horrific situation. What we’re doing is trying to help them get what’s inside their skull out. We are totally focused on solving medical problems.” BCIs are one of a range of developing technologies centred on the brain. Brain stimulation is another, which delivers targeted electrical pulses to the brain and is used to treat cognitive disorders. Others, like imaging techniques fMRI and EEG, can monitor the brain in real time. “The potential of neuroscience to improve our lives is almost unlimited,” says David Grant, a senior research fellow at the University of Melbourne. “However, the level of intrusion that would be needed to realise those benefits … is profound”. Grant’s concerns about neurotech are not with the work of companies like Synchron. Regulated medical corrections for people with cognitive and sensory handicaps are uncontroversial, in his eyes. But what, he asks, would happen if such capabilities move from medicine into an unregulated commercial world? It’s a dystopian scenario that Grant predicts would lead to “a progressive and relentless deterioration of our capacity to control our own brains”. And while it’s a progression that remains hypothetical, it’s not unthinkable. In some countries, governments are already moving to protect humans from the possibility. A new type of rights In 2017 a young European bioethicist, Marcello Ienca, was anticipating these potential dangers. He proposed a new class of legal rights: neuro rights, the freedom to decide who is allowed to monitor, read or alter your brain. Today Ienca works as a research group leader at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), the UN, OECD, and governments on the impact technology could have on our sense of what it means to be human. Before Ienca proposed the concept of neuro rights, he had already come to believe that the sanctity of our brains needed protection from advancing neurotechnology. “So 2015, around that time the legal debate on neurotechnology was mostly focusing on criminal law,” Ienca says. Much of the debate was theoretical, but BCIs were already being medically trialed. The questions Ienca were hearing six years ago were things like: “What happens when the device malfunctions? Who is responsible for that? Should it be legitimate to use neurotechnology as evidence in courts?” Ienca, then in his 20s, believed more fundamental issues were at stake. Technology designed to decode and alter brain activity had the potential to affect what it meant to be “an individual person as opposed to a non-person”. While humanity needs protection from the misuse of neurotech, Ienca says, neuro rights are “also about how to empower people and to let them flourish and promote their mental and cerebral wellbeing through the use of advanced neuroscience and neurotechnology”. Neuro rights are a positive as well as protective force, Ienca says. It’s a view Tom Oxley shares. He says stopping the development of BCIs would be an unfair infringement on the rights of the people his company is trying to assist. “Is the ability to text message an expression of the right to communicate?” he asks. If the answer is yes, he posits, the right to use a BCI could be seen as a digital right. Oxley agrees with Grant that the future privacy of our brains deserves the world’s full attention. He says neuro rights are “absolutely critical”. “I recognise the brain is an intensely private place and we’re used to having our brain protected by our skull. That will no longer be the case with this technology.” Grant believes neuro rights will not be enough to protect our privacy from the potential reach of neurotech outside medicine. “Our current notion of privacy will be useless in the face of such deep intrusion,” he says. Commercial products such as headsets that claim to improve concentration are already used in Chinese classrooms. Caps that track fatigue in lorry drivers have been used on mine sites in Australia. Devices like these generate data from users’ brain activity. Where and how that data is stored, says Grant, is hard to track and even harder to control. Grant sees the amount of information that people already share, including neuro data, as an insurmountable challenge for neuro rights. “To think we can deal with this on the basis of passing legislation is naive.” Grant’s solutions to the intrusive potential of neurotech, he admits, are radical. He envisages the development of “personal algorithms” that operate as highly specialised firewalls between a person and the digital world. These codes could engage with the digital world on a person’s behalf, protecting their brain against intrusion or alteration. The consequences of sharing neuro data preoccupies many ethicists. “I mean, brains are central to everything we do, think and say”, says Stephen Rainey, from Oxford’s Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics. “It’s not like you end up with these ridiculous dystopias where people control your brain and make you do things. But there are boring dystopias … you look at the companies that are interested in [personal data] and it’s Facebook and Google, primarily. They’re trying to make a model of what a person is so that that can be exploited. ” Moves to regulate Chile is not taking any chances on the potential risks of neurotechnology. In a world first, in September 2021, Chilean law makers approved a constitutional amendment to enshrine mental integrity as a right of all citizens. Bills to regulate neurotechnology, digital platforms and the use of AI are also being worked on in Chile’s senate. Neuro rights principles of the right to cognitive liberty, mental privacy, mental integrity, and psychological continuity will be considered. Europe is also making moves towards neuro rights. France approved a bioethics law this year that protects the right to mental integrity. Spain is working on a digital rights bill with a section on neuro rights, and the Italian Data Protection Authority is considering whether mental privacy falls under the country’s privacy rights. Australia is a signatory to the OECD’s non-binding recommendation on responsible innovation in neurotechnology, which was published in 2019. Promise, panic and potential risks Australian neuroscientist and ethicist Assoc Prof Adrian Carter, of Monash University, Melbourne, is described by peers as having a “good BS detector” for the real and imagined threats posed by neurotech. As a self-described ‘speculative ethicist’, he looks at the potential consequences of technological progress. Hype that over-sells neuro treatments can affect their effectiveness if patients’ expectations are raised too high, he explains. Hype can also cause unwarranted panic. “A lot of the stuff that is being discussed is a long way away, if at all”, says Carter. “Mind-reading? That won’t happen. At least not in the way many imagine. The brain is just too complex. Take brain computer interfaces; yes, people can control a device using their thoughts, but they do a lot of training for the technology to recognise specific patterns of brain activity before it works. They don’t just think, ‘open the door’, and it happens.” Carter points out that some of the threats ascribed to future neurotechnology are already present in the way data is used by tech companies every day. AI and algorithms that read eye movement and detect changes in skin colour and temperature are reading the results of brain activity in controlled studies for advertising. This data has been used by commercial interests for years to analyse, predict and nudge behaviour. “Companies like Google, Facebook and Amazon have made billions out of [personal data]”, Carter points out. Dystopias that emerge from the data collected without consent aren’t always as boring as Facebook ads. Oxford’s Stephen Rainey points to the Cambridge Analytica scandal, where data from 87 million Facebook users was collected without consent. The company built psychological voter profiles based on people’s likes, to inform the political campaigns of Donald Trump and Ted Cruz. “It’s this line where it becomes a commercial interest and people want to do something else with the data, that’s where all the risk comes in”, Rainey says. “It’s bringing that whole data economy that we’re already suffering from right into the neuro space, and there’s potential for misuse. I mean, it would be naive to think authoritarian governments would not be interested.” Tom Oxley says he is “not naive” about the potential for bad actors to misuse the research he and others are doing in BCI. He points out Synchron’s initial funding came from the US military, which was looking to develop robotic arms and legs for injured soldiers, operated through chips implanted in their brains. While there’s no suggestion the US plans to weaponise the technology, Oxley says it’s impossible to ignore the military backdrop. “If BCI does end up being weaponised, you have a direct brain link to a weapon,” Oxley says. This potential appears to have dawned on the US government. Its Bureau of Industry and Security released a memo last month on the prospect of limiting exports of BCI technology from the US. Acknowledging its medical and entertainment uses, the bureau was concerned it may be used by militaries to “improve the capabilities of human soldiers and in unmanned military operations”. ‘It can be life changing’ Concerns about the misuse of neurotech by rogue actors do not detract from what it is already achieving in the medical sphere. At the Epworth centre for innovation in mental health at Monash University, deputy director Prof Kate Hoy is overseeing trials of neuro treatments for brain disorders including treatment-resistant depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s. One treatment being tested is transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which is already used extensively to treat depression and was listed on the Medicare benefit schedule last year. One of TMS’s appeals is its non-invasiveness. People can be treated in their lunch hour and go back to work, Hoy says. “Basically we put a figure of eight coil, something you can hold in your hand, over the area of the brain we want to stimulate and then we send pulses into the brain, which induces electrical current and causes neurons to fire,” she says. “So when we move [the pulse] to the areas of the brain that we know are involved in things like depression, what we’re aiming to do is essentially improve the function in that area of the brain.” TMS is also free of side effects like memory loss and fatigue, common to some brain stimulation methods. Hoy says there is evidence that some patients’ cognition improves after TMS. When Zia Liddell, 26, began TMS treatment at the Epworth centre about five years ago, she had low expectations. Liddell has trauma-induced schizophrenia and has experienced hallucinations since she was 14. “I’ve come a long way in my journey from living in psych wards to going on all sorts of antipsychotics, to going down this path of neurodiverse technology.” Liddell wasn’t overly invested in TMS, she says, “until it worked”. She describes TMS as, “a very, very gentle flick on the back of your head, repetitively and slowly.” Liddell goes into hospital for treatment, normally for two weeks, twice a year. There she’ll have two 20-minute sessions of TMS a day, lying in a chair watching TV or listening to music. She can remember clearly the moment she realised it was working. “I woke up and the world was silent. I sprinted outside in my pyjamas, into the courtyard and rang my mum. And all I could say through tears was, ‘I can hear the birds Mum.’” It is a quietening of the mind that Liddell says takes effect about the three- to five-day mark of a two-week treatment. “I will wake up one morning and the world will be quiet … I’m not distracted, I can focus. TMS didn’t just save my life, it gave me the chance of a livelihood. The future of TMS is the future of me.” But despite how it has changed her life for the better, she is not naive about the dangers of setting neurotech loose in the world. “I think there’s an important discussion to be had on where the line of consent should be drawn,” she says. “You are altering someone’s brain chemistry, that can be and will be life changing. You are playing with the fabric of who you are as a person.” This article was amended on 24 November 2021 to change Marcello Ienca’s job title. He currently works at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, not ETH Zurich.Almost every day for three weeks, Grace Lockyer would jump in her car and drive to a hill to attend her Zoom classes. Located on her family’s property outside the town of Warialda in northern New South Wales, the hill was the only place she could get a decent internet connection. For Lockyer, one of the many students completing her HSC from home during the NSW lockdown, limited access to internet and technology was just the tip of the iceberg. Yet with exams set to commence on Tuesday 9 November, the end of a hard year is finally in sight. When the NSW government first announced the HSC was to be postponed back in August, it felt like another blow for Lockyer. The hardest part was keeping up the motivation to study without burning out. “It gets really exhausting, to get up out of bed and drive to sit on the hill all day … it feels like the end is just a black hole, the finish line is there but it just kept getting moved and moved,” she says. For Rachel Coulton, who is preparing to sit for her HSC at Warialda High School, the postponement meant she had to change her plans for university. “I probably would have gone to uni, but because the offers come out so late it doesn’t give us a lot of time to prepare for uni.” Instead, Coulton is excited to start a traineeship at the Gwydir shire council and hopes to attend university online. Despite the challenges of lockdown to mental health and motivation, Coulton feels that many of her teachers were fabulous during the entire process. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Across the state, many teachers went above and beyond to help students struggling with lockdown. Joanna Towers teaches primary industries and agriculture at St Catherine’s Catholic College in Singleton. She found that many of her students had poor access to the internet because they were using satellite, or often had no internet access at all. Some students would hotspot off their parents’ phones, with families with multiple children taking it in turns to connect. During the HSC trial exams, this became particularly challenging with many students hotspotting or going to neighbours’ houses to access their online exams. On one occasion Towers had to drive and drop off a physical copy to a student, then drive back to pick it up when it was completed. “It was a struggle, but we had a really good system to make sure everyone was doing it [the exams],” she says. “The students had to text the principal or the assistant principal at the start of each exam … and if they hadn’t there would be phone calls and checks.” There have been stories across the state of teachers driving long distances to drop off work to students and making phone calls to families to check how everyone was coping. At Tingha Public School, in the small town of Tingha in northern NSW, they organised schoolwork almost entirely in paper copies knowing that many families didn’t have good internet access. In addition to the work, teachers would send resource packages with pencils, counters, charts and chocolate. In the lead up to Father’s Day the school sent gifts for the children to give to their parents. Many schools across both rural and metropolitan NSW sent out hampers during lockdown, with many teachers delivering them personally. Melinda Partridge, the principal of Tingha public, feels that a silver lining to come out of lockdown was an increased connection with parents. “We made regular phone calls to parents and students, touching base, building those relationships,” she says. “Sometimes the parents would be up for a yarn about whatever was going on because they just wanted some of that contact as well.” Angelo Gavrielatos, the president of the NSW Teacher’s Federation, says that many teachers put in large amounts of extra work helping children who could not access remote learning. “When we talk about remote learning, the immediate assumption is that kids have got access to multiple devices, have got desks in their rooms and space to study. That’s not the reality for many students,” he says. “Instead, what we saw in school after school was teachers and principals continuously preparing satchels of material, photocopying reams of paper, stuffing envelopes and dispatching them … in many instances driving around dropping off material.” While many schools in rural places put in a lot of extra effort, it was still a difficult time. Helen Young, the deputy principal of Warialda High School, says that while they also had success with a combination of online learning and hard copies, many children struggled with the work. “These kids have never had to experience independent learning before, and their parents often have a limited understanding of the curriculum too. And there was this helplessness, they want to help their kids, but they can’t because they don’t know how to do it,” she says. Despite the increased toll on mental health, many remote schools didn’t have regular access to mental health services. Warialda High School had a psychologist visit every three weeks and a school councillor twice a week. Any other options were only available online, which many students were unable to access due to connection restraints. Gavrielatos says Covid-19 has exposed deep inequalities in the schooling system, especially regarding access to resources in rural areas. “Let us hope those inequalities are addressed fundamentally, but in the meantime teachers and principals will continue to do what they consider is their professional responsibility, to look after the students in our care and the communities we serve.” Despite the difficult year, Young is optimistic about the future. “I think they’ll bounce back … it’s actually building resilience in the sense of creating what future employers want. They want young people who will think outside the square, are independent in their thoughts and be able to develop strategies to overcome their problems.” Madeleine Bower is a freelance journalist in Inverell, northern NSW. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe Commonwealth bank announced last week that it plans to allow users of its CommBank app to trade cryptocurrencies – the first of Australia’s big four banks to do so. Cryptocurrencies are known for their wildly unpredictable price fluctuations, damage to the environment and use by criminals to try to disguise illegal activities, such as money laundering. A number of countries, including China, Turkey and Vietnam, have banned or restricted the use of cryptocurrencies in their jurisdictions. So why is the CBA doing this? Based on account data, CBA thinks about 500,000 of its customers already engage in crypto trading. CBA’s chief executive, Matt Comyn, said in a statement: “We believe we can play an important role in crypto to address what’s clearly a growing customer need and provide capability, security and confidence in a crypto trading platform.” The bank will in a few weeks invite 2,000 customers to join a pilot program where they will be able to buy, hold, and sell cryptocurrencies through the CBA phone app. The bank will initially offer 10 of the most popular coins, including bitcoin. (It will not include the parody-turned-US$35bn-market-cap dogecoin). What users won’t be able to do is transfer cryptocurrencies to other people – all transactions will involve either buying or selling the coins for real money. This is because crypto transfer is difficult to trace making it attractive to criminals and a nightmare for the bank when it comes to complying with anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism finance laws – something banks find hard enough with regular money transfers. Instead, all movements in and out of crypto are to take place through the customer’s own accounts, allowing the bank to better keep track of what’s going on. What are the environmental issues? Cryptocurrencies are generally created by computers solving difficult maths problems, a process called “mining” that uses a lot of electricity. Bitcoin mining alone currently uses more electricity than Argentina, the majority of which comes from fossil fuels, and is on track to use more than Australia. Burning fossil fuels to make electricity is a major source of global heating. Aren’t cryptocurrencies unstable? Yes – the price of bitcoin, for example, can halve or double in the space of a month or two. This volatility is one reason why it’s not suitable for use as a real-world currency. Transactions are also very slow and transaction fees are very high. Fees fluctuate a lot but are currently a little over 1% of transaction value. This may not sound a lot as it is about the same as what you’ll get charged for using a credit card at a shop. But when you use a card, the bank is lending you money. By contrast, transferring your own money between two Australian bank accounts is free, as is using eftpos. Bitcoin payments are also much, much slower than the almost instant transactions available through credit cards and eftpos. Even traditional transfers between accounts are becoming much faster thanks to what’s called the New Payments Platform, a system that all the banks are rolling out under which all transfers take less than a minute. Bitcoin transactions currently take more than six minutes to be confirmed. Back in July, it was closer to 20 minutes – far too long for use in retail transactions. At that speed no-one’s going to use bitcoin to buy overpriced pizza because it will have gone cold and soggy before the transaction settles. Some of the other cryptocurrencies CBA plans to offer aren’t much better. The average “gas fee” – transaction cost – of an Ethereum transaction is between US$85 and US $156, according to crypto.com data. This is fine for big transactions but not much use for small ones. Much of the enthusiasm for cryptocurrencies as an actual currency comes from the United States, where banking technology infrastructure is poor by developed world standards. They still regularly use paper cheques, for example, which have largely been abandoned in Australia. What is cryptocurrency used for? Because of these problems there are few legitimate uses for coins as a currency. Most people who buy cryptocurrencies do so to speculate on their value. However, since it’s difficult to trace, crypto is the preferred payment method demanded by ransomware gangs who hold organisations’ data hostage. That also makes it good for buying and selling illegal goods and services, such as drugs and even, according to some reports, murder-for-hire. People accused of unrelated crimes often tend to have bitcoin on hand when authorities swoop – in a number of recent cases the Australian Securities and Investments Commission has sought freezing orders over large holdings of bitcoin in the possession of defendants. Among its core uses appear to be investment scams and money laundering. Money launderers are prepared to wear a fair bit of volatility risk to clean dirty cash, and pay high fees along the way. Despite the occasional sudden fall, crypto in general is a rising market, so there’s even a chance to make money while laundering. Many of crypto exchanges that currently operate in the mostly unregulated offshore world have suffered from attacks that have led to customers losing some or all of their money. What are regulators doing about it? US regulators have been stepping up their scrutiny of the sector. Last month the Commodity Futures Trading Commission charged the owners of trading platform Bitmex with operating an unregistered trading platform and other violations, including failing to implement required anti-money laundering procedures. There are also grave concerns among regulators about so-called “stablecoins”, the value of which is supposed to be pegged to real-world currencies such as the US dollar or the euro. Central banks around the world have become increasingly alarmed about the threat posed by stablecoins. In a joint paper last month the Bank for International Settlements, which is the central bank for central banks, warned that they posed a series of risks that would increase if any of them were able to obtain global scale. In the past, one stablecoin issuer, Tether, claimed its coin was 100% backed by US dollars; however, this was not true and as a result last month the CTFC fined Tether and a related exchange operator, iFinex, a total of US$42.5m. How does Australia regulate it? Australia has been slow to regulate crypto. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission doesn’t have any regulatory oversight of most coins because they don’t meet its definition of a security. However, the threat to consumers from crypto scams is a priority area this year, for the first time. And last week Asic updated its information sheet for crypto assets, warning coin spruikers that a range of Australian laws could apply to them. Meanwhile, a parliamentary inquiry led by Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has proposed the crypto sector be subjected to a lighter-touch regulatory regime than normal financial products. In a report released last month, Bragg’s inquiry recommended changes including giving crypto a tax break in order to encourage its growth here.From the time he first felt the water around his ankles when his family filled up their new pool, to his first tentative steps into Sydney Harbour, Pete Magner has always been swimming. The 47-year-old says the water is where he feels most free. “For me getting in and being under the water is really calming,” he says. “It’s a beautiful thing in the harbour. You’re not really bound by any walls of a pool. It just feels like you’re more part of nature.” As the pandemic brought restrictions on travel, Magner says his family soon discovered Chiswick Baths, a small netted splash area along the Parramatta River – along with a host of others. “It was weird going to a suburban park when it was like they were at the beach,” Magner says. “People were there sun baking, there were people in bikinis out.” “It feels like a mini adventure. Finding somewhere to swim on your doorstep, it feels like you’re exploring, which is pretty good for the kids to find fun just where they are.” The baths are among a growing list of sites across Australia helping to reconnect swimmers with urban rivers and driving the clean-up of polluted waterways once thought permanently lost. Recent months have seen proposals from City of Sydney Lord Mayor Clover Moore for a floating pool in Sydney Harbour, a filtered pool in the Torrens in South Australia and a “sea-creature friendly” pool in East Fremantle, Western Australia. In Melbourne talk of building a river pool on the banks of the Yarra began a decade ago, with the latest iteration of the design including an artificial wetland. The City of Melbourne is now investigating the feasibility of a river pool as part of a $300m plan to transform the north bank of the Yarra into a series of parks. On Thursday the NSW minister for planning and public spaces, Rob Stokes, pledged $50m in part to help make the state’s waterways clean enough for swimming. “One of the lessons [from the recent lockdown] we really learned … was that our parklands and opportunities to enjoy places to roam, places to swim or places to play are not spread equitably across the city,” Stokes said. These proposals are a local variation on a global movement already under way in cities like Copenhagen, Portland, Berlin, New York and Boston – one which Marco Amati, associate professor at RMIT’s school of global, urban and social studies says represents “a form of subversive environmental activism”. “It’s a way of getting people used to the idea that the river can be clean and swimmable again,” Amati says. “When people don’t have much contact with the river, people don’t care so much whether it’s polluted. If it’s something people want to swim in, you have to make sure it’s clean.” ‘The river used to stink’ Suggesting a dip in the Torrens or a dive in the Yarra may be met with a look of horror or disgust today, but the cultural prejudice against river swimming is a relatively recent development among Australians. Colonial authorities might have sought to brutally alter rivers near large urban settlements from the point of colonisation – a waterfall near Queen’s Bridge in Melbourne today was dynamited and the course of the Yarra straightened to prevent flooding – yet people still maintained a connection with the waterways. Urban rivers remained a place to swim and play. The Yarra itself was home to a world-famous three-mile swim race that began in 1913 at a time when swimming was considered an extreme sport. This connection would be severed with the advent of heavy industry and a growing population that meant rivers were seen as cheap and convenient ways to wash away waste. Today the factories may have disappeared from most capital cities but the toxic legacy of 30 years of manufacturing with no real environmental regulation remains. In 2005 up to 60 eels were found floating dead in the Yarra while the Torrens – once home to the platypus – contained an “astonishing” level of heavy metal contamination. Even the stunning Sydney Harbour is itself home to several dead spots around stormwater and sewer outlets, with some patches still polluted from decades of industrial and commercial activity. “As our Aboriginal friends like to say, for 30,000 or so years before we came along it was all really tickety-boo,” Mark Drury says. Drury is a councillor with the Inner West council and chair of the Parramatta River Catchment Group, an alliance of nine local councils, three state government agencies and a “myriad” of community groups who in 2008 took up the work of cleaning the river. To build support they set a goal of making the river swimmable by 2025 – an outcome unimaginable for many who remembered the factories that once operated in Homebush Bay making petrol, batteries, pesticide and paint. But Drury says breaking through the prejudice was an essential first step. “It plants the seed so people can imagine it,” he says. After that the next step was to learn the scale of the challenge. Upon investigation, however, they quickly learned that the river had already begun to heal, allowing the councils to focus on speeding up the process. Since then, water quality in the Parramatta has significantly improved. Four river pools are open to the public and there are plans for more as initial water quality tests show new areas to be safe. As this monitoring has improved, so has the reporting of water quality information to the public in order to allow them to swim safely. Though this is not currently published in a central location, an interactive map is under development. While there is more to be done, Jerome Laxale, a councillor with Ryde city council who previously served as chair of Parramatta River Catchment Group says the impact has already been felt. “The river used to stink,” Laxale says. “It doesn’t smell any more. That’s great.” Laxale says houses in areas like Melrose Park were once built facing away from the water in a sign people had quite literally turned their backs on the river. That is now changing as people and wildlife, such as the critically endangered Bar Tailed Godwit, return to the banks of the river. “It’s also egalitarian,” Laxale says. “The river doesn’t belong to anyone, it belongs to everyone. This whole process has turned everyone’s attention to this amazing natural resource that has been used by people here for millennia.” ‘Beautiful until you test the water’ If industrialisation drove people away from rivers last century, the new threat is urbanisation. Ian Wright, a water scientist with the University of Western Sydney and a river swimmer himself, says cleaning up a river system is only half the battle. The next challenge is keeping it clean. Growing populations mean the residue of humanity – oil dripping from car engines, pet faeces, run-off from construction sites and farms, leaking sewer lines – all wash into stormwater systems, which overflow untreated into rivers. “Whatever the level of human activity, you can just about predict the impairment of water quality that will result,” Wright says. Fixing the problem means diverting these systems in the same way they were restructured in the 90s to protect swimmers on Sydney beaches from sewage. But Wright says there are also still threats from hold-out industrial operations in some areas. One example is the Bargo River, a tributary of western Sydney’s Nepean River that feeds the Mermaid Pool, a spectacular natural water hole at Tahmoor Gorge which is a favoured swimming spot for residents who live well away from the beach. “It looks beautiful until you test the water and see what’s in it,” Wright says.’ A nearby 40-year-old underground coalmine that supplies high quality coking coal to the Whyalla steelworks in South Australia and discharges 5.3 megalitres – roughly two Olympic swimming pools – of water into the river each day. Wright says this water contains a “complex cocktail of contaminants” and on average makes up two-thirds of the flow of the river – though most who swim there would have no idea. This is why he believes that regular and detailed report on levels of contamination is important for public safety and a necessary step in building support for cleaning up river systems. “We only measure the things we care about,” Wright says. “Rivers are beautiful to swim in, but it is a huge act of faith to jump into a river – and really, it shouldn’t be faith. It should be driven by fact.”To live and work overseas is a rite of passage for many Australians. Life abroad, however, took on a new sense of fragility with the rise of Covid-19. More than a million Australian citizens were forced to choose between riding out the pandemic in a foreign country, or returning to the relative safety of Australia. Since March 2020, it is estimated about half of those living abroad chose to come back, while tens of thousands wished to return but were unable to. Those that did make it were forced to swiftly recalibrate to a life they thought they had left behind, but with travel bans lifted for fully vaccinated Australian citizens and permanent residents, a new choice has arisen. For some, it is the moment they have been waiting months for, for others the start of a difficult decision making process, pitting new lives against old dreams. Chillie Vary had lived in New York for six years working as a landscape architect when Covid hit. Her apartment was just a few blocks from Brooklyn’s main hospital, giving her front row seats to the disaster of New York’s pandemic. “It was like the apocalypse,” says Vary. “Nothing was open. You couldn’t order food. The hotels were empty. It was scary, and getting worse, and I just knew I had to get home.” The journey back to Australia was harrowing. Her visa was complicated, she was travelling with her dog, and she was forced to leave her American boyfriend behind. Shortly after returning home to Melbourne in January of this year, she found herself plunged back into another lockdown. Months and months of confinement in Melbourne gave Vary “something that feels like PTSD” and an underlying sense of mistrust for the Australian and American governments. “It feels almost naughty to leave, like it’s against the rules. If I do manage to get back to New York, I’m scared I’ll never get home again.” Vary says that Melbourne’s lockdowns prevented her from properly reestablishing her life. The state of emergency she felt in New York is still running hot in her mind. “No one really understands it here, the death,” she says, adding that her experience has been a polarising force when trying to calibrate to the local scene. “I still don’t feel settled, almost a whole year after arriving back. My relationship ended, purely because of Covid. We thought we’d be back together by Christmas, but that won’t happen.” Despite being desperate to get back to New York, the reopening hasn’t done much to buoy her hopes. “If I could get on a plane tomorrow, I would – but the cost? The rules? I just don’t think I will be getting back for a long time,” she says flatly. But a long time does not mean never. “I think if you’re a true expat, you never get over that joy of living abroad.” Global professional network Advance released a survey in March this year in which they spoke to 1,301 Australians living abroad about the circumstances under which they returned home in 2020 – and how Covid-19 had affected their decisions. The survey found that almost half of the Australians who had moved home – like Vary – intended to return overseas when the borders open or some time in the future. But 37% have decided to remain indefinitely. The location of your home town became something of a lottery for returning Australians. If you were flying back to Melbourne, like Vary, the comparative shine of life abroad lingered. But what if your pandemic hideout was located in sunny Queensland? Director Ashleigh McCready has split her time back in Australia between Noosa on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast and her home town of Brisbane. With only a handful of brief lockdowns and more freedom than most other states, she has had a vastly different homecoming. Eighteen months after returning from Los Angeles, she is pregnant, engaged, and producing her very own stage show. “I love being back home, and I’m staying put,” she says. But it wasn’t an easy road. Just a few months into her “dream job” as assistant creative director for Cirque Du Soleil based in Los Angeles, McCready was sent home to Brisbane for “a couple of weeks” to see out the pandemic. Before long, Cirque Du Soleil was forced to shut down. All shows were cancelled, 3,500 staff were let go, and in June 2020 they filed for bankruptcy. McCready grappled with this upheaval from afar. “I was in a really bad place … I had worked my entire career to get to that point. To have that ripped from under my feet was devastating.” She felt isolated, with the response from locals being less than understanding. “There wasn’t much empathy for the entertainment industry. It was like ‘oh you better go find another job’.” Thanks to Queensland’s relatively light-touch experience with lockdowns, however, she managed to scout an impressive assortment of local and expatriate talent to produce and direct an entirely new show, Cirque Bon Bon, showing this December at the Brisbane Powerhouse. With life back home “falling into place”, international travel doesn’t hold the allure it once did. “At the start of my time in Brisbane, I was waiting for the next flight out. But now, I’m more excited to recreate what I had overseas … right here in Brisbane. If it wasn’t for the pandemic, I would never have considered getting married or having a baby – so I’m incredibly grateful for how things turned out.” The enforced stillness – and perhaps lack of choices – of locked-in life back home has changed other hearts too. Berny Nguyen and her husband, Vladamir, had been working for the cruise line industry since 2012, making “home” little more than a pit stop between contracts. “It’s taken a long time to accept that we were back for good,” says Nguyen. “I still haven’t unpacked some of my luggage!” A year-and-a-half on, the pair have moved back to her home town and set down roots. They adopted a foster dog, Ernie, and are considering starting a family. “When we first came back we didn’t want to commit to any long-term jobs, but now I’m in a full-time position which I really enjoy. It would be hard to leave.” Life on deck feels further and further away. “We spent so much of our lives working and building an identity in one world – and now we have had to start a new chapter,” she says. There are so many stories of young Australians having their time abroad cut off prematurely – but what about those at the other end of their careers? Anna Odfeldt, 54, and her husband, Mikael, 62, had just moved abroad when Covid hit. Mikael was working as a management consultant in Amsterdam and Anna, retired, had been waiting decades to travel. “We never had the chance to live and work overseas when we were younger – we went straight from school, to marriage, to mortgage, to kids. But our children had finally grown up, so we were at an age where we could leave them and go and have that experience,” she says. After seeing out the first year of European lockdowns in Amsterdam, the Odfeldts were pulled back to their children, and the stability of Australia’s healthcare system. But the disappointment of thwarted retirement plans is hard to shake. “One of our big dreams was to bring the kids to us in Europe and show them where their family is from.” When news of the border closure ending was announced, Anna said that she was sceptical, but hopeful. “I was very excited for the simple reason that it finally gave us some choices.” As time goes on, however, that window of unencumbered opportunity may shrink. “My levers right now are around my children,” says Anna. “I’m not a grandmother yet, but once that happens, we will have a very different conversation. I wouldn’t leave again if I had grandkids.”Pacific black ducks are common in Melbourne parks. They’re beautiful birds with chocolate plumage and brown heads bisected by toffee-coloured stripes. But last weekend, I had no time to appreciate their looks when I heard quacking coming from outside my flat. It was a Pacific black duck with eight ducklings. Half a dozen people herded them around the garden, taking photos with their phones. I called rescue group Wildlife Victoria and their advice nearly floored me. “It sounds counterintuitive,” said Erin. “It sounds unkind. But the best thing you can do is let the duck be. Let it go where it wants to. Just try to keep them all safe.” According to the rescue group, ducks can lay eggs up to 5km from their wetland homes, in suburban backyards or “wherever they can find a nice, safe place”. The duck was about to demonstrate unerring instincts. Hatched somewhere near my place, the young had to be walked to water right away. This was a “march of the ducklings”, a life and death hike. For the next three hours, the odyssey unfolded. First, the duck crossed our street, leading its tiny, fluffy offspring beside a drain into which two promptly fell. In the concrete chamber, they cheeped in panic. Happily, someone helped haul up the grate. I fetched my fishing net and scooped out the downy little scraps. They trundled to their siblings on miniature webbed feet. The mother took off, leading the way south. She reached a T-intersection, crossed, headed west then made a left. They waddled south again before following the curve of the railway line all the way to Elsternwick station. The parade continued as the tiny ducklings – weighing around 40 grams each – tumbled along, falling back then racing to catch up. At one point, several plunged into a puddle, gliding like seasoned swimmers – though they can’t have been more than a day or two old. Now and then, they stopped to graze on grassy nature strips and guzzle water from the gutters. As for me, after an hour, I was exhausted. It was harrowing to keep up, but I was also fending off traffic – mercifully light on the quiet backstreets. Didn’t the duck know the peril they were in? It walked doggedly on to roads and I kept my distance lest I accidentally ushered it the wrong way. I covered drains with my fishing net so the little ones didn’t fall in. When Mum crossed roads (or Dad, it could have been either), I stood in the middle like a crazy lollipop lady with my fishing net upright. A sign reading “Ducks Crossing” would have been better. As they reached the pocket park known as Elsternwick Plaza, it seemed, at last, there was method in her madness: she was headed for the local wetlands. Later, I learned ducks have an “inbuilt GPS” – an aerial map in their heads. The duck knew where it had to go. Ducks may also be guided by the smell of water. Locals helped shepherd them across Glenhuntly Road, then left me to it. But Nepean Highway lay ahead, with its four lanes of traffic pounding along at 80km/h. This little black duck was intent on her task, oblivious to the risk. A young man in a Coles uniform quickly sized things up. Using his considerable height, he helped stop the two southbound lanes. Even so, our hearts were in our mouths as the duck advanced into the city-bound traffic. After all the previous near-misses, this looked horribly like the end of the line. Luckily, modern cars have excellent brakes. The ducks made it and, after a second crossing of Glenhuntly Road, the high-stakes drama ended at Elsternwick Park Nature Reserve. The ducks had travelled 3km from my home to safety. Why would they have evolved to endure such a difficult start to life? Why do some ducks breed so far from water? Birdlife Australia’s Sean Dooley says the parent may have been inexperienced and chose the wrong place to nest, or that its choice “speaks of the paucity of local nesting sites”. Ducks must live in water but those breeding in our suburbs are in terrible danger as they travel to it. We need to understand them better. They’ve been here for millennia, before houses, roads and cars. Before deadly drains. Sadly, the problems for ducks are increasing. Last year, Wildlife Victoria volunteers helped a staggering 7,000 ducks – an increase of 25% on 2019 numbers. Another group, Nigel’s Animal Rescue, receives three or four calls to help ducks every day in the spring. One in five Victorians can’t name a single native duck species, but that doesn’t matter. Anyone can help ducks get to safety; it starts with paying attention. Looking back, I’m amazed the ducks survived. More so that I risked my life for them. Improbably, I became as determined as a Pacific black duck on a critical journey, marching her babies to water. Every spring, there’s a viral video on social media. Someone’s stopped their car and parked across a busy road, letting a duck and her ducklings cross. I’m here to tell you: that’s not the end of it, not in the least. That’s just the start. • Debbie Lustig is a Melbourne writer, birdwatcher and occasional wildlife rescuerBoris Johnson’s personal approval rating has slumped to its lowest level on record after his botched attempt to scrap Westminster’s standards system and spare a Tory MP from being suspended. According to a new Opinium poll for the Observer, the prime minister’s personal ratings have now fallen to -20, down from -16 last week. It surpasses the previous low of -18 that Johnson recorded a month ago, suggesting he was already experiencing a low point in his popularity in recent weeks. The Tory lead has also fallen to a single point in the past week, according to the poll that is the first to be conducted entirely after the resignation of Owen Paterson. The former Tory cabinet minister quit as an MP after No 10 ordered an embarrassing U-turn over its attempt to spare him from a 30-day Commons suspension for breaching lobbying rules. There was also a significant shift in who voters see as the best prime minister. An 11-point lead for Johnson has shrunk to just 2 points. Johnson is regarded as the best prime minister candidate by 28% of voters, down 5 points, with the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, on 26% (up 4 points). No 10 had backed an amendment suspending Paterson’s punishment and creating a new standards body with a built-in Tory majority. The next day, after intense criticism, the government backed down. It has caused fury among Tories at all levels of the party, many complaining of a backlash from constituents. However, the Tories still lead in terms of overall voting intention at 37%, down 3 points on last week. Labour is up one point on 36%. The Lib Dems are on 9% and the Greens on 7%. Thirty per cent approve of the job Johnson is doing, while 50% disapprove. Starmer’s approval rating is unchanged at -9, with 29% approving of the job he is doing and 37% disapproving. The results of the poll will anger Tory MPs and cause alarm in Downing Street. While the Tory conference was largely successful for the party, the recent budget caused some ideological splits. The row over Paterson saw whips having to persuade MPs in newly won former Labour seats to protect an MP in a safe, traditional constituency. It led to a major rebellion, with dozens of Tories abstaining rather than backing Paterson. The Tories are regarded as more corrupt than other parties, with 39% saying a Conservative government would be more corrupt, and 14% saying Labour would be. However, 26% think they’d be as bad as each other. As to Paterson’s punishment, 59% think the 30-day suspension was correct, 10% think it was wrong, and 31% did not know. A majority (60%) think the government was wrong to try to overturn the suspension. “Johnson’s approval rating has been slowly slipping for months but this is the lowest we have ever recorded for him,” said Adam Drummond of Opinium. “By two to one, voters think the prime minister and the government and party he leads are corrupt rather than honest. The figures for Labour and Keir Starmer are much more positive and Johnson’s lead as ‘best PM’ has shrunk from 11 points to just two. Nevertheless, after another week of torrid headlines, the question is why Labour still haven’t managed to pull ahead.” Opinium polled 1,840 people online between 5 and 6 November.England are hopeful Owen Farrell will be cleared to face Australia at Twickenham next weekend despite the captain’s positive Covid-19 test which left his teammates fearing Saturday’s opening autumn international against Tonga would be cancelled just hours before kick-off. Farrell was forced to sit out England’s 69-3 victory over Tonga after returning a positive PCR test on Friday. Government guidance would appear to dictate that Farrell has to isolate for 10 days, therefore missing the match against the Wallabies, but Eddie Jones revealed Public Health England will ultimately determine his availability amid suggestions the 30-year-old produced a false-positive. “It is very clear and very simple, we are just following the Covid regulations and protocols and are awaiting further guidance,” said Jones. “It is not my decision, it is Public Health [England], so we just leave it to them and we are just waiting. We have done everything we are supposed to do. We knew 100% he wasn’t going to be involved [on Saturday] morning, and in terms of when he is going to get out [of isolation], if you could give a ring to Public Health England, that would be most appreciated.” England opted to undertake PCR tests when a member of Jones’s backroom staff produced a positive lateral flow test result on Thursday. On Friday, after learning of Farrell’s positive test, the rest of the playing squad and staff members were subjected to another round of tests and were left with an anxious wait for the results, which were not known until Saturday morning. Jonny May, who scored two of England’s 11 tries, said: “It was stressful. It is hard enough preparing for a Test match without all [of that]. On Thursday morning we have got a positive in the camp, we are about to train and we have all got to go back to our rooms and all have to PCR and lateral flow and we are not sure if we are going to train. “[Then] 20 minutes [later] the message comes out we have got to race down and get training, all [take] PCR [tests], everybody is nervous... what if a positive comes back? Are we going to get a game in? Then Owen has got a positive test back, it looks by all accounts to be a false positive and that is a different discussion. I was worried about coming down to breakfast [on Saturday] morning and the game not being on if we had had a few more positives.” In Farrell’s absence, George Furbank started at fly-half before Marcus Smith came off the bench for a swashbuckling cameo to press his claims to start against Australia, regardless of Farrell’s availability. “To perform under those conditions and distractions is credit to the team,” said May. “It didn’t knock us off our stride [and] it was a distraction that we dealt with well. It was challenging.”Everton’s new manager, Jean-Luc Vasseur, urged patience after Aileen Whelan’s second-half header lifted Brighton to third in the Women’s Super League at the expense of his team in his first league game in charge. “The project is long and we need to be patient,” said Vasseur. “Win or not winning, we need to build, that’s what’s important.” The 52-year-old former Lyon manager may have begun his tenure with a win on Wednesday night, when Everton beat Leicester City 3-1 in the League Cup, but a reversal of the team’s WSL fortunes is sorely needed. A turnaround will come “the sooner the better”, said Vasseur. “I don’t have control over time. I arrived one week ago, we’ve had two games, so we don’t have time to put in the new method. You always need time as a new manager to change things. Today we are disappointed in defeat but in defeat you learn and it’s important to learn in every game.” Everton have taken only six points from their opening six fixtures and sit in eighth, and both Manchester City and Reading are able to leapfrog them with wins on Sunday . The Blues’ poor run of form prompted the removal of Vasseur’s predecessor, Willie Kirk, who took charge of a side at the bottom of the table in 2018 and guided them to a fifth-place finish last term. Vasseur comes with Champions League pedigree, having guided Lyon to their fifth consecutive European title in the 2019-20 season before being dismissed after failing to progress past Paris Saint-Germain last season. Brighton, under Hope Powell, did not offer the cannon fodder that a new manager would perhaps like to meet soon after their arrival. They are dark horses this year, with Powell’s patient and discreet work easing them up the table each year. The patient work of the Brighton hierarchy, who paid a fee for a player for the first time when they signed Danielle Carter in the summer, contrasts starkly with that of big-spending Everton, who recruited some of Europe’s best talent, including the Swedish trio of Hanna Bennison, Anna Anvegård and Nathalie Björn. Perhaps because of the effects of the fierce winds whipping through Walton Hall Park, there was a lack of intensity to the opening 45 minutes of a game that would potentially mark a shift in the fortunes of the hosts or the continuing rise of their guests. With Everton unchanged from their midweek cup game, they dominated possession but had nothing to show for it, with two shots on target apiece at the break. In the second half Brighton punished the profligacy of Everton. First the defender Maya Le Tissier went close after the former Evertonian Inessa Kaagman sent the ball towards her at the far post. Then, just past the hour mark, Brighton took a deserved lead. The former Arsenal forward Danielle Carter combined nicely with Lee Geum-min and then sent in a cross that was nodded in by Whelan, who had scrambled in front of the goalkeeper Sandy MacIver. The win was impressive testament to the improved consistency of Brighton, who had won nine of 14 league matches before meeting Everton – as many wins as in their previous 49 games in the competition. They also look well organised, with Powell doing well to utilise the talents of the players at her disposal. Meanwhile, Everton play without an identity and whether Vasseur is able to enact his vision quick enough to impress the board – and buy him the time needed to do more than halt this team’s slide – remains to be seen. The positives? “The mindset of the team because players tried and tried,” said Vasseur. “And my team believes in the project, Today is not a good day for us but they believe in what we are doing.”You guess it has been a long 24 hours for the South Africans in Cardiff, long enough for them to enjoy a selection of the city’s delights, the freezing-cold weather, the torrential rain, and not just one, but two, night-time fire alarm calls in their hotel, one at 3am, which gave them a good 20-minute stretch standing around on the street mingling with Cardiff’s Friday nightlife, and then, because it was so much fun, another at 7.20am. And then, to top it all off, they had a brutal 80 minute set-to with a Welsh team who were utterly unrecognisable from the lot who shipped 54 points against the All Blacks last week. It was a hell of a game. There were two yellow cards, one try that wasn’t and a cameo appearance by a pitch invader and a security guard, who threw themselves in the way of Liam Williams as he was closing in on the Springbok tryline. Williams skipped around them but the distraction cost him precious split seconds. Wayne Pivac was phlegmatic about it. “You don’t want to see that in the game, very disappointing, but there’s nothing the match officials can do about it,” Pivac said. “I don’t know if we would have scored. We just saw a two v one, and thought: ‘Well, here we go.’” As for the miscreant, well, the stadium manager explained: “He was intercepted and immediately escorted from the stadium and handed over to South Wales police.” No doubt he was in for a long night of it too. At least the Springboks came away with a win to go with all their bruises. It was in the balance until the 12th round. The Springboks were sure they had settled it when Makazole Mapimpi dived over the line to finish what looked to be a length-of-the-field try, sparked by a startling break by Cobus Reinach in the 70th minute. But even while Elton Jantjies was lining up the conversion, the television replay showed that several of their players had been offside in the buildup. Minutes later they really did finish it when Malcolm Marx bulled over from a lineout drive. Jantjies missed the conversion but landed a penalty with the last kick to finish it. It was South Africa’s first win here since 2013. Wales had won five of the last seven matches between the teams. Of course, that was Warren Gatland’s team, Pivac’s side is a different beast, and they were missing their captain, Alun Wyn Jones, and a handful of other senior players besides. It hardly showed. Turns out there’s plenty of the old blood and guts in Pivac’s young team, too. Ellis Jenkins, back in the side after three years out injured, was especially good. He was key in the opening minutes, when Wales were being tossed in the storm. Whatever else it achieved, those two early morning wake-up calls did not seem to have done much for the South Africans’ mood. But the Welsh gathered themselves after Jenkins won a crucial turnover. It helped that their lineout was back working again too. One led to an opportunity, after Dan Biggar threw a long pass out to Jenkins in space on the right wing, he shovelled it on to Louis Rees-Zammit, who was hauled down by Siya Kolisi in the split second before he crossed the line. Rees-Zammit had a second chance moments later, when Biggar whistled a high cross-field kick over to the right corner, but the ball burst through his fingertips as he leapt for it. It was Wales’ best chance of the half. If the lineout was fine, the scrum was still malfunctioning, and a ready source of penalties for the visitors. Fortunately for Wales, South Africa were giving away plenty too, seven penalties in the first 30 minutes alone. The referee reckoned that was one too many and sent Ox Nché to the sin-bin for obstruction. Wales’ one-man advantage did not last, with Rhys Carré shown a yellow card when he came into a ruck from the side. Worse, South Africa actually started playing some of their best stuff when they were down to 14 men. Handré Pollard almost put Mapimpi through with a grubber. Always, though, there was the looming threat of the South Africa replacements. The difference between the two teams seemed starkest when you looked at the men on the benches. The Welsh had two debutants among their spare forwards and two more with only a handful of caps. The South Africans, on the other hand, were a gnarly old lot, Marx, Steven Kitshoff, Vincent Koch, Franco Mostert, men who had been instrumental in the World Cup win in 2019. It was a sign of how well Wales were playing that South Africa bolted early, and brought on Marx, Kitshoff and Koch five minutes into the second half. In the minutes afterwards, they came hard at the Welsh line, 14 phases, all in the Welsh 22, but the hosts held, won a turnover and, better yet, a penalty off the back of the clearance. That lead did not last either. François Steyn kicked a penalty from five metres inside his own half, and then Pollard added another. That made the scores level at 15-15 with 20 minutes to play. And while Biggar kicked one more penalty, as Jenkins said afterwards: “South Africa were just too good at turning the screws on us in those last few moments.”Howe do you like that? Before kick‑off Newcastle sank to the bottom of the league because of Norwich’s victory at Brentford; then they fell behind to a penalty by Leandro Trossard. Then came the reaction that must have encouraged their prospective new manager, who, from his seat in the stands, saw Newcastle fight back to claim a valuable point. It would have been more if Callum Wilson had not been fouled by Robert Sánchez in stoppage time when running clear on goal. The goalkeeper was sent off but Newcastle did not have enough time to go on and claim their first league win of the season. They did, however, show Eddie Howe that this team have at least something to build on. In many ways Brighton are a case from which Newcastle’s new owners could take inspiration. The seasiders are shrewd operators off the pitch and mostly slick on it. Calmly and methodically, Graham Potter has made them difficult to beat and enjoyable to watch, which is why the mood music around the Amex Stadium since his arrival two and a half years ago has generally been the exact opposite of the bellyaching that has accompanied most matches at St James’ Park during that time. For all that, Brighton fans have not become strangers to frustration and here they groaned as the home team wasted a stack of chances, wound up with only 10 men, and ended with a centre-back playing as goalkeeper as they clung on for a draw. For his last game in temporary charge of his hometown club, Graeme Jones made three changes to the side that began last weekend’s 3-0 defeat by Chelsea. Newcastle’s players started as if on a mission to impress Jones’s eventual replacement and/or atone for past performances. They pressed with intensity. But it takes a lot to disrupt Brighton’s smooth passing game and the hosts enjoyed far more possession. They also enjoyed having Tariq Lamptey back. Restored to the starting lineup for a league match for the first time since being injured 11 months ago, the wing-back showed he has lost none of his zip, quickly creating Brighton’s first chance with a run and cross that Trossard headed into the arms of Karl Darlow. Newcastle retorted. Jacob Murphy burst down the right in Lamptey-esque fashion and swapped passes with Miguel Almirón, only to pull his shot way wide. Then another thrust from Lamptey earned the game’s first corner, which led to Shane Duffy bringing a save from Darlow. Then, to no one’s surprise, Newcastle’s hapless streak resurfaced. Amid a scramble in the box after a corner, Trossard tricked his way past Ciaran Clark, who caught him lightly with a trailing leg and then made a half-hearted grab for his shirt. Trossard was not going to miss the opportunity to hit the ground. Nor did he miss the penalty. After that Newcastle’s ambition seemed to be to hang in and hope they would get a chance to equalise, without being sure how to bring one about. Early in the second half Darlow kicked away a shot by Trossard after elegant work by Joël Veltman and Lamptey. Then Marc Cucurella headed wide after a cross by Trossard, who, soon afterwards, curled a shot wide from 20 yards. Each chance showed Brighton’s superiority but each miss stoked Newcastle’s belief that parity could be restored if they could put together a cutting attack. They did so in the 66th minute when Matt Ritchie took a quick free-kick on the left to Allan Saint-Maximin, accepted the return pass and sent a cross beyond the back post. Clark did well to nod it back to Isaac Hayden, who kept his cool and lashed the bouncing ball into the net from the middle of the box. Newcastle threatened to win through a late counterattack. Sánchez rushed out of his area to intercept Joelinton’s through ball but was beaten to it by Wilson, who would surely have shot into the empty net from 25 yards if the goalkeeper had not tripped him. Lewis Dunk was redeployed as an emergency goalkeeper after Sánchez’s red card but Newcastle ran out of time to test him. “It’s easy to fracture in a situation like we’re in but the boys are together,” said Jones. “Whoever comes in will inherit a healthy football club. [The new manager] will have seen a team that added a bit more possession, a bit more control on the ball and he’ll inherit a team that off the ball is capable of pressing a brilliant Brighton team.”Paul Doyle was at the Amex, and his report has landed. The link to that is below ... as well as a little bit more on the sacking of Norwich boss Daniel Farke. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Graham Potter talks to BT. “Up to the goal, we had really good control. It’s not easy to play a side as low as they were. In the end it’s a good point for us. While it’s still 1-0 you have to keep fighting, we have to accept the role we had to play in the game, which was the team trying to win the game and create something, but we’ll get better at that, it’s just something you have to go through.” A slightly frustrated but philosophical Callum Wilson speaks to BT. “That’s the way things are going at the moment. Through on goal, but the keeper takes me out. The worrying thing is, it wasn’t blown up for first time. We got the right decision in the end. If it was a penalty it was different. We showed great character, that’s what we need to do in times like this. It’s not going to stay like this forever, the boys are getting more confidence. It’s good with a new manager coming in, getting his feet under the table, getting a new identity into the team.” Some breaking news elsewhere in the Premier League. Norwich City have sacked Daniel Farke, who at least went out on a high today after his side secured their first win of the season, 2-1 at Brentford. The Canaries are still bottom of the table, mind. Baby steps for Newcastle, then. A much-improved second-half display earns them a precious point that hauls them off the bottom of the table and puts them back above Norwich on goal difference. Eddie Howe, their manager-in-waiting, has some positives to take away that weren’t there after the first 45. Brighton meanwhile pass up the chance to leapfrog Manchester United into fifth place, but they do edge past Arsenal on goal difference to make it to sixth. Yep. Ritchie’s corner fails to beat the first man. Brighton clear, and the whistle goes. A fair result on the balance of play ... though the visitors were denied a dramatic win when Sanchez cynically clipped Wilson as the Newcastle striker threatened to race through towards an unguarded goal. 90 min +8: But hello. What’s this? A long hoick forward is deflected out for a Newcastle corner on the right. Can Dunk and Brighton hold out? 90 min +7: It looks like Sanchez’s cynical foul on Wilson has saved Brighton a point, and cost Newcastle two. Wilson would surely have romped forward and slotted into the unguarded net. 90 min +6: Brighton launch an attack and probe along the front of the Newcastle box. Veltman tries to spring Maupay into the area with a wedged pass, but gets too much on it and Darlow claims. 90 min +5: There will be more than five added minutes, mind, because a couple were wasted with the sending off and all attendant faff. 90 min +4: That’s a really weird decision, and it looks to have cost Newcastle the chance of testing Dunk, because in the next phase of play, Saint-Maximin lashes a cross behind for a goal kick. 90 min +3: Dunk takes an age to pull on the goalkeeping gloves. The free kick is 35 yards out. Shelvey should surely test Dunk’s handling skills, despite the distance, but floats the free kick into the box, and Brighton deal with the delivery. 90 min +2: Yep, off goes the Brighton keeper. The home side have used up all their subs, so Dunk pulls on Sanchez’s jersey and gloves. 90 min +1: VAR intervenes in the first of five added minutes. Sanchez is surely going to be sent packing for that professional foul. 90 min: Joelinton blooters clear with Brighton piling forward. Suddenly Wilson is free down the inside-left channel ... and Sanchez is miles from his area on walkabout! Wilson rounds the keeper but before he can make towards the box and roll into the empty net, Wilson goes over. He’s been clipped ... but the referee waves play on! 89 min: Brighton pass and probe. Newcastle hold their shape. Cucuarella and Bissouma have half-chances to shoot, but opt not to. There’s no way through. 87 min: Shelvey delivers into the Brighton box from the right. Sanchez claims then spills, but Dunk is on hand to whack away. 86 min: Cucurella crosses from a deep spot on the left. Darlow dives to claim spectacularly, under no pressure, one for the cameras. 84 min: Mac Allister and Bissouma leave the ball to each other, and Hayden races off with it. Bissouma is forced to pull him back and take the booking. Then yet another yellow card, this time for Maupay, who was being wrestled by Murphy, and stuck a few fingers in his face. VAR check for serious misconduct, but yellow is deemed adequate punishment. 82 min: Joelinton barrels down the right and looks for Wilson in the middle. His cross loops off Cucurella and into the arms of Sanchez. 80 min: Veltman crosses from a deep position on the right. An easy pluck for Darlow, despite the presence of the nearby Maupay. 78 min: Brighton were much the better side in the first half. Now they’ve lost their mojo. Newcastle by contrast look much more confident now. 76 min: Lamptey, only recently back from injury, is out of fuel. He’s replaced by Webster. 75 min: Now it’s Lallana’s turn to go into the book, taking a clumsy, wild swipe at Saint-Maximin. He’s slightly fortunate not to see red there, you know. Perhaps fortunate that he didn’t make too much contact, even though that shouldn’t be a factor. A bigger clatter may have forced the referee’s hand. 74 min: Almiron is replaced by Joelinton, and is none too happy about it. 73 min: Wilson slides into the back of Mac Allister, and though he tried to pull out of the tackle as he aquaplaned across the greasy turf, he goes into the book. 71 min: Krafth is good to continue. 70 min: The free kick comes to nothing. Then play’s stopped when Duffy accidentally catches Krafth in the mush. The physios come on, and there’s time for both sides to take stock of the new situation. 69 min: Shelvey slides through the back of Trossard, and that’s a yellow card, no matter how ferociously he wags his finger at the referee. Free kick to Brighton, 30 yards out. 68 min: A huge smile plays across the face of Eddie Howe in the stand. Anything from this performance will be considered a bonus. Clark, who gave away the penalty, will be pretty pleased with his assist, too. Ritchie and Saint-Maximin combine down the left. Ritchie crosses long. Clark rises at the far post and heads down for Hayden, who sweeps into the net from eight yards! Simple as that. The away end erupts! 65 min: Maupay comes on for March. 64 min: A bit of extremely sterile Newcastle possession in the middle of the park. “From the way Newcastle are playing, I wouldn’t be surprised if they were cut adrift by Christmas,” suggests Nicholas Berg. “Even all of the money in universe wouldn’t be able to help them.” 62 min: A melee on the edge of the Brighton D. Hayden tries to sort his feet out for a shot, but there’s no time or space in which to work, and Brighton eventually hack clear. 60 min: Brighton faff around at the back, as is their occasional wont, Murphy very nearly closing down Sanchez in his own six-yard box. So close to a farcical equaliser. Brighton escape Newcastle’s clutches, though, and Cucuarella romps down the left wing on the counter. Murphy takes one for the team with a cynical lunge. Yellow card. 58 min: Krafth’s right-wing cross is headed over his own bar by Veltman. Ritchie’s corner is claimed confidently by Sanchez. 56 min: Sanchez creams a long, Edersonesque pass down the left for Cucurella, who feeds Trossard. Some twisting and turning. Trossard can’t make room for a shot, so pulls back for Lallana, who improvises a sidefoot pass-shot towards the bottom left. Had it been on target, it was beating the rooted Darlow, but it flies a couple of inches wide. Great football from Brighton. 55 min: The irrepressible Lamptey skitters down the right and enters the box, only to send a weak shot straight at Darlow from a tight angle. 54 min: Almiron wins a corner down the right. Shelvey to take. Lascelles can’t win a header. Murphy waits on the edge of the box to volley but has the ball stolen off his toe. The ball breaks to Ritchie, whose low drive is deflected towards the bottom left. The pace has been taken off the shot, though, and Sanchez gathers. 52 min: Lamptey cuts another one back from the byline on the right. It rolls perfectly for Cucurella, to the left of the D. However Cucurella doesn’t fancy swinging his right peg at the ball, opting to trap and look for a pass instead. The chance evaporates into the night sky. 51 min: It’s pelting down on the south coast. Veltman’s loose pass allows Almiron to shape to shoot on the edge of the Brighton box. Almiron hesitates and Cucurella picks his pocket, saving Veltman’s blushes. 49 min: Ritchie goes in hard for an aerial 50-50 with Lamptey. There’s only ever going to be one winner. Lamptey takes a big clattering, albeit one that’s within the laws of the game. Ritchie checks his opponent is OK, and the diminutive wing-back springs up soon enough. One of those challenges that drew an OOF! from everyone in the stadium. Hard but fair. 47 min: Lallana smoothly sashays down the inside-right channel, wriggling out of a tight spot and slipping the ball forward to Trossard, whose low shot is kicked away by Darlow at the near post. Brighton come again, Trossard crossing deep from the right, Cucurella meeting it at the far post, but sending his header across goal and out for a goal kick. Two big chances at the start of the half. Newcastle get the ball rolling for the second half. The hosts have made one change, Mwepu making way for Mac Allister. Half-time advertisement. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Leandro Trossard’s penalty is the difference at the break. As things stand, Brighton will go fifth, with Newcastle bottom. Plenty to play for in the second half. No flipping! 45 min +2: Lamptey turns Ritchie inside and out like a pair of socks. He reaches the byline on the right with an outrageous drop of the shoulder, about turn, and burst of speed, then dinks into the centre, where March heads wide right. Lamptey is such an enjoyable footballer to watch. 45 min: There will be three added minutes. 44 min: Newcastle take their sweet time over a couple of throws. A team waiting eagerly for the half-time whistle, right here. 42 min: Ritchie’s long corner is headed down by Almiron, finding Saint-Maximin at the far post. Saint-Maximin spins and shoots, but his close-range effort is half-blocked by Sanchez, then hooked off the line by Dunk. Much better from Newcastle ... although the flag goes up for offside, Brighton having pushed up smartly to catch Saint-Maximin well offside. 41 min: Shelvey’s long pass down the right finds Murphy, who wins another Newcastle corner, off Cucurella. The visitors load the six-yard box. 39 min: According to BY Sport, that Brighton sequence ran to 46 consecutive passes, lasting two and a quarter minutes! The home side have enjoyed 96 percent possession in the last five minutes. You can kind of understand why Hayden got frustrated and decided to whack Trossard. 37 min: Brighton are totally comfortable at the minute. 35 min: Brighton string a long sequence of passes together. The crowd soundtrack the move in the time-honoured style. Hayden eventually puts an end to the caper by clipping Trossard’s ankle. 34 min: Newcastle had started very brightly, but that penalty has taken the wind out of their sail. They’ve only won one of the last 25 matches in which they’ve conceded the first goal, losing 17 of them. 32 min: Lamptey screeches towards the byline on the right and cuts back. Trossard threatens to latch onto the pass, and he’s got Hayden right up his back. He opts to stay on his feet and attempts to control, but fails. There was a chance to put on the brakes suddenly, and purchase a cheap and cynical penalty off Hayden there. Hey, we don’t make the rules. 30 min: Lamptey tears off down the right again. It’s a searing run with a disappointing end, Lamptey crossing with nobody but Newcastle defenders in the box. Krafth tidies up. 28 min: Hayden works his way down the right and wins Newcastle a corner. They load the six-yard box. Lamptey clears with a strange sideways header. The ball’s returned into the mixer. Clark is lightly tugged to the ground. He wants a penalty. Referee says no. VAR says no. 27 min: Veltman fizzes a ball through the six-yard box from the right. Lamptey is inches away from sliding the ball home at the near post. He’ll curse cutting his toenails last night. 26 min: Newcastle weren’t happy with the award of that penalty, claiming that Trossard made a meal of the challenge. He certainly did that, going down late, but Clark definitely hung out a clumsy leg and caught his man going past him. It was a fair decision in the end, though other opinions will inevitably be available on the information superhighway. After the usual pre-penalty faff, Trossard steps up and lashes the spot kick straight down the middle. Darlow dives to his right, and Brighton take the lead. 22 min: PENALTY FOR BRIGHTON! The referee overturns his decision, makes the TV mime - possibly in memory of the great Lionel Blair? - and points to the spot. 21 min: VAR operative Craig Pawson asks referee David Coote to go to the monitor. Off he trots. 20 min: A corner for Brighton on the left. The ball drops to Trossard on the penalty spot. Trossard takes a touch and clanks into the leg of Clark. The referee isn’t interested but it looks like enough contact has been made to call the foul. VAR will take a look. 19 min: Saint-Maximin and Almiron mess up a one-two in the centre circle as they threaten to charge upfield on the counter, Wilson again in a lot of space on the right wing. Even so, Newcastle are looking dangerous when they snaffle possession and break quickly. 17 min: Hayden drives forward with Brighton light at the back and Wilson free to his right. He inexplicably drifts infield, and is swarmed by what remains of the Brighton defence. Odd choice, and Wilson throws his head back in annoyance and despair. 15 min: Sanchez claims a high ball, lands on Wilson, and drops it. The whistle goes for a foul on the keeper, despite the Newcastle striker having done nothing but stand still, because that’s what always happens. 14 min: Lamptey shovels a pass down the right for Mwepu, who can’t get past last man Krafth and eventually concedes a foul. 12 min: Lascelles is booked for a late crump on Trossard in the centre circle. He looks affronted, arguing that it was his first challenge, but it was clumsy and unnecessary, and he can’t really have any complaints. 11 min: Cucurella bursts into space down the left. His cross is too long. Lamptey, then Trossard, take turns to deliver balls in from the right, neither managing to find a man. Both sides are looking lively in attack. 9 min: Lamptey makes some more high-speed trouble down the right and wins the first corner of the game. March swings it in. Duffy rises highest and slams a downward header that doesn’t have the requisite oomph. Darlow claims with ease again. 7 min: Murphy accelerates down the inside-right channel and exchanges passes with Almiron, bursting into the box and dragging a shot across the face of the Brighton goal and harmlessly out for a goal kick. Almiron, who had kept on running, wanted the favour returned, though you can’t blame Murphy for taking the shot on himself. 6 min: Lamptey embarks on his first exciting dribble of the evening. He jinks in from the right and floats a cross into the box. Trossard’s header is on target but weak and easy pickings for Darlow. Trossard possibly had time to take that down and get a shot away. 4 min: It’s all Brighton during these early exchanges, albeit to no great effect. 2 min: Brighton start the evening with a game of keepball. All very patient. Eddie Howe finally shows his face, making his way to the directors’ box, led there by Amanda Staveley. The players take the knee, then Brighton kick off. Before kick off, the players congregate around the centre circle to pay their respects to the fallen. Both managers lay a wreath of remembrance, a poppy mosaic flutters in the stand, and the stadium falls silent for the Last Post. Perfectly observed. Rest in peace. The teams are out! Brighton wear their blue and white stripes, while Newcastle play in second-choice black. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! Brighton boss Graham Potter talks to BT Sport ... “Tariq Lamptey gives us a different dimension, and we’re looking forward to getting him on the pitch. I thought it was the right time to put him in from the start. [Newcastle] will be fighting for the points. We have to be ready for that.” ... and so does Newcastle interim coach Graeme Jones. “You have to focus on the match. I’ve tried to keep everyone’s attention on today’s game. We need to be adaptable.” Word is that Eddie Howe will be in the stands at the Amex tonight. He’ll run the rule over his new charges, with his official unveiling as Newcastle United manager expected next week. The 3pms certainly haven’t gone Newcastle’s way. Burnley snatched a precious point at leaders Chelsea with a 1-1 draw, while Norwich City have won their first match of the season, 2-1 at Brentford. That victory for Daniel Farke’s side means Newcastle are now bottom of the Premier League. A draw here will see them leapfrog the Canaries this evening on goal difference. Brighton make just one change to the XI that started the comeback 2-2 draw at Anfield. Tariq Lamptey, borderline unplayable when he gets the wind behind, comes in for Jakub Moder, who drops to the bench. Newcastle make three changes to the team beaten 3-0 at Chelsea. Jonjo Shelvey, Jacob Murphy and Miguel Almiron replace the benched Javier Manquillo, Ryan Fraser and Sean Longstaff. Brighton &amp; Hove Albion: Sanchez, Veltman, Duffy, Dunk, Lamptey, Mwepu, Bissouma, Cucurella, March, Lallana, Trossard. Subs: Webster, Maupay, Mac Allister, Gross, Moder, Steele, Locadia, Richards, Sarmiento. Newcastle United: Darlow, Murphy, Krafth, Lascelles, Clark, Ritchie, Almiron, Hayden, Shelvey, Wilson, Saint-Maximin. Subs: Dubravka, Schar, Joelinton, Lewis, Manquillo, Fraser, Willock, Gayle, Longstaff. Referee: David Coote (Nottinghamshire). Brighton will be feeling good about themselves in the wake of their excellent display at Anfield last weekend. The confidence is flowing through Graham Potter’s team; they’re very easy on the eye. Newcastle, by contrast, are six points adrift of safety and a bit of a mess. Better days lie ahead, but for now they desperately need to start picking up points if the big billion-dollar rebuild isn’t going to start in the Championship. Only problem is, they’ve never beaten Brighton in the Premier League, and have only won twice in their past 16 games with today’s opponents. And if they don’t win today, it’ll be their worst-ever start to a league campaign. Plenty of pressure on the Magpies, then, as they take on the Seagulls. Wings start a-flapping at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!That’s all from me. Thanks for your company. Here’s the full match report Wayne Pivac is chatting to Sara Elgan. “Massive effort from our boys and disspointed not to hold on for last ten minutes. We had a couple of poor penalties at the wrong time and that was the difference. The scrum wasn’t great and that’s something we’ll have to work on, a few learnings we’ll take away. Ellis Jenkins had some great moments and I’m so pleased to see him back at this level and enjoying himself. We had to play a different type of game today, but scrum aside I thought we did really well.” “Valiant effort with an amazing performance from Ellis Jenkins.” says Frazier Stroud, “If he can stay fit he is the Wales captain moving forward. Wales just didn’t have the ball carriers to compete with the heft of the South Africa.” I think we can file that whole Wales performace under ‘not enough heft’, Frazier. Jonathan Davies, losing captain, is here: “Can’t fault the effort, but it’s frustrating. You try and physically match teams, but SA are one of the best in the world and we’ve just got to take the positives and move on. Conditions didn’t help the way we wanted to play and it’s a tough loss.” Siya Kolisi: “What a special day. Wales are a very strong team, six years without a win here and we really wanted to focus on this game. First half was tough, but second half we stuck to our guns. We face challenges in our country all the time and we learn to get up and we know by winning we put a smile of people’s faces.” What a bloke. A brilliant game in awful conditions, compelling to the end. Much for Wales to be pleased about here but South Africa’s physicality and nous with the high kick told the more the game wore on. And you cannot expect to win a Test match with a scrum as utterly outgunned as the home side’s this evening. SOUTH AFRICA WIN IN CARDIFF FOR FIRST TIME SINCE 2013! 80+1mins. Game over times two. 80 mins. Wales do nothing but go scrappily and slowly backwards. They end up in their own 22 and are penalised at the breakdown. Game over. 79 mins. Wales have lineout from the Mostert being off his feet at the breakdown. The home side will have to win this, go from 60 metres out and somehow get a score.. 78 mins. Vermeulen takes it at the tail and the maul is on once more before the Wales pack manage to halt it. The ball is sprayed left and Wales are doing a decent job of containing the Bok attack. But, they are at the wrong end of the field and the wrong end of the match clock. 76 mins. Liam Williams can’t hold a high kick under pressure from Mapimpi and South Africa are back on the attack on the Wales 22. After a couple of phases Wales are penalised for not rolling away and South Africa spurn the points and kick to the corner, probably cackling as they do so. 74 mins. An increasingly tired Wales have a South African lineout to defend in their own 22. The visitors take it at the tail, set the maul, get the ball to the back and walk ominously forward. The pace increases and they are over the line allowing Marx to flop down and score. Elton Jantjies pulls the conversion horribly. Penalty or drop goal can still do it for Wales! 71 mins. Wales’s subs at prop have made no difference to the marmalising they are taking at the scrum. Another penalty is won and Steyn launches it into the Wales half Siya Kolisi off, replaced by Jasper Wiese Bradley Roberts replaces Elias for Wales. Wales Subs Gareth Davies for Tomos Williams Gareth Anscombe for Dan Biggar 68 mins. Biggar puts a kick in behind for Rees-Zammit to chase, but Reinach reaches it first. The replacement scrum-half runs it back thirty metre as Adams and Rees-Zammit get in each other’s way. Next phase Reinach puts a horrible sliced kick up that somehow pops to Etzebeth as it retunrs to earth who feeds Mapimpi to run in and score. But wait! The ref wants a look! At least two Springboks were offside from the kick. NO TRY! 65 mins. Adavantage was being played and when everyone calms down Biggar puts Wales back in front 64 mins. Lineout for Wales on the Springbok 22. The ball comes all the way left and as the ball reaches Liam WIlliams some absolute clanker invades the pitch immediately in front of the Scarlets man! Williams manages to go around him, but it clearly broke his stride and the defence covers. The defence may have covered anyway, but still.... 60 mins. Biggar tries a choke tackle, but the ref calls full tackle, which Biggar either didn’t hear or ignored. Either way the outcome is three points for the Boks from Pollard 57 mins. Another scrum, another waking night terror for the Wales scrum. Honestly, if I was SA I’d be deliberately dropping the ball forward at this stage as every scrum is a guaranteed penalty. Seb Davies is on for Aaron Wainwright 55 mins. Steyn puts his howitzer foot through it and the ball sails through the Welsh rain and then the posts. What a kick! 54 mins. Siya Kolisi has a run and bounces Tomos Williams’s tackle attempt off like they were zorbing but Kolisi was in a tank. It breaks down but there was advantage being played and Frans Steyn eyes it up from 54 (fifty four) metres. 50 mins. Wales throw all their souls at stopping the Bok charge and it works. The ball is dislodged, McNicholl booms it away and Kriel fumbles the boucing ball. When he finally gathers it he’s snagged by Tompkins and Ellis Jenkins wins yet another turnover at the breakdown. It’s forty metres out and Biggar hammers it through. 47 mins. Tomos Williams gets the ball in and out of the scrum as quickly as possible, but the clearance kick simply allows Frans Steyn to run the ball back forty metres. It’s worked left to Am who chips and chases before regathering and being hauled down; but South Africa are up to ten phases and in the Wales 22. In terrible news for the Wales scrum Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff and Vincent Koch replace Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi and Trevor Nyakane in the front row 45 mins. A strong defensive effort from Wales forces Pollard to cross-kick which the ever dependable Josh Adams fields in the air, secures and allows Tomos Williams to clear. Rhys Carre is out of the bin, Ellis Jenkins is back on and Wyn Jones goes off (for now) 43 mins. Biggar spills his attempt to catch a towering Steyn bomb and Wales have another nightmarish scrum to face, this time a man down. Wyn Jones is swapped with Jenkins with Carre still in the bin. It makes no difference as the red scrum goes backwards like wheelie bin full of shame being pushed downhill. Penalty South Africa. Twitter sensation Ox Nche is out of the bin as Pollard gets us back underway. Half time musings A fair reflection on the scoreboard of the game so far. The deluge from above means this isn’t going to be Super Rugby style and Wales have put together the best of what could be recognised as phased play. Attacking breakdown discipline, stemming form poor organisation of attacking patters is letting the home side down. The frustrating thing is this was an issue last week that appears to have endured in spite of other problems - the lineout and kick chase - being fixed. South Africa look stronger in the scrum and maul and Wales would do well to keep the ball moving and in play as much as possible. As well as fixing the breakdown, obviously. PEEEP! A frantic, interesting if not always quality half comes to an end. 40+1 mins. Wales again suffer for slight lethargy in clearing out their own rucks as Kolisi gets his hands on it. Pollard points at the post and caresses the ball over. 39 mins. Josh Adams covers a deep De Allende kick and munts it miles up the touchline where is take one bounce in play and spurts out. He’s hit that 50 metres in about a six-foot corridor. A kick for the scrapbook. 37 mins. South Africa spray the ball wide from the lineout this time and on the second phase Ellis Jenkins flies out and intercepts the pass. He’s stopped by a high tackle and Biggar has a penalty kick to clear the ball into the South Africa half. 36 mins. Another catch and drive from South African is stopped illegally, this time by Carre creeping around the side. It’s kickable for Pollard, but they go to the corner given the joy they are having with the maul 34 mins. De Allende steps inside and away from Tompkins far too easily - that was a full revolving door job. South Africa are up into the Wales 22 but more good work from the red defence wins the ball back as they cover a Pollard grubber kick. 32 mins. It was in range and Biggar slotted it. 32 mins. Ten phases of possession from Wales works the Springbok defence hard and indiscipline creeps in for the visitors. Ox Nche firstly hits Tompkins high with a swinging arm but the ref says he was going for the bobbling ball so no foul play. While advantage rolls on, Nche then blocks a Tompkins kick-chase, which the ref agrees is an issue. Penalty and yellow card due to persistent team infringement. 30 mins. Wainwright catches the restart safely and this allows Wales to execute a solid exit drill via a Tomos Williams box-kick. That’s the first time in the match either side have received restart correctly since the kick-off, which says much about what’s been going on. 27 mins. Lineout for Wales on the Bok 22 is won cleanly and fired into midfield before De Allende tackles Jon Davies but is pinged for not releasing afterwards. It’s bang in front and Biggar doesn’t miss those. 24 mins. The Springbok pack power is growing ominous. From the lineout they set up the maul and Wales can do nothing but pull it down as it gets rolling; Adam Beard the guilty man. SA go back to the corner and Wales repel the maul legally this time. The ball comes out to to the backs and the returning Ellis Jenkins wins a crucial turnover at the breakdown. Outstanding work from the blind-side. 21 mins. Wales have good position with the ball on the SA ten metre line, but the home team’s attack is predictable and has too many one-up runners. And that is absolute manna for the Bok defence who again win a breakdown penalty. At the lineout they win another one for Wales driving early and Pollard puts them right into the Wales 22. Frans Steyn is on for the Boks with Damian Willemse off for an HIA assessment. 18 mins. Hmmm. The Wales pack holds for about ten seconds and then folds like a concertina then splinters as South Africa have a shove. Penalty, which Pollard gobbles up. 16 mins. First scrum of the game is a Bok one in the Wales half; the first test for Rhys Carre at loose-head whose scrummaging is, er, not best. 14 mins. Anything Wales can do is matched by South Africa as the visitors immediately infringe from the kick-off. On the advantage Biggar creams a pinpoint cross-kick to Rees-Zammit who is above Mapimpi but the slippery ball guns through his grip and into touch. So close! Biggar tees the ball up again and establishes his team’s lead once more. 11 mins. In similar scenes to the NZ match, Wales get some points and immediately allow the opposition back in. Ellis Jenkins is penalised in front and Pollard brings it level from 30 metres. 9 mins. Wales win a lineout in the opposition 22, which is already a marked improvement on last week. After few phases Tompkins fires a long pass to Rees-Zammit who steps Mapimpi, but as he drives for the line he’s engulfed by two Bok scramble defenders. Advantage was being played and Biggar tees it up and puts Wales ahead. A deserved lead, just about. 6 mins. Wales are doing OK in winning possession, but their use of it presently has a lot of the shovelling the proverbial about it. Slow passes, forced left and right that allows the SA blitz defence to simply walk into the line an disrupt. But there’s some clumsly breakdown action from the Boks and then they stay offside to give Wales a penalty. Biggar sends it into the corner. 3 mins. The first period of possession for Wales comes to an end as their laboured midfield passing allows Am to clamp on the isolated Tompkins to steal the ball. The Boks can do little with it and there’s some scrappy back and forth with the ball by both teams. 1 min. Dan Biggar has the ball and he drop-punts it deep. Willemse gathers it securely and Hershel Jantjies clears. All the usual pointless pyrotechnics and basic rock soundtrack as Wales take the field. The teams line up for the anthems and give it plenty. It’s honking down with rain in Cardiff. Not sure who this works out better for. Plants probably. Pre match reading Let me know what you think either on email or tweet. I’ll take anything, including the usual insults. Pivac welcomes the availability of Louis Rees-Zammit, Nick Tompkins and Dan Biggar by slotting them straight into the starting line-up. Rhys Carré is into start at loose-head while Will Rowlands and Ellis Jenkins - back from his huge injury lay-off - replace the injured AWJ and Ross Moriarty. The subs might as well be sitting on a dry-stone wall, such is the cobbled together nature of the forwards on it in particular. South Africa make four changes to the team that beat NZ a few weeks back. Damian Willemse, Jesse Kriel (on the wing?!) and Herschel Jantjies all start while Cobus Reinach will join from the bench. Wales: Johnny McNicholl; Louis Rees-Zammit, Jonathan Davies (captain), Nick Tompkins, Josh Adams; Dan Biggar, Tomos Williams; Rhys Carré, Ryan Elias, Tomas Francis, Will Rowlands, Adam Beard, Ellis Jenkins, Taine Basham, Aaron Wainwright. Replacements: Bradley Roberts, Wyn Jones, WillGriff John, Ben Carter, Seb Davies, Gareth Davies, Gareth Anscombe, Liam Williams. South Africa: Damian Willemse; Jesse Kriel, Lukhanyo Am, Damian de Allende, Makazole Mapimpi; Handré Pollard, Herschel Jantjies; Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi, Trevor Nyakane, Eben Etzebeth, Lood de Jager, Siya Kolisi (captain), Kwagga Smith, Duane Vermeulen. Replacements: Malcolm Marx, Steven Kitshoff, Vincent Koch, Franco Mostert, Jasper Wiese, Cobus Reinach, Elton Jantjies, Frans Steyn. In the latest installment of what I presume must be the Welsh Rugby Union enjoying making life difficult for their national team, Wales follow up last week’s tuning against the best team in the world by this week facing the second best. No easing your way into the Autumn like England, Ireland and Scotland, I’m afraid the WRU have a hotel to pay for. Wayne Pivac will have a few more players to pick from this time around, although the nett effect is arguably evens given the injuries sustained by Alun-Wyn Jones and Ross Moriarty against New Zealand. The home side can take some comfort from the fact that South Africa have not won in Cardiff since 2013; the Southern Hemisphere hoodoo does not appear to have the power of the Kiwis and the Wallabies here. But all of those home Welsh victories were under the Gatland regime and South Africa are a different outfit to the class of 2013-2018.The allegations of systematic racism made against Yorkshire County Cricket Club by Azeem Rafiq first surfaced in August 2020. Rafiq gave a wide-ranging interview to the Wisden journalist Taha Hashim, ostensibly about his work providing free meals for key workers during the pandemic. But he also spoke about the racism he experienced at Yorkshire, including an “openly racist” captain, a dressing room in which racist comments were regarded as humorous, and a culture in which complaints about racist behaviour were ignored and turned against him. Yorkshire refused to comment. And you wonder, 15 months on, how they might reflect on that decision after a week that has seen English cricket’s most successful county and best-known club ripped apart, deserted by sponsors, banned from hosting international cricket and facing financial implosion. Perhaps, on balance, they should probably have said a little something. It might have saved them a good deal of strife in the long run. Instead, as we know, the club were finally prodded into action weeks later, after further accusations were made by Rafiq in an interview with the far larger ESPNCricinfo website. An investigation was halfheartedly launched. Some lukewarm platitudes were issued about there being no place for discrimination in cricket. In among all this were boasts about how much progress Yorkshire had made on diversity issues, and about how the club had made Rafiq the first ever British south Asian (temporary) captain of their Twenty20 side. Meanwhile, behind the scenes, a counter-assault was being launched. Rafiq received further abuse on social media. His motives were questioned, his character was impugned. An influential local league chairman wrote a blog accusing Rafiq of being “discourteous, disrespectful and very difficult”, adding: “As ye sow, so shall ye reap.” The investigation into Rafiq’s claims dragged on past Christmas, into 2021, through spring and summer, with almost no public communication and no indication of when the report would be released, if at all. (It has still not been made public.) All this has long been in the public domain. Rafiq’s accusations have been known about and discussed within the game for more than a year. The culture at Yorkshire has been an open secret for far longer. And so the real point of interest here is how the story has only blown up now, and with such staggering speed that sponsors have been persuaded to flee, former players such as Michael Vaughan and Andrew Gale have been implicated, members of the cabinet have been moved to offer their comment and the BBC’s Question Time was debating on Thursday night whether the P-word was racist or not. The answers should comfort none of us. Part of the reason this story developed so quickly is the attention-deficient nature of the news cycle. Individuals are targeted; new revelations emerge from the undergrowth; back pages and news schedules are cleared; the usual talking heads are wheeled out. And even if there is a certain welcome sensation of purgation to the current moment, of truths finally being divulged and individuals receiving their long-awaited just desserts, then it comes with a reminder that a storm blowing into town with devastating speed often leaves again just as quickly. It is revealing, for example, that it was the Daily Mail and the Telegraph who first disclosed that the senior player named in the report as using the P-word to Rafiq was the former England batsman Gary Ballance. This is, after all, where the rightwing press is most comfortable operating: with a laser-focus on exposing and isolating errant individuals rather than interrogating systems and structures of power (which in large part their readers are quite happy to leave untouched). Even though Rafiq made it clear from the start of the process that he was not interested in claiming scalps, so much of the media’s energy has nevertheless been trained in this direction: who might resign next, who said what to whom. Clearly there are individuals in this case who need to go away and do some thinking. Ballance’s cricket career is hanging by a thread. Vaughan has been relieved of his BBC presenting duties for now. The Yorkshire chairman, Roger Hutton, has resigned, telling the BBC that he “never personally met anyone at Yorkshire in the 18 months that I was there who I consider a racist”. The positions of Gale as the head coach and Martyn Moxon as the director of cricket should have been untenable long ago. But racist behaviour does not simply occur in a vacuum, and perhaps the ultimate lesson here is how many of our institutions are indicted: the education system that sent these individuals out into the world utterly ill-equipped for modern society, the legal system that advised Yorkshire not to take any disciplinary action against Ballance, the ECB whose failure to exercise any leverage whatsoever on Yorkshire until this week again demonstrates that from the start it has seen this as primarily a PR problem rather than a moral issue. And yes: the media, too. Perhaps the best expression of the power disparities at work here is the fact that on Thursday Vaughan was given a 1,000-word article in the Telegraph to put his side of the story and protest his innocence of the charges made against him. Meanwhile, for years people such as Rafiq, Michael Carberry, John Holder and Ismail Dawood have been trying to find an audience who will listen to their stories, denied the sort of free (indeed, well-paid) platform that Vaughan and his ilk enjoy by right. In short, we all need to do better here. The same structures that allowed Rafiq’s plight to go unheeded for so long are still in place. The corporate imperatives that allowed the ECB to sit on its hands for more than a year remain unchallenged. On traditional and social media, allegations and victims of racism continue to be ignored, contested, folded into snackable culture-war content. And what of Yorkshire? Well, as a wise man once said: as ye sow, so shall ye reap.The problem with any discussion of Marcelo Bielsa is the tendency immediately to speak in grand broadbrush terms; everybody already knows what they think about him. It’s the curse of our age that positions so rapidly become entrenched, even when it comes to the ostensibly trivial issue of how football should be played. Nobody can ever simply question the way Ole Gunnar Solskjær structures a midfield or his organisation of the press or ask whether the inclusion of Cristiano Ronaldo might have made those issues worse, without immediately being cast as anti-Ole or anti-Manchester United, revelling in every goal conceded. It feels as though football exported a particularly blinkered tribalism to wider culture and has since accepted it back with added paranoia and conspiracy theory. (The most absurd recent example is the idea that to be sickened by Saudi human rights abuses is to participate in a decades-long hate campaign against the city of Newcastle. It’s difficult, isn’t it? Is it possible to be anti-torture without also being anti-Geordie?) But, Bielsa. He has divided people everywhere he has been, which is perhaps inevitable given his idiosyncratic and messianic nature. On the one hand, the Argentinian is extremely down-to-earth, drinking coffee in Costa, eating in a local Italian restaurant, dressing in a club tracksuit, apparently unconcerned by anything outside football – and yet simultaneously extremely sensitive to the sport’s role in society and the importance clubs play in the local community. There is an integrity and a humility to him. But at the same time, he is stubborn and demanding, idealistic and so sure of his own mind that he insists on, for instance, the training ground being redesigned to his specifications. It’s easy to see why Leeds fans love him. Not only did he take them back to the Premier League after a 16-year absence, but he has given them a style and an identity. It’s not so much that he has made football fun, although he has certainly done that, as that he has given Leeds a team of which they can be proud. They are not the first fans to feel that way about him. In 2015, four years after he had left the Chile job, I had to have some passport photos taken in Santiago. It turned out Bielsa had once used the shop I went to and so three walls of the studio were covered in tiny pictures of him, thousands of Bielsas staring at you like being trapped in the poster for Being John Malkovich. Why? “Because he is Bielsa.” But that level of devotion makes criticism difficult. The issue of fatigue dominated his first two seasons in the Championship. Leeds fans hated the suggestion that burnout had caused them to miss the automatic slots in his first season and even more the idea that the Covid shutdown facilitated promotion in his second. The way Leeds finished last season, with one defeat in their final 11 games, would suggest they had a point. Yet the question was relevant: given Bielsa’s previous history, at Newell’s Old Boys and Marseille in particular, why was burnout not a factor? How has he adapted to avoid it? Sensitivities around the question mean it has never really been answered. Set against that are those who see Bielsa as a hipster affectation, those frustrated by his reluctance or inability to conduct post-match interviews in the familiar English cliches, those who wonder just how great a manager can be when in 30 years he has won three Argentinian championships, Olympic gold and promotion with Leeds. Such is the factionalism of the modern world, Leeds fans probably aren’t wrong to believe that there are some who would like him to fail. Which brings us to this season. Leeds went into the weekend fourth bottom of the Premier League, having won two of their first 10 games. They have failed to beat Burnley and Newcastle. This season looks like being a struggle against relegation. And that has led to claims that Bielsa has been worked out. The past couple of weeks have even brought wild suggestions that the 66-year-old should be replaced – ludicrous, perhaps, but serious enough for the club owner, Andrea Radrizzani, to feel the need to rebuff them after last Sunday’s win at Norwich. Part of the problem is another recurring theme of the age, the need for constant growth or expansion. Having finished ninth last season, with the highest points total for a promoted side in two decades, where, realistically, was there for Leeds to go? Their wage bill remains one of the five lowest in the division (although that may change, bringing its own pressures, if the transfer of shares from Radrizzani to 49ers Enterprises goes on). Leicester, who Leeds face on Sunday, have faced a similar problem: just because they have finished fifth in the past two seasons doesn’t mean that anything less than that is somehow failure. An extraordinary achievement one season shouldn’t make that the new par. Where Leicester and Leeds have suffered this season is with injuries. Leeds are still without Patrick Bamford, Luke Ayling and Robin Koch, but have also been without Kalvin Phillips, Raphinha and Junior Firpo at times and that has had an effect. The stereotypical criticism of a Bielsa side is that they are too attacking, but this season the problem has been at the other end: 10 goals in 10 games; to have conceded 17, eight of them in two games, is unremarkable. As players return – and if Joe Gelhardt is as exciting as he appeared against Wolves – Leeds probably will rally. But it’s not unreasonable at this stage to raise doubts. After all, Bielsa is an exhausting figure and this is already the longest he has spent at any one club. It has not been a great start to the season and he is not beyond reproach; the tendency to divide everybody into Frauds or Goats is corrosive to proper discussion. But whatever happens in the rest of this season, Bielsa has been brilliant for Leeds and his time at the club a rare joy in a world that feels increasingly sick.The continuing racism scandal at Yorkshire County Cricket Club intensified this weekend with protests outside the ground on Saturday and claims staff have received death threats. The club was plunged into turmoil last week after a report carried out into a culture of racism described the use of the p-slur against former Yorkshire captain Azeem Rafiq as “banter” that, it said, warranted no further action. A protest outside the stadium in Headingley on Saturday saw cricket fans, including Rafiq’s young son, sister and father, call for the release of Yorkshire CCC’s full report and an end to racism in cricket. As heavy rain lashed down on the gathered protesters, Rafiq’s father held a homemade sign that read “Racism is not banter”. Addressing the crowd, Leeds University lecturer Dr Abdul-Bashid Shaikh said: “We call upon Yorkshire CCC to do the right thing and acknowledge that racism exists and it has fallen short of the standards we expect from such a prestigious club.” He called for Yorkshire to take “concrete steps” to eliminate institutional racism. Mohammed Patel, a human rights lawyer who organised the protest, told the Observer: “Yorkshire County Cricket Club failed in their duty. No doubt about it. To drag an ex-player through everything that he has endured, to the brink of him thinking of taking his own life, there’s no excuse for that. That’s why everyone is here today.” Rafiq, who played for Yorkshire for two spells between 2008 and 2018, has said he was left feeling suicidal after his treatment by fellow players and a failure to investigate complaints of racism by the Yorkshire CCC board. On Thursday night the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) suspended all internationals and other big games at Yorkshire’s ground and the club’s main sponsors withdrew their support after a public backlash. The former England batsman Mark Ramprakash called for Yorkshire CCC to be “dragged into 2021” after what he said was a “disappointing” reaction to accusations of racism. Ramprakash told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday: “The attitudes of the board show … a lack of contrition and a lack of understanding of the gravity of what happened. That is what is so disappointing.” A source at the club said that extra security has now been brought in to protect staff working at the cricket ground after some of them received death threats. It is not suggested any of the protesters were involved. Staff said Friday’s Yorkshire CCC board meeting was held over Zoom, instead of in person, for security reasons and that the majority of staff have been told to work from home if possible for the foreseeable future. The club also took down the staff directory from its website on Friday. The events come in the face of anger from cricket fans in Yorkshire over what many see as blatant attempts by the club to sweep the problem of systemic racism under the carpet. The report, which took 12 months to complete and remains unpublished, upheld seven of Rafiq’s 43 allegations and accepted he had faced “racial harassment and bullying”. Yorkshire announced last week that no current employees would face action as a result. Rafiq will give evidence to parliament’s digital, culture, media and sport select committee on 16 November. A second player, Rana Naved-ul-Hasan, has said he too had experienced “systematic taunting” and racism at Yorkshire and an additional investigation at the club is now taking place into claims by another unnamed Asian player that he suffered racism and was urinated on by another player. The club’s chairman, Roger Hutton, who was appointed in April 2020, stood down on Friday along with two other board members. In interviews, he accused the ECB of failing to act and not providing necessary support to Yorkshire while it attempted to investigate the racism claims. The ECB has now launched its own investigation to decide whether further sanctions need to be taken. On Friday evening it emerged the Equality and Human Rights Commission had also made contact with Yorkshire requesting access to the full independent report into Rafiq’s claims and was considering whether or not to pursue action against the club. Hutton has been replaced by Kamlesh Patel, who said there was “much work to do” to redress the damage caused by the botched investigation. After his appointment, Lord Patel spoke out about how he had experienced “loads” of racism growing up in Bradford and playing cricket, particularly the use of the p-slur. “When I was a boy I developed into a very fast runner,” he said in an interview with ESPNcricinfo. “Do you know why? Because gangs of skinheads used to delight in what they called ‘Paki-bashing’ and you either learned to run or you took a beating. “So that word – the ‘Paki’ word – has real meaning for me. I don’t need to be told it’s not banter.” Having trained as a social worker, Patel chairs Social Work England and is a former chair of the Mental Health Act Commission. Large sponsors such as Nike, Emerald group and Yorkshire Tea withdrew their support for the club with immediate effect. Tetley’s brewery and David Lloyd Clubs said they would not renew their contracts with Yorkshire, while Leeds Beckett University, which teaches at the ground, pulled its branding from Yorkshire CCC’s website. Ripples from the allegations have hit Michael Vaughan, who was removed by the BBC from Radio 5 live’s The Tuffers and Vaughan Cricket Show on Monday after two cricketers said they heard the former England captain make racist comments while playing for Yorkshire in 2009. The decision came after Vaughan, who has worked as an expert summariser and analyst on Test Match Special for 12 years, was accused of telling three players of Asian descent that there were “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it” before a county match in Nottingham. Yorkshire CCC did not respond to requests for comment. Vaughan strongly denies allegations of racism.The row over Tory sleaze reached new heights on Saturday night as MPs demanded details of any lobbying by Owen Paterson of government ministers on behalf of a company that won almost £500m of Covid-19 related contracts last year. The crisis facing Boris Johnson also worsened after the former Tory prime minister, Sir John Major, described his successor’s attempts to block Paterson’s suspension from parliament last week for breaching paid advocacy rules as “shameful”. A new Opinium poll for the Observer shows ratings for Johnson and his party have slumped dramatically since last weekend, with the prime minister’s personal approval figures hitting their lowest ever level. With Tory MPs already fearing their party is regaining its reputation for financial impropriety after last week’s chaotic events involving Paterson, all the main opposition parties turned up the pressure. Labour, the SNP, the Liberal Democrats and the Green party all switched their focus to the award of pandemic contracts, demanding investigations by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, or the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, into Paterson’s contacts with ministers during the pandemic. Paterson, who announced his resignation as an MP last week, was paid more than £8,000 a month for 16 hours’ consultancy work by Randox Laboratories, until he resigned from the role on Friday. Randox was awarded two Covid testing contracts last year worth nearly £480m without the normal competition. Government officials cited the urgency of the pandemic as grounds for not advertising the contracts. The company insists Paterson “played no role in securing any Randox contract”, but on 9 April last year the MP had a telephone meeting with the firm and Lord Bethell, then a health minister, about Covid testing. On Saturday, Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said she had written to Case demanding “the publication of all correspondence and details of all meetings between ministers and the businesses that were paying Mr Paterson to lobby on their behalf”. The Observer has been told that before Paterson resigned as an MP on Thursday, Conservative whips understood that Stone was seriously considering launching an investigation into the former Northern Ireland secretary’s lobbying of ministers since the pandemic began. She is also believed to be considering an inquiry into the controversy over the prime minister’s refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. Over the coming days, the opposition parties are determined to raise the pressure. Rayner said: “It is particularly brazen that Randox were awarded £347m of taxpayers’ money after already failing to deliver on a previous contract that resulted in the recall of 750,000 unsafe testing kits and care homes being left without regular testing. Ministers need to set out how they will claw back taxpayers’ money that was wasted on duff PPE and failed testing contracts.” The SNP leader, Ian Blackford, said he had also written to the cabinet secretary demanding “full transparency about Paterson’s lobbying, particularly relating to Covid-19 contracts involving huge sums of money”, while the Lib Dem chief whip, Wendy Chamberlain, called for “a full and thorough investigation by the standards commissioner” into the links between Paterson, Randox and the former health secretary, Matt Hancock. The Lib Dems have secured a three-hour debate on the issue on Monday in which the way Covid contracts were awarded will be central. The latest Opinium poll suggests the sleaze rows are hitting the Conservatives. The Tory lead has fallen to just one point, from five points a week ago, while Johnson’s personal rating has dropped to -20 from -16 last week, passing a previous low of -18 recorded a month ago. There has also been a significant shift in views of who would make the best prime minister. An 11-point lead for Johnson last week has shrunk to just two points. Johnson is regarded as the best candidate by 28% of voters, down five, with the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, on 26%, up four. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Major was scathing about Johnson’s government, the damage it was doing to the UK’s reputation, and the way it treated parliament. Referring to efforts to block Paterson’s suspension, Major said: “I think the way the government handled that was shameful, wrong and unworthy of this or indeed any government. It also had the effect of trashing the reputation of parliament.” He added: “There is a general whiff of ‘we are the masters now’ about their behaviour. I’m afraid that the government, with their over-large majority, do tend to treat parliament with contempt. And if that continues, it will end badly.” Writing in the Observer, the shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, also takes aim at the business secretary over his suggestions last week that Stone should consider her position because of the way she conducted her inquiry into Paterson’s lobbying activities prior to February last year. “Kwasi Kwarteng’s attempt to bully Kathryn Stone out of her job was yet another breach of the ministerial code, and the latest example of the Tories’ slide into corruption and moral bankruptcy. Boris Johnson has already had multiple run-ins with the standards commissioner. It is clear he simply wants revenge and impunity from the rule of law,” he wrote. “This level of flagrant norm-shattering and proud lawbreaking demands more than tut-tutting. That’s why we need the adviser on ministerial interests to launch an inquiry into Mr Kwarteng’s threats. And it is why Labour has urged the standards commissioner to open an investigation into the prime minister over the financing of the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat.”It was hardly the grandest of entrances but Eddie Howe probably preferred that. Just as Newcastle’s players were attempting to win a first Premier League match of the season at the 11th time of asking, the man tasked with reviving their fortunes emerged from an executive box at Brighton’s Amex Stadium and stepped into the unknown. Clasping an overcoat in one hand and with the other shoved nervously in his pocket as he descended the stairs behind Amanda Staveley, Newcastle’s director and minority stakeholder, the 43-year-old quickly took his seat in the front row next to former assistant Jason Tindall, who is expected to join him at St James’ Park. Earlier in the day, rumours had been swirling that a disagreement over Howe’s backroom staff could present another last-minute hitch to the search for Steve Bruce’s successor. Having already blown the chance of landing Unai Emery from Villarreal, missing out on their second choice would not have been a good look for Staveley and the club’s new Saudi Arabian owners. Some reports had even claimed Emery would be in charge for this match until he decided against returning to England in favour of staying with the club he led to the Europa League last season against all odds. In comparison, a manager who has never finished higher than ninth in the Premier League may seem like a downgrade but Staveley and co are gambling that Howe is exactly what is needed to revive a group of players badly struggling for direction. Norwich’s victory at Brentford meant Newcastle were bottom of the table at kick-off but perhaps boosted by the presence of their manager-in-waiting in the stands, they made an encouraging start here and could have gone ahead had Callum Wilson been more alert to an early chance. It did not last long, however, as Brighton assumed control in midfield and deservedly took the lead from the spot. Howe and Tindall were captured deep in conversation – it is always a good idea to seem keen when your new boss is sitting next to you. As the game drifted towards half-time a muted chant of “attack, attack, attack” came from the away fans behind the goal but there was no real intent from the side selected by Graeme Jones. The club’s owners have guaranteed Newcastle’s caretaker manager will stay in a job whatever happened during his brief spell in charge, although there has been not much evidence of improvement in the three matches since he took over from Bruce despite picking up two points on the road. Jones was full of praise for Howe earlier in the week having been part of Tindall’s staff at Bournemouth last season when he replaced his former boss following the club’s relegation in 2020, describing their approach as “high-tempo attacking football with momentum”. With two more of Howe’s lieutenants, Stephen Purches and Simon Weatherstone, getting the old band back together on Tyneside they will be expected to implement the same methods that took their old club from the brink of relegation out of the Football League to the Premier League during eight years on the south coast. While Bournemouth never conceded fewer than 61 goals in any of Howe’s five seasons in the top flight, it is at the other end of the pitch that has been the major issue at Newcastle for some time and his relationship with Wilson could be vital to their short-term aspirations. Asked while both were still at Bournemouth to describe the manager who signed him from Coventry in 2014 in one word, the England striker opted for “tactical”, and his first task will be to come up with a plan for this Newcastle side. Ryan Fraser – who signed a lucrative five-year contract last September – could be another to benefit from a reunion with his former manager, although Howe admitted to feeling let down after the Scotland forward refused a short-term extension on the south coast to see out the remainder of the Covid-19 affected 2019-20 season that ended in relegation. Howe could afford to smile when yet another former Bournemouth player in the form of Matt Ritchie swung in the cross that led to Isaac Hayden’s surprise equaliser that was celebrated with gusto by Jones on the touchline. But as Newcastle’s wait for victory goes on another week, he will know the hard work starts now.Valtteri Bottas proved that he and Mercedes can never be written off after claiming a remarkable pole position for the Mexican Grand Prix. The Finn was immaculate at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez, beating Lewis Hamilton into second and securing a Mercedes one-two that had seemed unfeasible earlier in the weekend. Hamilton’s title rival Max Verstappen could manage only third with his teammate Sergio Pérez in fourth as Red Bull were left licking their wounds. Verstappen and Red Bull had expected to be on top in Mexico, a feeling that had been reinforced by their strong form all weekend. Yet it was Bottas and Hamilton who delivered with calm assurance, Bottas claiming he could not have done any better. “It was an awesome lap,” he said. “I think the first run in Q3 was one of my best laps.” Hamilton confirmed that the result was beyond their expectations. “To lockout the front row is pretty special,” he said. “Once we got to qualifying, all of a sudden we had better pace. I’m as shocked as everyone.” Bottas was clinical in delivering the perfect lap at the sharp end of qualifying, to which Red Bull had no answer. The margins were small but enough to once more illustrate that the world champions remain on top of their game even when seemingly outgunned. To put the achievement in perspective, Hamilton and Bottas had been over half a second behind a Red Bull one-two in final practice. Bottas will, however, almost certainly face team orders in Hamilton’s favour in Sunday’s race should it benefit the world champion in the title fight. Verstappen has a 12-point advantage over Hamilton with five races remaining. On the decisive runs it was Bottas who set the benchmark on the first hot laps with a time of 1min 15.875sec. Hamilton was second, just over one-tenth in arrears, but Verstappen was a full three-tenths back. Verstappen’s Red Bull had a crack in its rear wing, such that the team had to apply tape to it, but nonetheless he was no match for the Finn. As the track reached its peak grip for the final laps Verstappen had to back off when Pérez and Yuki Tsunoda both went off in front of him but he was already more than three-tenths slower than the time set by Bottas. Neither Bottas or Hamilton went quicker but the pair had already secured a most unlikely one-two. Bottas’s lap had been inch-perfect through turn seven to the line, Mercedes crucially finding pace through the sweeping quicker corners and then twisting stadium section where they had previously been unable to match Red Bull on Saturday. Pierre Gasly was in fifth for AlphaTauri and Carlos Sainz and Charles Leclerc in sixth and eighth for Ferrari. Daniel Ricciardo was in seventh for McLaren, Lando Norris was in 10th for McLaren but will start from 18th after the team opted to fit a new power unit for the race, beyond the three the regulations stipulate. Alpine’s Esteban Ocon also did so and qualified in 15th but will start in 19th. George Russell was in 13th for Williams but will take a penalty for having to fit a new gearbox, beyond the team’s allocation, due to a fault and he will start in 16th. Sebastian Vettel was in 11th for Aston Martin and Kimi Räikkönen and Antonio Giovinazzi were in 12th and 14th for Alfa Romeo. Lance Stroll crashed out in Q1 for Aston Martin and will start in 20th. Tsunoda was in ninth for AlphaTauri and will start from 17th with penalties for having exceeded his allocation of power unit parts. Fernando Alonso was in 16th for Alpine and Nicholas Latifi in 17th for Williams. Mick Schumacher and Nikita Mazepin were in 18th and 19th for Haas.Tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets of Glasgow on Saturday to demand stronger climate action from world leaders as the climate crisis summit reached its halfway stage. Protests were also held in London and other parts of Britain. There were rallies in South Korea, Indonesia, the Netherlands and France. Environmental groups, charities, climate activists, trade unionists and indigenous people all joined the Glasgow march in heavy rain. Extinction Rebellion activists dressed as Ghostbusters while another group, Scientist Rebellion – wearing white lab coats – blocked King George V bridge, one of the city’s busiest routes. Organisers claimed more than 100,000 people turned up for the march, which began in Kelvingrove Park in the city’s west end and finished at Glasgow Green in the east. Lucy Bell, who works for the Vegan Kind, an online vegan supermarket based in Rutherglen, said: “There are so many people here from different backgrounds. It’s easy to get discouraged by the negotiations going on behind closed doors, but I’m feeling optimistic.”Cop26 delegates were also scattered among the huge crowds. Tracy Sonny, 37, a negotiator from Botswana, said he was taking part to show solidarity and to call for more unity. “We need to see more political will and a change in mindset ... we’re already feeling the impact of climate change; we need to respond now, people are drowning,” he said.The mood was “celebratory, positive and punchy”, according to Mary Martin from Coatbridge. She was “walking the walk”, she said, shivering against the strong wind. As for the progress of the climate talks, “I’m holding my breath,” she said. In London, thousands of protesters, including trade unionists, refugee rights groups, students and environmentalists, marched from the Bank of England to Trafalgar Square, banging steel drums, chanting “one solution” and waving Extinction Rebellion banners reading “tell the truth”. Cop26 delegates focused on nature yesterday, with a slew of pledges being made by UK supermarkets, which promised to halve their impact on the natural world. Partnerships between developed and developing countries to conserve biodiversity and initiatives to promote sustainable agriculture were announced, while the governments of 26 countries including India, Germany, Australia, Ghana and Vietnam set out new commitments to make their farming policies less polluting. They also agreed to invest in scientific research on how to protect food supplies against the effects of the climate crisis. “We are going low-carbon and high-nature,” Tony Juniper, chair of Natural England, said. “Sometimes there has been a sense of a trade-off, trying to sacrifice nature while going low-carbon. They were seen as separate, but there is a growing body of evidence showing people how you can do both.”Juniper pointed to recent reviews that have shown how clean water, clean air, food and a healthy environment were not valued adequately under current economic systems. “Now we are having a different conversation about nature – we can see the economic necessity, the social necessity of protecting nature, as well as the ethical and moral drivers.” Developing countries coming to Glasgow could draw a lesson from the scars of industrialisation all around the UK, in the pollution of upland areas, the despoliation of forests and other natural habitats, and the toxic legacy of old mines, Juniper added. “They can leapfrog these dirtiest stages of development we went through and go directly to sustainable development.”He also rejected the idea that moving to a low-carbon lifestyle would involve sacrifice. “The way I would look at it is not to think about sacrifice but about gain. We gain human health, wellbeing, social cohesion. We gain jobs and peace and security.” The actor Idris Elba warned policymakers and the media that they risked ignoring a continent “that is central to the solution” of climate change if they did not include African voices in public debate. The star of The Wire and Luther, accompanied by his wife Sabrina, joined a panel on sustainable food production at the climate talks. The couple are both goodwill ambassadors for the UN’s International Fund for Agricultural Development. Also present was Ugandan climate activist Vanessa Nakate. Asked why it was important that the voices of people of colour are heard as the world attempts to decarbonise food production, Elba replied: “I think Sabrina and I stand here as human beings first, but absolutely, yes, it is important for us as proud Africans to be a part of this debate.” As the conference enters its final week, Boris Johnson urged delegates “to drive for the line”. “We have seen nations bring ambition and action to help limit rising temperatures, with new pledges to cut carbon and methane emissions, end deforestation, phase out coal and provide more finance to countries most vulnerable to climate change,” he said. “But we cannot underestimate the task at hand to keep 1.5C alive. Countries must come back to the table this week ready to make the bold compromises and ambitious commitments.” Additional reporting by Jonathan Watts, Matthew Taylor and Weronika StrzyżyńskaGareth Southgate said he was surprised to be on the receiving end of barbed comments from Jürgen Klopp regarding his deployment of Liverpool players, particularly given he professes to enjoy a good working relationship with his counterpart. Last month, Klopp questioned the omission of Joe Gomez from Southgate’s squad, pointing out that a lack of top-flight football this season had not prevented John Stones from being selected. “Obviously there’s a special thing for Mr Stones,” Klopp said, while he was also critical of Trent Alexander-Arnold’s use in midfield against Andorra in September. “Why would you make the best right-back in the world a midfielder? I don’t understand that really,” he said. “I don’t quite know why he keeps having a swing, you’d have to ask him,” Southgate said. “I think we’ve always got on reasonably well. I’ve noticed quite a few articles and quite a few comments, which is always interesting to see.” Southgate was asked whether it was important to forge strong bonds with club managers but suggested the industry’s volatility does not make that straightforward. “They come and go pretty quickly so it’s important to have a good relationship somewhere in the clubs, but maybe the managers [aren’t] the priority because it’s very transient,” he said. “I don’t think that will be the case with the Liverpool manager, by the way. I’ve got no problem with Jürgen at all. You’d have to ask him why he’s made the comments he has.” Alexander-Arnold has been selected for the squad to face Albania and San Marino over the coming international break but Gomez, who has not started a league game in 2021-22, again misses out. One manager Southgate expects to see more of in the near future is Antonio Conte, who has returned to the Premier League with Spurs and is charged with restoring Harry Kane to his best form. Only one of the England captain’s seven club goals this season has come in the league in the fallout from his failed attempt to depart in pre-season, and Southgate hopes Conte’s influence can set him back on course. “Now there’s an opportunity for Harry to be able to put everything behind him,” he said. “He announced he wanted to stay. Now there’s a change of manager, I think there’s a fresh start for him. That will be a good stimulus for him.” Southgate rejected any suggestion the thought of dropping Kane could have crossed his mind. “Harry has 41 goals in 65 internationals and we need to win a game of football,” he said. “There’s nobody we trust more if a chance drops to him than Harry Kane. He’s the outstanding centre-forward of his generation. “I’m sure the whole thing has been an experience that has been difficult. He’s ended up, understandably, with an adverse reaction from some of the fans there. So he’s had to deal with a lot of unintentional consequences of the possible move in the summer. Antonio coming in is probably a good thing from Harry’s personal point of view. Knowing Antonio as I do – an outstanding coach, a very good man – I’m sure he’ll get a response and a reaction out of Harry very quickly.”Jürgen Klopp can often display a breezy indifference to statistics but, while his team are on the verge of setting a record for the longest unbeaten run in Liverpool’s decorated history, a different fact caught his eye. Jordan Henderson will become the fourth player to make 300 Premier League appearances for Liverpool on Sunday, putting him in distinguished company alongside Steven Gerrard, Jamie Carragher and Sami Hyypiä. As Klopp noted, he is nevertheless already in uncharted territory. “He surpassed Gareth Barry as the player with the most passes in the Premier League, is that right?” Klopp said. “I read that and he still has four or five years to go.” Henderson’s tally stands at 17,002 and his manager, with deliberate understatement, said: “What it says about Hendo is he is an absolutely great and very important figure in this team. He is so incredibly valuable.” There are other measures of the significance of a Premier and Champions League-winning captain. Take at least a point against West Ham and Liverpool’s undefeated sequence in all competitions will stretch to 26 games, one more than Bob Paisley’s class of 1982. In another respect, Henderson is the Anfield almost Invincible. Liverpool suffered a series of defeats when he was an emergency centre-back last winter. But in the past four years, they have lost two league games when he has started in midfield; both to Manchester City, 2-1 in a January 2019 meeting defined by a remarkable goalline clearance from John Stones and 4-0 in July 2020, after Liverpool had clinched the title. The last time anyone other than City took three Premier League points when Henderson began in his preferred position was at Tottenham in October 2017, a couple of months before Virgil van Dijk arrived to operate behind him. Results may be an indirect indication of his influence, but an appropriate one. Henderson’s 299 games have yielded 40 assists and 28 goals, the most recent a lovely opener against Brighton last Saturday, but he has been essentially a team player, defined in part by his impact on the collective, by the points totals and the trophies. His contribution has been as crucial in the dressing room as on the pitch. “Hendo has been essential to all the things we achieved,” Klopp said. His captain’s character may be a reason why he loses so rarely. A motivator of a manager seeks to gee others up but not Henderson. “His natural motivation is already at the limit,” he said. “You don’t have to put oil in the fire, there is enough fire there already. That’s Hendo.” It is a reason why he was never tempted to pension his captain off. At 31, Henderson was afforded a four-year deal in the summer. Klopp never feared it would prompt a lapse into complacency. Rather, he appreciates Henderson’s role in creating a culture he deems special. “I was not concerned that the new contract could stop him being a crazy devil from time to time on and off the pitch,” he said. “His mindset is made for winning things and I am really happy to have him here.” A workhorse can be a work in progress, even in the autumn of his career. “Hendo is not old, he can still develop, he has to and he will and I will not stop helping him with that,” Klopp said. As Liverpool’s greatest generation for three decades enter their 30s, Klopp sees scope for potential record-breakers to get better again. He is relying on Henderson to drive them on. “As long as these boys aren’t 40, we will improve them,” he said. “We need players like him at the club in the long term. These boys, with the quality, mindset and attitude of them, they set standards for all the rest.” If the Henderson years have become a golden age at Anfield, and Klopp is determined to savour them when they are over, he is trying to extend an era with his brand of tough love. Kicking the losing feeling further into the past involves kicking backsides. “The way we work together, the things we do, how we inspire ourselves and each other: all these kinds of things make this a very special group,” he said. “And they will be considered in the future, looking back, as a very special group. I know this already. I don’t praise them or celebrate with them. I’m here to kick their butts from time to time. That’s what you do to make the next step.”As Australia qualified for the Twenty20 World Cup semi-finals by chasing 158 against West Indies, the most important piece dropped into place with a click. David Warner is Australia’s defining T20 player, ever since rising to prominence with a pyrotechnic national debut back in 2009. His current captain, Aaron Finch, may edge him on career runs after 13 matches in the past year that Warner missed, but Warner has still played the most T20s for Australia. He more than anyone legitimised the format in Australia by crossing from it to become a Test success. All the while, he gathered more than 5,000 IPL runs. In his most recent IPL season and his World Cup to date, his batting has done anything but click. His half-century against Sri Lanka was followed by a low score against England and an asthmatic wheeze against Bangladesh, unable to middle shots while needing to chase a small target at high speed to boost the team’s net run rate. Against West Indies, at last, the click arrived. First by striking the spin of Roston Chase through cover, the area that has so often got Warner started in Test innings. Then the short length of the tall Jason Holder gave Warner something to get under. In his recent work he has not been game to take on the pull shot early in an innings, but here he lashed the midwicket boundary, then cleared it, either side of fencing a wider ball down to the fence at deep third. From there it was Warner as we knew him, not as we have recently known him. Belting back past the bowler with a cleared front foot. Creating space to utterly smash spin over wide long-on. Utilitarian cut shots and square drives when the opportunities arose, then after notching his half-century, creating opportunities like a switch-hit from a slower ball from Dwayne Bravo that Warner had to chase right-handed across his stumps before thumping it over what had previously been backward point. The fact he ended up with 89 runs unbeaten was something, but the fact he scored them from 56 balls, at 9.5 an over, was much more important. If Warner goes well, Australia’s approach of big top-order runs and a Test-style pace attack reaps the benefit. The pace of his innings gave freedom to Mitchell Marsh after Finch’s early dismissal, with the first drop taking eight balls to get a read on conditions before he started clearing fences. Marsh shaded Warner for strike rate in the end, dismissed late in the chase for 53 from 32 balls. As clearly the most in-form striker in the team, Marsh is central to Australia’s chances in the finals to come. As is the continued work of Australia’s three premier quicks, especially Josh Hazlewood, bowling red-ball lengths with a few more variations. The approach looked great in the first innings when Starc got through the opening over for four runs, with the West Indies power merchant Chris Gayle blocking and leaving as though this was indeed the first morning of a five-dayer. It looked less good when Evin Lewis thrashed thee fours in a row from Hazlewood, followed by a Gayle six to take 20 from the over. When Gayle hit another from Patrick Cummins, West Indies had 30 on the board from 13 balls. But Cummins cramped him for room next ball to squeeze it back on to his stumps and, just as important with a new batter arriving, Finch kept faith with Hazlewood. Giving him another over, reward came with the wickets of Nicholas Pooran, undone by extra bounce while trying to hit over cover on the up, then Chase, bowled by a superb delivery that swung away a touch from the right-hander before pitching and cutting back in to take off stump. He followed up later in the innings by producing savage bounce to have Shimron Hetymer glove the ball through to the keeper on 27, then had the outgoing retiree Bravo caught down the ground: that first over conceding 20 was followed by three overs, four for 19. This has been Hazlewood’s power across 20 overs. Since his recall to this format last year, Australia’s most reliable Test bowler has gone at 6.8 runs per over while picking up 21 wickets in 15 matches. Throw in the continued good work of the leg-spinner Adam Zampa, currently leading the tournament with 11 wickets after returning one for 20 from his four overs, and Australia’s bowling configuration has worked. The overs of the fifth bowler remain a question and a vulnerability. But on Saturday, who should be stepping up to the bowling crease for the first time at this World Cup? Mitchell Marsh, chipping in with three overs for 16 runs. At the moment, there’s nothing he can’t do.Barcelona threw away a three-goal lead to draw 3-3 at Celta Vigo in La Liga on Saturday in a chaotic game which underlined the scale of the task facing incoming coach Xavi Hernández. Celta captain Iago Aspas completed a remarkable second-half comeback from the hosts by scoring in the fifth minute of added time after he had pulled their first goal back in the 52nd and Nolito had struck in the 74th to set up a tense finish. Teenage forward Ansu Fati had given Barça the lead in the fifth minute and captain Sergio Busquets extended their advantage with a low strike from outside the area in the 18th before Memphis Depay added a third in the 34th. But Barça experienced a huge drop off in performance in the second half and Celta’s stunning comeback extended the Catalans’ winless streak to four league games. Barça are ninth in the standings with 17 points after 12 games while Celta are 14th on 12. Toni Kroos and Karim Benzema fired Real Madrid to a 2-1 win at home to Rayo Vallecano to go top of La Liga. Real had drawn their last two league games at the the Bernabéu 0-0 but got off to a strong start when Kroos drilled a shot into the top corner in the 14th minute after Marco Asensio had cut into the area from the right wing. Their top scorer Benzema doubled their lead in the 38th minute and Real looked to be cruising until Radamel Falcao came off the bench in the second half andscored a header, with the help of a deflection off Alaba, to put Rayo back in contention in the 76th minute. The win takes Real on to 27 points after 12 games, two above second-placed Real Sociedad who have also played 12 but will return to the summit if they beat Osasuna on Sunday. Robert Lewandowski scored his 60th goal this calendar year as champions Bayern Munich claimed a 2-1 home win over Freiburg in the Bundesliga on Saturday to end the visiting side’s unbeaten start to the season. Bayern took a deserved lead in the 30th minute through Leon Goretzka and Lewandowski doubled the lead on 75 minutes, before Freiburg scored an injury-time consolation through Janik Haberer. Borussia Dortmund’s four-game winning streak in the Bundesliga came to a halt as they were beaten 2-1 away to RB Leipzig. Christopher Nkunku put Leipzig in front in the 29th minute and Jesse Marsch’s side missed numerous chances to build on their lead before they were punished by a Marco Reus equaliser early in the second half. Leipzig quickly set about restoring their lead and eventually made good on their dominance when Yusuf Poulsen slid in to send a cross from Nkunku inside the far post in the 68th minute. In Italy, Davide Ballardini’s fourth spell as Genoa coach came to an end on Saturday when the relegation-battling Serie A club announced his sacking. The 57-year-old was under pressure after winning one league game all season, and a 2-2 draw away to Empoli on Friday night proved to be the final straw. “Genoa have relieved coach Davide Ballardini of his duties. The club thanks the coach and his staff for their work, dedication and passion,” read a club statement. Genoa are 18th, with nine points from 12 games, and are on a nine-match winless run. Juan Cuadrado’s stoppage-time goal earned Juventus a 1-0 win over 10-man Fiorentina as the Turin club ended a three-match winless league run. Juventus are eighth with 18 points, level with Fiorentina above them. Atalanta beat bottom side Cagliari 2-1 in the late game to rise to fourth thanks to first-half strikes from Mario Pasalic and Duvan Zapata either side of a João Pedro goal for the hosts. Paris Saint Germain stretched their advantage at the top of Ligue 1 to 10 points after two goals from the Brazil forward Neymar and another from Kylian Mbappé helped them to a 3-2 win at Bordeaux on Saturday. PSG have 34 points from 13 games, ahead of second-placed Lens who beat Troyes 4-0 at home on Friday. Bordeaux stayed 16th on 12 points.The UK reported 155 deaths on Saturday of people who had tested positive for Covid-19 within the past 28 days, and 30,693 new infections. The government figures show a fall from the 193 deaths and 34,029 new cases reported on Friday. Brazil registered 328 Covid-19 deaths on Saturday and 11,866 additional cases, according to data released by the country’s health ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 609,388 coronavirus deaths and 21,874,324 total confirmed cases, Reuters reports. Costa Rican children aged five and above must get Covid-19 vaccinations, according to a new health ministry mandate, making the Central American country one of the first to adopt such a requirement for kids. Mexicans who need to cross the US land border for work or school are scrambling to get approved Covid-19 vaccines ahead of new rules set to go into effect next week, 20 months after the United States shut crossings for non-essential trips. Queues formed outside shops in Athens on Saturday on the first day of new restrictions that require the unvaccinated to show proof of a negative Covid-19 test before entering a range of venues, Reuters reports. Booster jabs will be available to book a month earlier than expected in England for those who need them, in an effort to speed up the programme, the government has announced. Those eligible for the top-up vaccination will receive their booking invitation five months after their second dose instead of six, after a change to the system means boosters can be prebooked. Russia’s Covid-19 cases hit another one-day record as the country struggles to contain a wave of infections that has persisted for more than a month. The national coronavirus taskforce on Saturday reported 41,335 new cases since the previous day, exceeding the previous daily record of 40,993 on 31 October. The taskforce said 1,188 people with Covid-19 died, just seven fewer than the daily death record reported on Thursday. Eleven patients died on Saturday after a fire broke out in a hospital’s Covid-19 ward in the western Indian state of Maharashtra, police said. There were 17 patients in the ward in the city of Ahmednagar where the fire started, said police inspector Jyoti Karkade. The remaining six patients were in stable condition, she added. Austria said on Friday it was barring those not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 from cafes, restaurants, and hairdressers as the government struggles to convince people to get vaccinated. About 64% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about getting jabbed. Mexico reported 261 new confirmed coronavirus fatalities and 3,574 further cases on Saturday, bringing the country’s death toll from the pandemic to 289,674 and total infections to 3,825,404, according to health ministry data. New Zealand’s 206 new daily community infections on Saturday carried it past the double-hundred mark for the first time during the coronavirus pandemic, as the nation scrambles to vaccinate its population of 5 million. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia here: Brazil registered 328 Covid-19 deaths on Saturday and 11,866 additional cases, according to data released by the country’s health ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 609,388 coronavirus deaths and 21,874,324 total confirmed cases, Reuters reports. The row in the UK over Tory sleaze reached new heights as MPs demanded details of any lobbying by Owen Paterson of government ministers on behalf of a company that won almost £500m of Covid-19 related contracts last year. The crisis facing Boris Johnson also worsened after the former Tory prime minister, Sir John Major, described his successor’s attempts to block Paterson’s suspension from parliament last week for breaching paid advocacy rules as “shameful”. A new Opinium poll for the Observer shows ratings for Johnson and his party have slumped dramatically since last weekend, with the prime minister’s personal approval figures hitting their lowest ever level. The US administered 429,442,508 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Saturday morning and distributed 533,019,545 doses, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Those figures are up from the 428,006,540 vaccine doses administered by Nov. 4, out of 531,287,645 doses delivered, the CDC said. The agency said 223,245,121 people had received at least one dose, while 193,627,929 people were fully vaccinated as of 6 am ET on Saturday, Reuters reports. Almost every day for three weeks, Grace Lockyer would jump in her car and drive to a hill to attend her Zoom classes. Located on her family’s property outside the town of Warialda in northern New South Wales, Australia, the hill was the only place she could get a decent internet connection. For Lockyer, one of the many students completing her HSC from home during the NSW lockdown, limited access to internet and technology was just the tip of the iceberg. Yet with exams set to commence on Tuesday, the end of a hard year is finally in sight. To live and work overseas is a rite of passage for many Australians. Life abroad, however, took on a new sense of fragility with the rise of Covid-19. More than a million Australian citizens were forced to choose between riding out the pandemic in a foreign country, or returning to the relative safety of Australia. Since March 2020, it is estimated about half of those living abroad chose to come back, while tens of thousands wished to return but were unable to. Those that did make it were forced to swiftly recalibrate to a life they thought they had left behind, but with travel bans lifted for fully vaccinated Australian citizens and permanent residents, a new choice has arisen. Costa Rican children aged five and above must get Covid-19 vaccinations, according to a new health ministry mandate, making the Central American country one of the first to adopt such a requirement for kids. The move would add Covid-19 to a list of other infectious diseases that Costa Rica has for years required children to be vaccinated against, Reuters reports. “Our basic vaccination scheme has made it possible to subdue many of the viruses that cause suffering and health consequences and even fatalities in the underage population,” health minister Daniel Salas said. Mexicans who need to cross the US land border for work or school are scrambling to get approved Covid-19 vaccines ahead of new rules set to go into effect next week, 20 months after the United States shut crossings for non-essential trips. The rules specify that from Monday only foreigners who have received World Health Organization-approved vaccines can cross, which in effect bars those who received jabs including China’s CanSino Biologics and Russia’s Sputnik V, among others. More than 15 Mexicans told Reuters that they were looking to get re-vaccinated, not with booster shots, but rather to simply comply with the new entry rule, which requires them to show proof of their vaccine status and will be enforced with random checks. France reported 9,605 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, Reuters reports. The country has had over 7.1 million cases overall. A US federal appeals court issued a stay freezing the Biden administration’s efforts to require workers at US companies with at least 100 employees to be vaccinated against Covid-19 or be tested weekly, citing “grave statutory and constitutional” issues with the rule, Reuters reports. The ruling from the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit comes after numerous Republican-led states filed legal challenges against the new rule, which is set to take effect on 4 January. More data from Italy. The number of patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 3,173 on Saturday, up from 3,124 a day earlier. There were 23 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 37 on Friday. The total number of intensive care patients fell to 392 from a previous 395. Some 491,962 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 543,414, the health ministry said, Reuters reports. France has reported a cumulative total of 90,988 coronavirus deaths in hospital – an increase of 25 in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. It also reported 1,099 people in intensive care units for Covid-19 on Saturday, an increase of 10. Italy reported 31 coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, the country’s health ministry said. It also reported 6,764 new infections, the same figure as the previous day, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 132,365 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its initial outbreak in February last year, the second highest toll in Europe after the UK. Queues formed outside shops in Athens on Saturday on the first day of new restrictions that require the unvaccinated to show proof of a negative Covid-19 test before entering a range of venues, Reuters reports. Coronavirus infections in Greece hit a new daily high almost every day in November, prompting authorities to announce new measures on Tuesday, which restrict access to cafes, restaurants, state services and banks, among other public spaces, to those who are either vaccinated or have a negative test. Those vaccinated against Covid-19 must also present their certificates, resulting in long lines outside shops in the capital’s busiest shopping street, Ermou. The UK reported 155 deaths on Saturday of people who had tested positive for Covid-19 within the past 28 days, and 30,693 new infections. The government figures show a fall from the 193 deaths and 34,029 new cases reported on Friday. Booster jabs will be available to book a month earlier than expected in England for those who need them, in an effort to speed up the programme, the government has announced. Those eligible for the top-up vaccination will receive their booking invitation five months after their second dose instead of six, after a change to the system means boosters can be prebooked. Russia’s Covid-19 cases hit another one-day record as the country struggles to contain a wave of infections that has persisted for more than a month. The national coronavirus taskforce on Saturday reported 41,335 new cases since the previous day, exceeding the previous daily record of 40,993 on 31 October. The taskforce said 1,188 people with Covid-19 died, just seven fewer than the daily death record reported on Thursday. Eleven patients died on Saturday after a fire broke out in a hospital’s Covid-19 ward in the western Indian state of Maharashtra, police said. There were 17 patients in the ward in the city of Ahmednagar where the fire started, said police inspector Jyoti Karkade. The remaining six patients were in stable condition, she added. Austria said on Friday it was barring those not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 from cafes, restaurants, and hairdressers as the government struggles to convince people to get vaccinated. About 64% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about getting jabbed. New Zealand’s 206 new daily community infections on Saturday carried it past the double-hundred mark for the first time during the coronavirus pandemic, as the nation scrambles to vaccinate its population of 5 million. Covid infections have fallen among secondary schoolchildren in England for the first time in weeks, but experts from the government’s pandemic advisory body are warning that deaths and hospitalisations from the disease across the UK could soar over the next nine days. Germany’s expected incoming government will not reimpose pandemic lockdowns, a coalition partner pledged on Saturday. It comes amid a record rise in Covid-19 cases. Christian Lindner, head of the pro-business Free Democrats (FDP), one of three parties working to form a coalition to replace the government of the outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, made the promise. “The Bundestag majority of the [Social Democrats], Greens and FDP is excluding the instruments of lockdown and curfew,” Lindner told the German tabloid Bild, referencing the three coalition partners. A northern California town has declared itself a “constitutional republic” in response to Covid-19 health restrictions imposed by the governor, in the latest sign of strife between the state’s government and its rural and conservative regions. The city council in Oroville, located at the base of the Sierra Nevada foothills about 90 miles from the capital of Sacramento, adopted a resolution this week stating it would oppose state and federal orders it deems to be government overreach. Oroville leaders said the designation was a way of affirming the city’s values and pushing back against state rules it doesn’t agree with, although a legal expert said the designation was merely a gesture and did not grant the city any new authority. Booster jabs will be available to book for those who need them a month earlier than expected in England, in an effort to speed up the programme, the government has announced. Those eligible for the top-up vaccination will receive their booking invitation five months after their second dose instead of six, after a change to the system means boosters can be prebooked. Office for National Statistics figures show that the prevalence of coronavirus infections in England remained at about 1 in 50 people in the week ending 30 October, steadying at its highest level of the year. Prevalence was unchanged from the previous week, after five weeks of rising infections. Infection rates decreased for older secondary school pupils over the week, the ONS said, dropping to 7.5% from 9.1% the previous week. Other suggestions that the spread of Covid is slowing include England’s R number falling to between 0.9 and 1.1, down from a previous estimate of 1.1-1.3. More than 9m top-up jabs have already been administered across the UK and from Monday, the English booking system will allow someone to prebook their booster appointment a month before they are eligible. Everyone over 50 and all those most at risk from Covid-19 should get a booster six months after their second dose. Currently, someone can only book an appointment at six months. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the plans would “accelerate the booster programme”. He urged people not to delay getting jabbed. Dr Michelle Drage, chief executive of Londonwide LMCs, which represents GPs in 27 of the capital’s 32 boroughs, doubted that the change would increase uptake much. He said: It may make a small difference. But it doesn’t tackle the levels of vaccine hesitancy and denial that are prevalent in communities right now. But Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, applauded the move. She said: Vaccination remains at the heart of our response to the pandemic. Primary care sites will do everything they can to ensure that those eligible for vaccination get them without delay, and to do that well, the supply will need to match the volume and timing of appointments as they are booked. Read more here: The poet Michael Rosen has written an impassioned open letter to the UK’s education secretary Nadhim Zahawi, asking what space there is in schools to discuss how pupils think and feel about what has happened over the course of the pandemic. He wrote: I had a conversation with a teacher the other day. She asked me what she and other teachers could do to help children with the trauma of the pandemic. This pulled me up sharp. She explained that the children in her class had been deeply affected by what has happened over the last 18 months. She thought some of them were troubled, at times distressed, and that this was showing up in the way they were behaving towards each other. She wasn’t talking about whether the children were “behind” at school. This was about that very unfashionable idea “the whole child” – not the tested and measured child, evaluated purely on the basis of their performance in tasks set by people in offices far away. When we see children in a school playground or in a park, it’s easy to imagine that the past year and a half has washed over them. They run about, whooping and laughing. This teacher made me think about what might be going on under the surface. Let’s ask ourselves some hard questions: how many school-age children have had direct experience of losing a sibling, a parent, a grandparent, a close relative or carer? How many children are close friends with a child who has had that experience? How many schoolchildren have had direct experience of people suffering the long-term effects of Covid? A hundred thousand? Two hundred thousand? More? I ask myself and you: do we think that the effect of this can be ignored? We are, after all, talking about the psychological impact of widespread bereavement. Read the full letter here: Russia’s Covid-19 cases hit another one-day record as the country struggles to contain a wave of infections that have persisted for more than a month. The national coronavirus task force on Saturday reported 41,335 new cases since the previous day, exceeding the previous daily record of 40,993 from 31 October. The task force said 1,188 people with Covid-19 died, just seven fewer than the daily death record reported on Thursday. Officials cite Russia’s low vaccination rate as a major factor in the sharp rise in cases that began in mid-September. The task force reported about 57.2 million full-course vaccinations or less than 40% of the country’s 146 million people. Last month, the president, Vladimir Putin, ordered many Russians to stay off work between 30 October and 7 November. He authorised regional governments to extend the number of non-working days, if necessary. Several regions, including Novgorod in the north-west, Tomsk in Siberia, the Chelyabinsk region in the Ural Mountains and Kursk and Bryansk regions south-west of Moscow, have extended the nonworking period through the end of next week. Moscow’s mayor said the situation in the capital had stabilised sufficiently for people to return to work there on Monday. People in the Russia-annexed Crimea region also will resume working next week. Certain restrictions will remain in place in the Russian capital, such as a stay-at-home order for older adults and a mandate for businesses to have 30% of their staff work from home. Access to theatres and museums is limited to those who either have been fully vaccinated, have recovered from Covid-19 within the last six months, or can present a negative coronavirus test. Russia has recorded more than 8.75 million confirmed virus cases and 245,635 deaths in the pandemic, according to the national task force, which counts only deaths directly attributed to the virus. Figures from the state statistical service, which also count deaths in which the virus was a contributing factor or was suspected but not confirmed, indicate the virus’ impact is significantly more severe; its most recent report tallied about 462,000 virus-connected deaths through to the end of September. Eleven patients died Saturday after a fire broke out in a hospital’s Covid-19 ward in the western Indian state of Maharashtra, police said. There were 17 patients in the ward in the city of Ahmednagar where the fire started, said police Inspector Jyoti Karkade. The remaining six patients are in stable condition, she added. While the fire has been brought under control, the cause was not immediately clear. Officials said they will carry out an investigation. The former chief minister of the state, Devendra Fadnavis, took to Twitter to express his condolences and called for “strict action” against those responsible. Such incidents are not uncommon in India. In May, when the country was battling a devastating surge in coronavirus cases, a fire in a Covid-19 ward in western India killed at least 18 patients. Poor maintenance and lack of proper firefighting equipment often cause deaths in India. Austria said on Friday it was barring those not fully vaccinated against Covid-19 from cafes, restaurants, and hairdressers as the government struggles to convince people to get vaccinated. Around 64% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against Covid, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about getting jabbed. Officials say 10 patients have died after a fire broke out in a hospital’s Covid-19 ward in the western Indian state of Maharashtra. An official told New Delhi Television on Saturday that around 17 patients were in the ward when the fire broke out. The remaining patients have been moved to a Covid-19 ward in another hospital, district collector Rajendra Bhosle said. While the fire has since been brought under control, the cause was not immediately clear, he added, saying officials will carry out an investigation. Two hyenas at the US Denver zoo have tested positive for Covid-19, the first confirmed cases among the animals worldwide. Samples from a variety of animals at the zoo, including the spotted hyenas, were tested after several of its lions became ill, according to the National Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL). The hyena samples tested presumptive positive at a lab at Colorado State University and were confirmed by the national lab. In addition to the two hyenas, 11 lions and two tigers at the zoo tested positive. Russia reported 41,335 new Covid-19 infections in the last 24 hours, its highest single-day case tally since the start of the pandemic. The government’s coronavirus task force also reported 1,188 deaths related to the virus. A week-long workplace shutdown in Russia, designed to curb the spread of the virus, is nearing its end. Some regions are planning to extend restrictions into next week, but many have opted to resume work from Monday. US pharma giants Merck and Pfizer have announced encouraging results for oral drugs, while an antidepressant has also shown promise in what could open up a new chapter in the fight against the pandemic. What are these treatments? They are pills taken orally as soon as the first symptoms of Covid-19 appear, to avoid serious forms of the illness, and therefore hospitalisation. This form of treatment has been sought since the start of the global health crisis. Early October, Merck said it was seeking authorisation in the United States for its pill molnupiravir, and Pfizer followed suit on Friday with paxlovid. They are both anti-virals that act by reducing the virus’s ability to replicate, slowing down the disease. Why are they important? If the efficacy of these drugs is confirmed, it will be a major step forward in the fight against Covid-19. They would add to vaccines to bolster the world’s therapeutic arsenal against the virus. Treatments already exist, mostly in the form of synthetic antibodies. But these drugs, which usually target those who already have severe forms of the disease, are injected and therefore more difficult to administer. A pill can be quickly prescribed to a patient who will then take it at home. What limitations? It is difficult so far to properly evaluate Merck and Pfizer’s treatments given both groups have only published statements and have not made the data of their clinical trials available. French infectious diseases specialist Karine Lacombe warned in September that these types of announcements should be treated with “caution” until the studies can be scrutinised. She pointed out that these treatments represent a “potentially enormous” market for pharmaceutical groups. Covid infections have fallen among secondary schoolchildren in England for the first time in weeks, but experts from the government’s pandemic advisory body are warning that deaths and hospitalisations from the disease across the UK could soar over the next nine days. Figures released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics show that infection rates among children aged 11 to 16 in school years seven to 11 dropped to 7.5% in the week ending 30 October, ending rises throughout September, and down from a high of 9.1% the week before. While the infection rate is still far higher than in any other age group in the UK, scientists said the downturn may signify that cases have peaked in England, at least for the time being. While the data includes the October half-term week when children mixed less, the ONS said the tests performed in the week ending 30 October would have identified those infected before the break. The ONS figures raised hopes that the wave of disease that swept through schools at the start of the autumn term may finally be on the decline. New Zealand’s 206 new daily community infections on Saturday carried it past the double-hundred mark for the first time during the coronavirus pandemic, as the nation scrambles to vaccinate its population of 5 million. The most populous city of Auckland, which reported 200 of the new cases, has lived under Covid-19 curbs for nearly three months as it battles an outbreak of the infectious Delta variant, although restrictions are expected to ease on Monday. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said she wanted Auckland residents to be able to travel for the southern hemisphere summer and Christmas. “We will not keep Aucklanders isolated to Auckland through that period - we simply cannot do that,” Ardern told a news conference at the national gathering of her Labour party. Saturday’s cases served to remind people of the importance of vaccination as the number one protection against the virus, the health ministry said in a statement. It said 78% of New Zealanders aged 12 and above had been fully vaccinated, while 89% had a first vaccine dose by Friday. Once praised globally for stamping out Covid-19, New Zealand has been unable to vanquish the Delta outbreak in Auckland, forcing Ardern to abandon a strategy of eliminating the virus in favour of efforts to live with it. Australia reached on Saturday a full inoculation rate of 80% of those aged 16 and older, a moment that was dubbed by the country’s prime minister as a “magnificent milestone”. “Another, magnificent milestone, Australia,” prime Minister Scott said in a video post on Facebook. “That’s four out of five, how good is that? This has been a true Australian national effort.” While vaccinations remain voluntary on the federal level, Australia’s states and territories introduced mandatory measures for many occupations and workers. The unvaccinated are barred from many activities, such as dining out or concerts. Mainland China reported 55 new Covid-19 cases on 6 November, down from 78 a day earlier, the country’s national health authority said on Saturday. The National Health Commission said in its daily bulletin that 40 of the new cases were locally transmitted, down from 68 the previous day, with 16 in the north-east border province of Heilongjiang. The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, stood at 27, down from 42 a day earlier. Mainland China has reported 97,660 coronavirus cases, with 4,636 deaths Ukraine reported a record daily high of 793 Coronavirus-related deaths, the health ministry said. It comes as the country grapples with Covid vaccination scepticism. More than a thousand people blocked several streets in the centre of the Ukrainian capital on Wednesday, protesting against vaccine certificates and state-imposed restrictions to control the virus. The protesters held up signs reading “Say No to Covid passports”, “Say no to Covid genocide”. In England, people will be able to book their Covid-19 booster jab a month before they are eligible from Monday. The NHS is changing the booking system to allow people in England to arrange an appointment a month in advance, as the health service aims to ramp up vaccination uptake ahead of a “challenging” winter. Currently, anyone eligible who had their second dose of a coronavirus vaccine six months ago can only book their top-up once those six months are up. The update means that people can pre-book an appointment after five months, allowing them to get vaccinated on the day they reach the six-month milestone. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “Covid-19 vaccines are the best way to protect yourself and your family ahead of a challenging winter and this change to the booking system will make it as easy as possible for people to book their booster jabs.” Welcome to the Guardian’s coronavirus live blog, where I will bring you the latest updates from around the world. Please get in touch with me while I work if you have any comments, news tips or questions. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com