More than 300,000 workers in the UK will get a pay rise from Monday as the charity behind the voluntary real living wage raises the minimum hourly rate amid growing fears over a squeeze on household incomes this winter. Set by the Living Wage Foundation, the nationwide “real living wage” will be raised by 40p to £9.90, while workers in London will see their pay boosted by 20p to £11.05. The changes will apply to workers at about 9,000 living wage employers who adopt the voluntary pay measure. However, the charity warned that almost 5 million workers in Britain earn less than these amounts, putting them at risk of severe hardship from rising energy bills and mounting inflation across the UK this winter. The rise comes as the government faces growing criticism over cuts to universal credit and plans to increase taxes on workers next year. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said the Living Wage Foundation figures showed an urgent need for the government to raise the legal minimum wage to £10 an hour immediately, ban zero-hours contracts and give trade unions more access to workplaces to negotiate improved pay deals. “Low pay is endemic in modern Britain. Millions are in jobs that don’t pay the bills or put food on the table,” she said. Following the changes this week, the real living wage – which is used on a voluntary basis by employers including Taylor Wimpey, Aviva and Everton football club – will be almost £1 higher than the government’s national minimum. The legal pay floor currently stands at £8.91 for workers aged 23 and over, although it is due to rise to £9.50 next April in a move announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, at last month’s budget. The foundation calculates the living wage based on what people need to live on, including the costs of fuel, energy, rent and food. It said this year’s rate had been mostly driven upwards by rising fuel costs, as well as higher rents. It estimates that a full-time worker on the voluntary minimum would take home an extra £1,930 than the government-enforced living wage. In London, where household costs are typically higher, the difference is worth £4,173. Katherine Chapman, director of the Living Wage Foundation, said higher pay needed to be at the heart of Britain’s post-pandemic recovery. “There are still millions trapped in working poverty, struggling to keep their heads above water – and these are people working in jobs that kept society going during the pandemic like social care workers and cleaners,” she said. The GMB union welcomed the living wage increase, but said that the pandemic had exposed the failures of many employers. Gary Smith, GMB general secretary, said: “Workers are facing a cost-of-living crisis, and employers face a recruitment crisis, after years of politically driven cuts and a race-to-the-bottom by many employers.”The thundering juggernaut that is Adele’s marketing campaign for her new album, 30, pulled in at the Oprah Winfrey Show on Monday, where the record-breaking artist opened up to the Queen of America about the struggles of divorce, becoming a “single parent” and juggling her career. Under the arches of Oprah’s rose garden, Adele discussed the meaning of new songs on her eagerly awaited album, which is set for release on Friday, in a two-hour special that featured a performance from the London-born singer. In excerpts released before the broadcast on Sunday evening in the US, her first televised conversation about the album and the stories behind it, she explains that many of the songs touch upon the aftermath of her divorce from the charity chief Simon Konecki. Sitting in the same garden where Oprah interviewed the Duke and Duchess of Sussex in March after the couple effectively quit the royal family, the talk-show host quizzed Adele over some of her “dark” lyrics. In a short preview clip released to CBS This Morning, Oprah reads lyrics back to Adele from the song Hold On, before asking: “What was going on there?” “I’m such a mess / The harder that I try I regress / I am my own worst enemy / Right now, I truly hate being me,” Oprah recited. Adele told her host: “My friends always would say ‘hold on’ when I would feel like the lyrics in the verse. But it was just exhausting trying to keep going with it. “It’s a process: the process of a divorce, the process of being a single parent, the process of not seeing your child every single day wasn’t really a plan that I had when I became a mum,” Adele said. “The process of arriving for yourself every single day, turning up for yourself every single day. And still running a home, running a business so many people know what I’m talking about and I feel like that as well, I juggled those things as well. And I felt like not doing it any more. “It made my feet hurt, walking through all that concrete.” The musical performance was filmed at Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles before the broadcast. Adele’s comeback single, Easy On Me, which is taken from 30, was released last month and topped the UK singles chart after being streamed a record-breaking 24m times. Adele: One Night Only will air on US network CBS on 14 November at 8.30pm eastern standard time (1.30am GMT on 15 November). A primetime concert filmed at the London Palladium, An Audience with Adele, will be broadcast on ITV a week later on 21 November.An Oxfordshire-based company will soon start clinical trials of a second-generation vaccine against Covid-19, an easy-to-administer skin patch that uses T-cells to kill infected cells and could offer longer-lasting immunity than current vaccines. Emergex was set up in Abingdon in 2016 to develop T-cell vaccines, the brainchild of Prof Thomas Rademacher, the firm’s chief executive and professor emeritus of molecular medicine at the University College London medical school. The vaccines prime T-cells to remove infected cells from the body quickly after infection, thus preventing viral replication and disease. While the antibodies produced by the current Covid vaccines stick to the virus and stop it infecting cells, T-cells find and destroy infected cells. Those other vaccines, such as the Pfizer/BioNTech and the AstraZeneca/Oxford University jabs, also produce a T-cell response, but to a lesser extent. Emergex has received the green light from the Swiss drugs regulator to conduct initial human trials in Lausanne, involving 26 people who will receive a high and a low dose of its experimental Covid-19 vaccine, starting on 3 January. Interim results from the trial are expected in June. Robin Cohen, the firm’s chief commercial officer, said: “This is the first time a regulator has approved a Covid vaccine to go into clinical trials whose sole purpose is to generate a targeted T-cell response in the absence of an antibody response and those T-cells look for infected cells and kills them.” Using the analogy of an asteroid hitting a planet, he explained: “The virus is the asteroid: it fires into the planet and a viral code, a signature for that virus, is rapidly displayed all over the surface. These signatures are read by T-cells as foreign, and the T-cells kill the cell before it can produce new live viruses.” Current Covid-19 vaccines mainly elicit an antibody response that wanes over time, which means people need booster shots to maintain protection against the virus. The Emergex vaccine works differently, by killing infected cells quickly. This means it could offer longer-lasting immunity – possibly for decades – and could also be better at fighting virus mutations, said Cohen. A study published in Nature last week showed that some people experience “abortive infection” in which the virus enters the body but is cleared by the immune system’s T-cells at the earliest stage. Scientists said the discovery could pave the way for a new generation of vaccines targeting the T-cell response, which could produce much longer lasting immunity. Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London, said he doubted that a T-cell vaccine “could do the job on its own” but it could play a complementary role, in a mix-and-match approach where different vaccines are given for the first, second and third doses. He said mRNA vaccines such as the Pfizer/BioNTech shot work so well because they produce a strong neutralising antibody response. The Pfizer vaccine has been shown to be more effective against Covid than the AstraZeneca/Oxford jab, which elicits a stronger T-cell response. But a T-cell vaccine could be used to complement other jabs, he said, as T-cell vaccines might be more impervious to virus mutations. “Antibodies are very sensitive to mutations while T-cells can see many other parts of the virus. Maybe that’s a selling point for T-cell vaccines.” He noted that the idea of T-cell vaccines was not new – for example, Prof Sarah Gilbert, the University of Oxford professor who developed the AZ/Oxford jab, has been working on them for influenza for more than a decade. Cohen said the tricky part was working out the delivery mechanism for the Emergex vaccine to the immune system. Rademacher and his team settled on tiny gold particles coated in peptides (bits of proteins) designed to generate the T-cell response in the body. The vaccine will eventually be administered as a skin patch the size of a thumbnail bristling with micro-needles that release the shot within seconds. It can last for up to three months at room temperature, unlike other jabs that need to be stored in the freezer or fridge. The trial will be conducted by Prof Blaise Genton from the centre for primary care and public health at the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. He said: “This exciting new scientific approach to developing a vaccine against Sars-CoV-2 addresses the need to generate a T-cell response to elicit long-term immunity.” However, the Emergex shot will not be available until 2025 at the earliest, the usual timeframe for vaccine development. Last year Covid vaccines were developed within months as the regulatory process was speeded up, but the emergency has passed, said Cohen. Emergex is testing another T-cell vaccine against dengue fever on humans in a separate Swiss trial, with initial results due in January. Half the world is at risk from dengue fever, according to the World Health Organization, and there is no specific treatment or vaccine for it. The firm also wants to deploy its T-cell vaccines against influenza, Zika, Ebola and other infections. Dr Andrew Freedman, a reader in infectious diseases at Cardiff University school of medicine, said last week: “A vaccine that primes T-cell immunity against different viral protein targets that are shared between many different coronaviruses would complement our spike vaccines that induce neutralising antibodies.”Weak EU vehicle emissions targets could allow Europe’s biggest carmakers to produce millions more petrol and diesel cars than necessary up to 2030 in a “wasted decade” for cutting carbon pollution, according to a report. Analysis of car industry sales plans for electric vehicles shared exclusively with the Guardian by Transport and Environment (T&amp;E), a thinktank and campaign group, showed that manufacturers could hit their 2030 EU carbon emissions targets with four years to spare. However, the report warned that manufacturers could stick closely to their minimum requirements, as has been the case in recent years – opening up the potential for the industry to sell their more profitable petrol and diesel marques. Based on the car industry’s publicly stated commitments for EV production, the study showed there was a gap between what could be achieved and where sales volumes would be if they are kept in line with the EU emissions rules. Some vehicle makers could wholeheartedly embrace an electric revolution. But T&amp;E said leaving the rules unchanged would jeopardise the sale of 18m battery-powered models and result in 55m extra tonnes of CO2 pollution – more than the annual emissions of all the cars in Spain. T&amp;E said carmakers got easier targets if they sold heavier vehicles, driving up sales of high-emitting SUVs and plug-in hybrid models, which – when not charged – could pollute more than fossil fuel engines. The surge in SUV sales has meant that average engine emissions from three carmakers are actually higher than they were five years ago – even as they simultaneously green their fleets by making new electric cars. They were: Jaguar Land Rover, Volvo and Mercedes-Benz owner Daimler – all of which last week signed a pledge at Cop 26 to only sell zero-emissions cars by 2040. Alex Keynes, the clean vehicles manager of T&amp;E, said: “The electric vehicle boom has been driven by EU clean car rules but will falter unless lawmakers step in. Now is the time to set properly ambitious targets if we are to avoid a wasted decade in the race to decarbonise cars.” Under the existing rules, carmakers must reduce emissions relative to 2021 levels by 15% by 2025, and by a proposed 55% by 2030 – a bigger cut than previously planned. However, T&amp;E argued that the 55% cut is still too lenient, arguing that emissions should fall by 80% by 2030 – a level that would force carmakers to accelerate from their current plans. The European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association (ACEA) has said that even the 55% carbon reduction target would be “very challenging” and warned that bans on “a single technology” would not be rational, in part because of meagre electric charger provision in some countries. The emissions rules do not include the UK, where carmakers must report emissions separately following Brexit. However, the UK has copied nearly identical rules that came into force on 1 January, and about half of all cars built in UK factories are exported to the EU. A spokesman for Daimler said Mercedes-Benz would be ready to go all electric at the end of the decade, where market conditions allowed. He added that the UK had seen “an increase in customer demand for SUVs in recent years”. A spokesman for Jaguar Land Rover said electrification was at the heart of its new “electric-first” strategy, with battery versions of all models available by 2030. Volvo said emissions data showed it was “one of the industry leaders in reducing CO2 emissions from the cars it sells” because of growing electric and plug-in hybrid sales. The carmaker plans to only sell electric cars by 2030 and to be “climate-neutral” by 2040. A spokesperson for ACEA said manufacturers were fully committed to bringing CO2 emissions down to zero and supporting the EU’s goal of reaching climate neutrality by 2050. They said that car industry investment in EVs was outpacing funding for charging infrastructure, warning that failure to increase spending on the network could lead to electric car uptake stalling. “The auto industry’s efforts must be met with the same level of ambition by the EU and its member states. It is essential that all players work together to create the right supportive framework that will drive consumers towards cleaner mobility options, and thus achieve our common goal of reaching climate neutrality in Europe.”Immersive theatre, at its best, transports us to another existence. Hidden within an abandoned warehouse on the backstreets of Hoxton in east London, Lost Origin, a new interactive story created by the Almeida theatre in partnership with Factory 42 and Sky, is billed as a 60-minute problem-solving group adventure. But, despite its impressive technical illusions, its lacklustre premise fails to suspend our disbelief. In teams of six, we’re welcomed into Wing 7, a secret undercover unit with a mission to enter the Origin headquarters, a suspected base for an illegal dark web marketplace controlled by the evil mastermind Haggledance. From the Origin reception, we’re ushered through secret doors in walls and edge-lit corridors, into a dingy, underground storeroom. Stuffed with old record players, stolen celebrity belongings and Covid-19 vaccinations, all enclosed behind code-protected glass screens – the detail is so rich it would be impossible to see it all. Yet, even in such elaborate surroundings, our presence feels aimless. The group leader, Marsha (Daisy Badger), does her best to guide us towards clues to drive the drama forwards, but more often than not we look back at her, perplexed. Her stellar performance is not enough to stop her constant instruction from feeling overbearing and unnatural. As the story evolves from criminal detective mission to a journey of supernatural discovery, the reliance on digital media steps up a notch. Inside the pages of a lost diary, we are given the task of determining the origins of a prehistoric fossil. Ghostly energy that we strengthen by gesturing with our hands appears, sparky, on the giant sheet walls, with mixed-reality glasses then fitted over our eyes so we can see phantom dinosaur figures. Vividly sentient, they scurry in front us, and we’re encouraged to reach out to them – a species categorisation device appears when we do. Though it doesn’t exactly make sense within this muddled narrative, it is still a bit of fun. The culmination of a three-year research project into audiences of the future, and supported by an evidently jumbo budget, Lost Origin had staggering potential. But its visual enchantment only takes us so far. At Hoxton Docks, London, until 4 DecemberThat’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for your Covid rundown this morning. I’ll be back again shortly to bring you all the latest headlines as the world looks to curb increasing case numbers and attempt to return to life as normal. In the meantime, please follow along with all our coronavirus news here. Austria orders nationwide lockdown for those not fully vaccinated against Covid. Million will be under lockdown as of Monday in an effort to deal with a surge in infections, the country’s chancellor has said. Britain expected to extend Covid booster programme to under 50s. Brazil reports lowest end of week Covid death toll in over a year. Egypt’s national research body said on Sunday that it will start clinical trials for a domestically made coronavirus vaccine. Israel announces vaccine drive for children aged 5 to 11. UK firm to trial T-cell Covid vaccine that could give longer immunity against Covid-19. An Oxfordshire-based company Emergex will soon start clinical trials of a second-generation vaccine against Covid-19, an easy-to-administer skin patch that uses T-cells to kill infected cells and could offer longer-lasting immunity than current vaccines. UK officials have compiled a ‘Covid exit strategy’ from April called Operation Rampdown, leaked documents reveal. Under the plan, the government could wind down testing and people would no longer be forced to isolate if they are ill from April, leaked documents reveal. Three snow leopards died of complications from Covid-19 at the Lincoln children’s zoo in Nebraska. Germany to return to work from home amid rising infections. The measure is being reintroduced under draft legislation seen by AFP on Sunday, after the home working restriction was lifted at the beginning of July. In the UK more than two million people received their Covid-19 booster in the past week, with health officials describing the numbers as record-breaking. NHS England said 2.1 million boosters were delivered between November 6-12, an increase on the 1.7 million boosters given out during the previous seven days. China donated 500,000 doses of Covid-19 vaccine on Sunday to Syria, which has one of the world’s lowest inoculation rates and what the UN called an alarming rise in cases. The United States has so far administered 440,559,613 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Sunday morning, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Those figures are up from the 439,034,461 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by 13 November. The agency said 226,607,653 people had received at least one dose while 195,120,470 people had been fully vaccinated as of 6am ET on Sunday. The CDC tally includes two-dose vaccines from Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech,, as well as Johnson &amp; Johnson’s one-shot vaccine. About 29.3 million people have received a booster dose of either Pfizer, Moderna or Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine. Booster doses from Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson were authorised by the US health regulator on 20 October. The British government is expected to extend the Covid-19 booster programme to people under the age of 50 to drive down transmission rates as winter approaches, The Times reported. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) is expected to give its approval on Monday to extending the rollout, the newspaper reported, adding the precise details of the age groups have not been confirmed. Good morning it’s Samantha Lock reporting to you from over here in Sydney to kick off the week’s Covid news. First up, some numbers out of Australia for you. The state of Victoria has recorded 860 new local Covid cases and five deaths with a vaccination rate for those aged 12 and over at 87%. NSW has recorded 165 cases and one death with a cracking 91.1% of those over 16 double dosed. South Australia also plans to open its borders the state premier has promised. Over in sunny Queensland, some restrictions are set to ease after the state reached the 70% fully vaccinated milestone. Stay tuned for more developments throughout the day. Brazil reported on Sunday 61 new Covid-19 deaths, the lowest death toll on a Sunday in more than a year. The ministry of health reported 4,129 new cases of coronavirus, taking the country’s overall tally to a total of 21,957,967 cases. Egypt’s national research body said on Sunday that it will start clinical trials for a domestically made coronavirus vaccine. The Associated Press reports: The country’s acting health minister, Khaled Abdel Ghaffar, told reporters at a press conference that it is launching clinical trials of the new vaccine. He said the trial for the vaccine, named Covi Vax will start with tens, then hundreds, and will eventually include thousands of people. Sunday’s announcement in Cairo was the first indication that researchers there had moved from producing the vaccine and early testing to injecting people who are the subjects of the trial. The World Health Organization has previously recognized the Egyptian vaccine as one of hundreds of formulas around the world that are in development. It works by including proteins from the original virus to provoke an immune response. “It’s a very important strategic situation, that there is an Egyptian vaccine that we can rely on in the coming period,” said Ghaffar, who is also the minister of higher education and the head of the national research institute in the country. The government has been trying to encourage more of its population to get vaccinated as case numbers have risen in recent weeks. Starting November 15, all government employees are expected to show proof of vaccination to enter their workplaces. Egypt has vaccinated more than 14% of its population, according to government officials. It’s been almost entirely reliant on shipments of vaccines from other countries, many through the international Covax initiative that is meant to provide shots to developing countries. According to a daily updated tally of coronavirus cases from the country’s ministry of health, 19,435 people have died from the virus in Egypt since the pandemic started and 343,026 have been confirmed to have been infected. The true number is believed to be much higher. Here some more detail on Israel’s decision to roll out Covid vaccines to children aged five to 11 from AFP: Israel gave the green light Sunday to start vaccinating children aged between five and 11 against Covid-19 using Pfizer/BioNTech jabs, following the example of the United States. “The director general of the ministry of health ... authorised the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years,” the health ministry said in a statement. Israel was one of the first countries to launch a vaccination campaign last year using the jabs thanks to a deal with Pfizer that gave it access to millions of doses in exchange for data on the vaccine’s efficacy. The vaccination campaign allowed the health authorities to fully vaccinate 5.7 million of the country’s 9 million population. The authorities had already begun vaccinating minors aged 12 to 17 but decided to lower the age threshold in the wake of trials by Pfizer and recommendations from a panel of Israeli scientists. The latest announcement came as health authorities reported 220 new infections over the previous day. It marked a plunge from daily cases that topped 10,000 in late August and early September, driven by the Delta variant of the coronavirus. A campaign for a third, booster vaccine appeared key to driving down infections. According to the results of clinical trials using the Pfizer jab on children, the vaccine was shown to be 90.7% effective in preventing symptoms of the illness. “The majority of experts believe that the benefits of vaccinating children outweigh the risks,” the ministry said. Israel joins other countries offering vaccines to young children, including the US, also using Pfizer, the United Arab Emirates, Cambodia, Colombia and Cuba. The ministry will announce the date for the start of inoculations for young children in coming days. Israel said on Sunday that children aged 5 to 11 would now be eligible for vaccination against Covid-19. The decision, announced by the health ministry, followed approval by an expert panel last week, after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration granted emergency use of Pfizer’s and BioNTech’s vaccine for the age group at a 10-microgram dose, Reuters reports. The number of Covid cases recorded each day on average in France has risen above 10,000, for the first time since 11 September - a rise of 39% in one week. 12,496 positive cases were identified in 24 hours, compared to 8,547 last Sunday. Hospitalisations in France continue to increase moderately, with 317 people hospitalised with Covid on Sunday, versus 190 admitted a month ago, and 77 Covid patients admitted to critical care today, compared to 44 daily critical care admissions one month ago. A total of 50,557,065 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by 13 November, government figures show. This is a rise of 31,806 on the previous day, while 46,009,463 second doses have been delivered in total, an increase of 23,668. A combined total of 12,613,256 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 448,670. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. Bulgarians were voting Sunday for the third time this year, hoping the latest general election will finally produce a government to fight the country’s deadliest coronavirus wave. This from AFP: Massive anti-graft protests last year sapped support for conservative Boyko Borisov, who long headed the poor Balkan nation with the EU’s lowest Covid vaccination rate and one of the world’s highest pandemic death rates. “I wish the elections are successful this time so that we have a new government for a better life,” pensioner Stanka Lenkova, 73, said at a polling station on the outskirts of Sofia. Polling stations are scheduled to close at 8:00 pm (1800 GMT) when the first exit polls are expected to be published. Turnout at 4:00 pm reached slightly more than 25 percent, according to the Election Commission, compared to some 27% at that hour during the last elections in July. Many have said they are disheartened by parties’ failure to cobble together a workable coalition after votes in April and July returned fractured parliaments. Analysts have said they expect parties to try hard to form a government to end the worst political crisis since the fall of Communism, highlighting the need to tackle the raging pandemic. The interim administration failed to impose stricter measures and stop new infections and deaths from spiralling upward. Just 23 percent of Bulgaria’s 6.9 million people are fully vaccinated, while around 200 people have recently been dying each day in short-staffed hospitals. Germany is preparing a return to working from home, as the country tries to tackle an unprecedented new wave of coronavirus cases. The measure is being reintroduced under draft legislation seen by AFP on Sunday, after the home working restriction was lifted at the beginning of July. Employers in Germany would be forced to offer the option to work from home in the absence of a “compelling business reason” to come to the office. Anyone going into work would also be asked to show they have protection against the virus either through antibodies or vaccination or have tested negative. Infections and deaths have been climbing steeply since mid-October, in a fourth wave blamed on Germany’s comparatively low vaccination rate of just over 67%. At 289 cases per 100,000 people, the recorded incidence of the virus reached a new high in Europe’s most populous country on Sunday, according to the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) health agency. Ahead of a “Covid summit” of federal and state leaders on Thursday, new measures to curb rising infections are being debated. The chairmen of the three so-called traffic light parties, the SPD, the Greens and the FDP, want to tighten the Infection Protection Act again, and restrictions on contact for unvaccinated people are also being discussed, Handelsblatt reports. “The coming wave will overshadow all the previous waves,” Saxony state premier Michael Kretschmer, whose region is currently amongst the worst hit, told German weekly Bild am Sonntag. The legislation will be presented to the Bundestag, the lower house of the German parliament, for approval on Thursday, before being signed off by the upper house on Friday. Italy reported 36 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections rose to 7,569 from 5,822 fresh cases that were logged a week prior. A week ago, Italy had reported 26 deaths from the virus. Italy has registered 132,775 deaths linked to Covid-19 since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 4.9 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 3,647 on Sunday, up from 3,597 a day earlier. There were 29 new admissions to intensive care units against 39 on Saturday. The total number of intensive care patients edged up to 458 from a previous 453. Some 445,593 coronavirus tests were carried out over the past 24 hour period, compared with a previous 540,371, the health ministry said. The UK reported 36,517 new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, as well as 63 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to government data. A week ago, the UK had logged 29,843 new infections and 62 deaths. Hello everyone, I’m Jedidajah Otte and will be taking over for the next few hours. As ever, feel free to get in touch if you have anything to flag you think we should be covering, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. That’s it from me. Thank you for your time. Handing over to my colleague Jedidajah Otte. Key developments so far today Austria is placing millions of people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on lockdown as of Monday to deal with a surge in infections to record levels, Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said. Roughly 65% of the population is fully vaccinated against COVID-19, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. In The Netherlands, it has been reported that fifteen people were arrested after protests broke out over a newly-imposed COVID-19 lockdown. Hundreds of people gathered in the Dutch city of Leeuwarden on Saturday night, where videos showed them setting off fireworks and holding flares billowing smoke. In the UK more than two million people received their Covid-19 booster in the past week, with health officials describing the numbers as record-breaking. NHS England said 2.1 million boosters were delivered between November 6-12, an increase on the 1.7 million boosters given out during the previous seven days. More than one million 12 to 15-year-olds in England have been vaccinated against Covid-19. NHS England said more than 3,500 schools have hosted clinics, while 95% of all schools have either already been visited or have a visit planned in the coming weeks. Cambodia will stop requiring quarantine for travellers who have been vaccinated for Covid-19 starting on Monday, prime minister Hun Sen said. The country has required lengthy quarantine for more than 18 months. China donated 500,000 doses of Covid-19 vaccine on Sunday to Syria, which has one of the world’s lowest inoculation rates and what the UN called an alarming rise in cases Russia on Sunday confirmed 38,823 Covid-19 infections and 1,219 deaths.The Moscow Times said health passes will be introduced for access to public places, restaurants and intercity trains and planes in a radical move designed to boost Russia’s vaccination campaign. Australia could start administering the vaccine shots for children under the age of 12 in January. Health minister Greg Hunt said medical regulators are still reviewing the health and safety data for the vaccinations to be administered for children between the ages of five and 11 and are unlikely to decide this year. Three men died when a fire broke out in a Covid-19 ward of a hospital in the southern Bulgarian city of Sliven early on Sunday.A cigarette, lit by a patient, was the most probable cause of the fire, the health ministry said. In the UK, new research suggests that workers who were furloughed are six times more likely to have lost their jobs than other employees. But the end of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (JRS) is likely to have led to only a small increase in the number of people not working, said the Resolution Foundation. Covid-19 victims and bereaved families in Northern Ireland should mobilise immediately to influence the terms of reference of any statutory investigation, a leading expert has said. Public inquiry lawyer Michael Imperato, said victims, their families, and the public and private sectors must have their say on any future probe into the pandemic. In Chile, some 2,835 new cases of Covid-1i were registered on Sunday, of which 1,811 were cases with symptoms, and 683 cases without symptoms. Thailand recorded 7,079 Covid-19 cases and 47 deaths, according to nationthailand.com . The ministry of public health said of the new cases that 171 had been found in prisons. China donated 500,000 doses of Covid-19 vaccine on Sunday to war-torn Syria, which has one of the world’s lowest inoculation rates and what the UN called an alarming rise in cases ,AFP reports. The latest shipment raises to almost two million the number of such deliveries to Syria in a week. Less than two percent of Syria’s population have been vaccinated and cases of infection are spiking, United Nations under secretary-general Martin Griffiths warned last month. Damascus last week received more than 1.3 million doses of Chinese-made vaccine Sinovac under the global Covax programme set up to try to ensure an equitable delivery of jabs. Health minister Hassan Ghabash, speaking to journalists, praised the latest donation of another Chinese vaccine, Sinopharm. Three snow leopards have died at the Lincoln Children’s Zoo in Nebraska of complications from Covid-19. The zoo described the deaths of the three leopards – named Ranney, Everest, and Makalu – as “truly heartbreaking”. The zoo began treating the leopards and two Sumatran tigers for the virus last month. The zoo said the tigers, Axl and Kumar, have made a recovery. More than one million 12- to 15-year-olds in England have been vaccinated against Covid-19. NHS England said more than 3,500 schools have hosted clinics, while 95% of all schools have either already been visited or have a visit planned in the coming weeks. Officials said the latest data shows that the NHS has hit the million milestone with children aged 12 to 15, with more than 800 schools set to be visited by NHS teams next week offering young people the jab. Vaccines have been available to 12 to 15-year-olds in England since September 20. Health secretary Sajid Javid said: Over a million young people aged 12 to 15 have now received the crucial protection the vaccine provides. This is a phenomenal accomplishment and will make a huge difference in stopping Covid-19 from further disrupting their education, their health and their lives.” Dr Emily Lawson, head of the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme, told PA: It is fantastic that one million 12 to 15-year-olds have now had their Covid jabs thanks to the schools programme and the hard work of specialist NHS teams who are either visiting hundreds of schools every single week or our vaccination sites. I would urge families to look at the information together and then book in to give children and their loved ones crucial protection ahead of winter.” Consent letters are sent out to parents and guardians prior to the school clinics with information on Covid-19 vaccination. Parents and guardians are asked to attend vaccination sites with their children if they want them to be jabbed outside of school hours and consent will be sought on the day. There are around 60 school-age immunisation services across the country with teams made up of clinical staff such as paediatric nurses and school nurses. The Tokyo metropolitan government on Sunday reported 22 new coronavirus cases, down two from Saturday and up one from last Sunday, Japan Today reports. The number of infected people hospitalised with severe symptoms in Tokyo is 10, unchanged from Saturday, health officials said. The nationwide figure is 85, down two from Saturday. Nationwide, the number of reported cases was 134. The number of coronavirus-related deaths reported was two. More on Austria’s proposed lockdown for the unvaccinated. AP reports: The move prohibits unvaccinated individuals older than age 12 from leaving their homes except for basic activities such as working, grocery shopping, going for a walk — or getting vaccinated. Authorities are concerned that hospital staff will no longer be able to handle the growing influx of COVID-19 patients. “It’s our job as the government of Austria to protect the people,” Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg told reporters in Vienna on Sunday. “Therefore we decided that starting Monday ... there will be a lockdown for the unvaccinated.” The lockdown affects about 2 million people in the Alpine country of 8.9 million people, news agency APA reported. It doesn’t apply to children under the age of 12 because they cannot yet officially get vaccinated. The lockdown will initially last for 10 days and police have been asked to check people outside to make sure they are vaccinated, Schallenberg said. Some confusion, it seems, over my earlier post regarding when people in England can book their booster. According to my colleague Denis Campbell’s report in The Observer today, boosters will now be offered five months after the second dose. Here is his exclusive article: Austria is placing millions of people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on lockdown as of Monday to deal with a surge in infections to record levels, Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg said on Sunday, Reuters reports. “We must raise the vaccination rate. It is shamefully low,” Schallenberg told a news conference announcing the new measure after a video call with the governors of Austria’s nine provinces. Roughly 65% of the population is fully vaccinated against Covid-19, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Russia on Sunday confirmed 38,823 Covid-19 infections and 1,219 deaths. The Moscow Times reports health passes will be introduced for access to public places, restaurants and intercity trains and planes in a radical move designed to boost Russia’s sluggish vaccination campaign. The move comes as Russia is now the world leader in coronavirus deaths for the first time since the start of the pandemic, the paper said. The developer of Russia’s coronavirus vaccine Sputnik V has said Moscow should make jabs mandatory as inoculation rates remain low despite record deaths and campaigning by authorities, it reported. St. Petersburg on Tuesday mandated vaccination against Covid-19 for all residents over 60 years old as well as people with certain chronic illnesses. Covid-19 victims and bereaved families in Northern Ireland should mobilise immediately to influence the terms of reference of any statutory investigation, a leading expert has said. Public inquiry lawyer Michael Imperato, of Watkins and Gunn, said victims, their families, and the public and private sectors must have their say on any future probe into the pandemic. PA reports Northern Ireland has seen one of the highest death rates of any developed country during the pandemic. It quotes Imperato saying: “It is inevitable there will be a public inquiry.Now is the time for impacted groups and victims in Northern Ireland to seek to shape its form and the nature of the investigation with the aim of securing fair outcomes. Once such a probe starts, it is too late to do that. Influencing the scope of a public inquiry is a major battle, and if those who want to do it are unprepared for the fight, ultimately, they lose out. A failure to involve Northern Ireland victims and their families, as well as all the relevant elements of the public and private sectors in the terms of reference will ultimately undermine confidence in the good faith of any inquiry. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has indicated he intends to launch an inquiry in Spring 2022 and that its aims and remit will be announced early next year. The UK government wants to work with the devolved administrations in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales on its scope. Johnson has also promised to appoint a chair for the official Covid inquiry before Christmas. But in Scotland, first minister Nicola Sturgeon wants to start a statutory inquiry there as soon as possible, and is already seeking input into its remit The Northern Ireland Assembly is yet to commit to holding a statutory inquiry. Imperato said it is imperative the facts about how it was handled in Northern Ireland come to light. Covid did not happen only in London. Any inquiry will require a Northern Ireland focus if we are to truly understand what happened. As the virus surges in Eastern Europe, leaders have been slow to act, according to a report by AP. The agency reports: At the main hospital in Romania’s capital, the morgue ran out of space for the dead in recent days, and doctors in Bulgaria have suspended routine surgeries so they can tend to a surge in COVID-19 patients. In the Serbian capital, the graveyard now operates an extra day during the week in order to bury all the bodies arriving.” The report said for two months now, “a stubborn wave of virus infections has ripped mercilessly through several countries in Central and Eastern Europe, where vaccination rates are much lower than elsewhere on the continent”. A World Health Organization official declared earlier this month that Europe is again at the epicenter of the pandemic. While several Western European countries are seeing spikes in infections, it is nations to the East that are driving fatalities. Romania, Bulgaria and the Balkan states recorded some of the highest per-capita death rates in the world in the first week of November, according to the WHO. AP reports: Experts say fumbled vaccination campaigns and underfunded and mismanaged health systems set the stage for the latest outbreaks, which gathered pace as leaders dithered. Some are acting now — but many doctors say it took too long and is still not enough. It adds: Many governments in the region are facing elections soon, and that no doubt made them reluctant to force people to get vaccinated or impose unpopular lockdowns even in former Communist nations that once carried out mandatory inoculations without hesitation or where leaders were quick to introduce closures earlier in the pandemic. It continues: While nations around the world have struggled with resistance to vaccines, many in Central and Eastern Europe have particularly low rates for places where supply is not an issue. Bulgaria and Romania, both in the European Union, have fully vaccinated about 23% and 35% of their populations, respectively. Bosnia and Herzegovina has just 21% fully vaccinated. In Croatia, it says, soaring infections appear to have been a wake-up call, with unusually large lines of people waiting for vaccines in recent days. “Authorities said on Wednesday that more than 15,000 people received their first dose a day earlier — a significant jump after vaccinations all but halted in the Adriatic country of 4.2 million. “Croatia and neighbouring Slovenia have also introduced COVID passes in recent weeks. But medical organisations in Slovenia have warned that the Alpine country’s health system is still on the verge of collapse. They urgently appealed to people to do their best to avoid seeking urgent care in the coming months. Australia could start administering the vaccine shots for children under the age of 12 in January, officials said on Sunday. Health minister Greg Hunt said medical regulators are still reviewing the health and safety data for the vaccinations to be administered for children between the ages of five and 11 and are unlikely to decide this year. “The expectation that they have set is the first part of January, hopefully early January,” Hunt told the Australian Broadcast Corp’s Insiders programme. “But they’re going as quickly as possible.” Army Lieutenant-General John Frewen, Australia’s Covid-19 Taskforce commander told The Age newspaper that Australia has secured the necessary supplies. “We have actually purchased sufficient supply for doses and boosters down to infants,” Frewen said. On Friday, Australia crossed the 90% single-dose mark for those aged 16 and over, with 83% having two shots. The country has also vaccinated 57.7% of children between the ages of 12 and 15, according to health ministry data. Australia’s high vaccination rates were key to its decision to partially reopen international borders this month for the first time since the start of the pandemic, despite ongoing Delta variant outbreaks in the most populous states, New South Wales and Victoria. On Sunday, there were 1,100 infections reported in the two states, home to nearly 60% of the country’s population. Five more people died. Reuters reports. However, despite the Delta outbreaks that led to months of lockdown in the two largest cities, Sydney and Melbourne, the national tally of just 191,000 infections and 1,596 deaths is far lower than those of many other developed nations. The continent is now the centre of the global epidemic – again. As countries from the Baltic to the Med brace for harsher winter measures, The Observer reports on what is driving the fourth wave. The Netherlands on Saturday became the first western European country since the summer to impose a partial lockdown, Berlin bars its restaurants to the unvaccinated, and France races to improve its booster campaign, Europe is once again the centre of the pandemic. Half a dozen Dutch towns have already cancelled the popular parades tha mark the annual arrival of Sinterklaas this weekend, and Germany’s celebrated Christmas markets could yet be called off. According to the World Health Organization, coronavirus infections across the continent rose by 7% and deaths by 10% over the past week, making it the only world region where cases and deaths are steadily increasing. Nearly two-thirds of new infections – about 1.9 million – were in Europe, the WHO said, marking the sixth consecutive week that the spread of virus has risen across the continent, with several countries experiencing fourth or fifth waves. Except in central and eastern Europe, where vaccine coverage is significantly lower, admissions to hospital and deaths generally remain much lower than a year ago, and national differences in preventive measures make it hard to draw broad conclusions. But, The Observer reports, experts agree that a combination of low vaccine uptake, waning immunity among people inoculated early, and growing complacency about masks and distancing after governments relaxed curbs over the summer is the most likely cause. You can read the full story here: Three men died when a fire broke out in a Covid-19 ward of a hospital in the southern Bulgarian city of Sliven early on Sunday, officials said. The fire, which was quickly extinguished, broke out at around 0040 GMT and affected one room, Reuters reports. Six patients in adjacent rooms were moved to other wards of the hospital, the head of the regional fire safety department Vladimir Demirev said. Two of the men were found dead by firefighters. The other patient suffered heavy burns and was transported to another hospital where he later died. The cause of the fire is being investigated, but a cigarette, lit by a patient, was the most probable cause of the fire, the health ministry said in a statement. There are more than 8,000 Covid-19 patients, including 700 in intensive care units, being treated in Bulgarian hospitals Bulgaria has the lowest vaccination rate in the European Union, Reuters reported, and one of the highest coronavirus mortality rates in the bloc, with record daily infection numbers throughout October stretching its hospitals. On Cambodia stopping requiring fully-vaccinated travellers from quarantining, Hun Sen said: “After seeing that people have two doses and a negative COVID test, they will be allowed to travel all over the Kingdom of Cambodia.” Hun Sen said travellers will have to show their negative test 72 hours prior to travel and have two vaccine doses. Those who are unvaccinated will be quarantined for 14 days. Vaccinated foreigners and Cambodians who are in quarantine will be allowed to leave from tomorrow. He said: “This is a quick way to re-open the country and facilitate travel for our people. I know some of our citizens want to go abroad but are worried about coming back with quarantine required.” Cambodia has vaccinated nearly 90% of its more than 16 million people, one of Asia’s highest inoculation rates. Cambodia will stop requiring quarantine for travellers who have been vaccinated for Covid-19 starting on Monday, prime minister Hun Sen said on Sunday. The prime minister made the announcement in a voice message on social media after the Southeast Asian country has required lengthy quarantine for more than 18 months, Reuters reports. Russia has reported 38,823 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, down from 39,256 on the previous day. Mexico reported 217 new confirmed deaths from Covid -19 on Saturday, bringing the country’s official death toll from the pandemic to 291,089, according to health ministry data. Officials have said the ministry’s figures likely represent a significant undercount of COVID-19 deaths. Still in the UK, new research suggests that workers who were furloughed are six times more likely to have lost their jobs than other employees. But the end of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (JRS) is likely to have led to only a small increase in the number of people not working, said the Resolution Foundation, PA reports. Its study among 6,100 adults indicated that around 136,000 workers moved from furlough to either unemployment or inactivity. The think tank’s research showed that almost nine out of 10 workers who were furloughed in September were employed in October, while 12% moved into either unemployment or inactivity. The Foundation said its study showed the Government was right to extend the JRS to the end of September, adding that the biggest economic contraction in a century has led to one of the smallest recession-led rises in unemployment. Charlie McCurdy, economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “During its 18-month duration the Job Retention Scheme has supported over 11 million employees, preventing lockdowns and huge behavioural changes causing catastrophic rises in unemployment. “Plans to prematurely close the scheme led to concerns that its end would spark a fresh rise in worklessness, but extending the scheme to beyond the reopening of the economy this summer has helped to limit this rise to just 136,000 workers. “While it is welcome that unemployment has remained low, recently furloughed staff did face a much higher risk of losing their job in October.” A Government spokesperson said: “The furlough scheme was a lifeline for people all over the UK, providing support to more than 11 million workers during the toughest of economic times. “The economy has reopened and, as planned, millions of workers have moved off the scheme and back into work, with two million fewer people unemployed than expected. An investigation by the Mail on Sunday newspaper claims Britain’s response to Covid-19 is set to be dramatically scaled back as part of a pandemic exit strategy codenamed Rampdown. The paper says the “secret” Whitehall plan is detailed in official government documents leaked to the paper. It reports these reveal the government is set to: axe the legal requirement for those with the virus to self isolate for ten days end free Covid tests allowing private companies to charge for lateral flow and PCR tests shut down the Test and Trace system focus the fight on tacking local outbreaks and protecting “highest risk settings” such as care homes scrap the £500 payments for those on local incomes who must quarantine. The documents say experts believe that Covid will remain at endemic levels for years and mutant strains will remains a “a very real risk”, the paper claims. The NHS is now inviting those in England who had their second dose more than five months ago for their booster, allowing people to book their top-up in advance of becoming eligible so they can receive it as soon as they reach six months. NHS England said next week another 3.6 million people will be invited to book their booster when they become eligible, The Observer reports. Dr Nikki Kanani, GP and deputy lead for the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme, told PA: “It is fantastic to see such strong uptake for the booster vaccine and record numbers booking their life-saving top-up next week to make sure they have as much protection as possible ahead of winter with 3.6 million invites due to be sent this week. “In just seven weeks more than 10 million people in England have received their booster, including more than three quarters of over-75s, and with eligible people now able to book their booster vaccine online five months after their second dose, it is easier than ever to get protected. “I’ve had my booster - it was quick and easy and I urge anyone else who is eligible to take up the offer as soon as possible, as the vaccine remains the best way to keep yourself and your loved ones safe from coronavirus.” In The Netherlands, it has been reported that fifteen people were arrested after protests broke out over a newly-imposed COVID-19 lockdown. Hundreds of people gathered in the Dutch city of Leeuwarden on Saturday night, where videos showed them setting off fireworks and holding flares billowing smoke,Sky News reported. The Northern Netherlands Police Unit said a number of people refused to leave after they called on everyone to return home. Dutch broadcaster NOS reported that riot police later moved in to push the protesters off the city’s central square. Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte has said: ‘The virus is everywhere and need to be combated everywhere”. Under the new three-week lockdown, bars, restaurants and supermarkets have to close at 8pm and stores selling non-essential items are required to shut at 6pm. Good morning. Caroline Davies here. I am going to be taking you through the latest coronavirus news and developments around the world today. In the UK more than two million people received their Covid-19 booster in the past week, with health officials describing the numbers as record-breaking. NHS England said 2.1 million boosters were delivered between November 6-12, an increase on the 1.7 million boosters given out during the previous seven days. A total of 2.7 million appointments were made on the National Booking Service in the past week - with more than three quarters of a million bookings made on Monday. More than 10 million people in England have now received their booster vaccine since the programme began - including people who are clinically vulnerable, aged 50 and above, or who work in health and social care. The latest figures come after Health Secretary Sajid Javid said last weekend that Covid-19 booster jabs, and first and second jabs, are part of a “national mission” to help avoid a return to coronavirus restrictions over Christmas. You can get in touch on caroline.davies@theguardian.comThere are “concerning weaknesses” in the Windrush compensation scheme, according to a legal charity that has called for the programme to be taken out of the Home Office. A report by the charity Justice, titled Reforming the Windrush compensation scheme, makes 27 recommendations after the working group found the scheme suffers from a lack of independence, delays and inconsistencies in decision-making and lack of experience and cultural understanding among caseworkers. The claim process is complex and many claimants require legal assistance to complete their claim, the report said; however, there is no provision of free legal representation. Despite the initial estimate of about 15,000 people being eligible for compensation, as of the end of September 2021 only 864 people have received compensation payments, Justice said. The report is the fourth investigation into why the compensation scheme has been so slow following reports by the Commons’ public accounts committee and home affairs select committee, as well as spending watchdog the National Audit Office. Among the recommendations are calls for the scheme to be moved from the Home Office, preferably to an organisation independent of the government, as well as funded legal representation for claimants. Stephanie Needleman, the acting legal director at Justice, said: “The Windrush Compensation Scheme should provide a valuable lifeline for those who have suffered losses and hardships: however, there are concerning weaknesses in the scheme’s current administrative and procedural processes. “Through these recommendations, we hope to see structural changes to improve processes, ensuring that those who have suffered are treated with dignity and receive the compensation they are due.” The report also calls for improved communication with claimants, including the use of video guides, correspondence that is easier to understand and regular reports on the progress of a claim. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The home secretary has been resolute in her determination to ensure everyone affected by the Windrush scandal receives the full compensation to which they are entitled. “We are pleased that this report welcomes the significant improvements we have made to the scheme, including its overhaul last December. Since then the amount of compensation paid has risen from less than £3m to over £31.6m, with a further £5.6m having been offered. “Many of the issues raised in this report are already being addressed and several recommendations have previously been considered. “For example, we continue to firmly believe that moving the operation of the scheme out of the Home Office would risk significantly delaying vital payments to those affected. However, we are always open to making further improvements and will reflect carefully on the report’s findings.”Western Australia’s largest city will dive into deep waters in February, embracing the theme of the sea for the 2022 Perth festival. After a Covid-infected security guard threw Perth into a snap five-day lockdown in February this year, scuppering the opening of the Bilya (river)-themed 2021 festival, the 2022 event will plunge head-first into Wardan (Noongar for ocean) for an almost exclusively Western Australian-populated program from 11 February. Unveiling the program, the festival’s artistic director, Iain Grandage, said while the 2022 festival would almost certainly be subject to Covid restrictions, it would be as celebratory as possible. “Borders are still closed and nobody knows yet when they will open but there is an assumption here that it will be some stage in the early months of next year,” he said. “So it could be before the festival, but certainly not before Christmas and certainly not before new year. “These extreme jurisdictions have meant we’ve had to enact a series of changes to our program because we just couldn’t guarantee we could get artists from Australia’s eastern seaboard ... but it is a program that is constantly evolving; we’re looking to be as responsive as we can be.” The opening weekend will feature Escape, a free, large-scale immersive event staged over two nights with live performances, light installations, food and ceremonies around the city’s beachfronts, wharves, warehouses and quays. The event will celebrate the enduring culture of the Noongar people, subsequent waves of migration to the city, and a tribute to the Catalpa rescue of 1876, in which six Irish Fenian prisoners escaped the British captors holding them in Fremantle prison. The festival will close with Noongar Wonderland, a three-day celebration of local First Nations culture held at Perry Lake, including storytelling, light installations and a dance party. An arena production of Bizet’s Carmen will be the festival’s operatic centrepiece, with more than 150 singers and musicians from the state’s flagship orchestra and opera companies claiming the hallowed ground of the Waca for two nights on 25 and 26 of February. Works themed around the sea by Benjamin Britten and the WA composer Olivia Davies, as well as the Australian premiere of John Luther Adams’ major work Become Ocean, will be performed by the West Australian Symphony Orchestra at the Perth Concert Hall on the festival’s closing weekend. On a more intimate scale, the immersive work Body of Knowledge, devised by the Melbourne-based performance curator Samara Hersch, will invite headphone-wearing audience members to accept individual mobile phone calls from Australian teenagers wanting to talk – and seek advice – about their relationship with their bodies. The work was streamed live at Germany’s Impulse theatre festival in August, with one critic, Amitha Amranand, writing that it tested the personal boundaries of all participants. “The personal and private nature of the format made me feel like I was constantly teetering on the edge of transgression,” Amranand wrote. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning The Heath Ledger Theatre will host two dramas: Mary Stuart, adapted from Friedrich Schiller’s verse play by the WA actor, playwright and screenwriter Kate Mulvany. The production will star Caroline Brazier as Mary and Kate Walsh as her nemesis, Queen Elizabeth I. From 4-6 March, the semi-autobiographical play City of Gold, written and starring the Wongutha Yamatji actor and activist Meyne Wyatt will claim the theatre, a joint Black Swan State Theatre Company and Sydney Theatre Company production. Another autobiographical performance, Jali, written and performed by Oliver Twist, will examine the Rwandan refugee’s turbulent past and moving, sometimes humorous, experiences trying to forge a new life in Australia. This will be one of two Studio Underground-staged one-man shows, the other being Joel Bray’s Daddy, an examination of the transition from idyllic childhood to queer adulthood. Her Majesty’s Theatre will host the world premiere of the Yirra Yaakin Theatre Company’s musical Panawathi Girl, written by David Milroy. The West Australian Ballet will once more transform the Quarry Amphitheatre into a choreographic fest with four works, including Robert Bondara’s Take Me With You, and a new work for the company by the Brazilian British choreographer Daniela Cardim. The dance artist Rachel Arianne Ogle will lead a team of performers in And the Earth Will Swallow Them Whole, exploring the themes of the body, death and burial. A collaboration between Queensland-based dance and theatre artist collective The Farm and resident Perth troupe The Co3 Contemporary Dance company, titled The Ninth Wave, will use the vast expanse of City Beach Park for a new end-of-the-world-so-let’s-party production, with an original score by Regurgitator’s Ben Ely. The Perth festival will include a comprehensive visual arts program and music concerts will include performances by Ta-ku and Katie Noonan. This program, along with the writers’ weekend in the final week of February – which has authors including Helen Garner and Michael Robotham booked – may be expanded if Covid restrictions are lifted earlier than expected. The festival’s long-running Lotterywest outdoor film festival, which will open on 22 November and run until 3 April, will be playing exclusively for WA residents for the time being, but will include the Cannes film festival award-winners Memoria, Murina, The Worst Person in the World, and the world premiere of Renée Webster’s WA-made How to Please a Woman.Early this year, as Japan’s coronavirus cases began another ominous rise, the country seemed determined to confirm its reputation as a vaccine backwater. Held up by additional clinical trials, its Covid-19 vaccine rollout lagged behind that of the UK and other countries by several months. And when it finally started offering shots in February, doses were administered at an achingly slow pace, beginning with medical staff and older people. Tens of millions of others were convinced they would have to wait many months before coming within arm’s reach of a health worker’s needle. But today, Japan ranks among the most Covid-immunised countries in the world. As of Friday, more than 94.5 million people, or almost three-quarters of its 125 million population, had received both jabs – a higher rate than the UK and several other countries that began their rollouts much earlier. Daily Covid-19 cases have plummeted. On Saturday, 202 new infections were reported nationwide, compared with more than 25,000 just three months ago. Tokyo had 24 cases, compared with a record 15,773 on 13 August, days after the closing ceremony of the 2020 Olympics. Months of emergency measures, including a ban on alcohol sales at restaurants and bars, have been lifted and people are returning to sports and other events in significant numbers. Booster shots will be offered from next month, starting with medical workers. Media hype over scares involving the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine in the 1990s and, more recently, with the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, helped turn Japan into one of the least vaccine-confident countries in the world, according to a 2020 Lancet study. Less than 30% of people were confident that vaccines were safe, compared with at least 50% of Americans, the study said. A February poll by the Kyodo news agency found that 27.4% of respondents said they did not want to be vaccinated against Covid-19. But data provided by the prime minister’s office shows high Covid-19 vaccination rates across all age groups. More than 92% of people in their 70s have been double jabbed, along with almost 70% of those in their 30s. Most surprising, however, is the take-up among younger people, a cohort thought to be more influenced by anti-vax conspiracies and social media disinformation. The most recent data show that 5.4 million children aged 12-19 – or 60.7% of that age group – have received two doses. Nanako Tokunaga, a university student in Tokyo, was initially sceptical when pharmaceutical companies announced they had developed Covid-19 vaccines at the end of last year. “I was worried about the side effects, and there were lots of rumours on social media that they caused infertility,” said Tokunaga, 20. Reassured by pro-vaccination comments by politicians and doctors, Tokunaga received both jabs in August. Many of her friends have done the same since early summer, when TV broadcasts showed long queues outside a walk-in vaccination centre in Shibuya, a Tokyo neighbourhood popular with young people. “It made us think seriously about the benefits of having the vaccine,” she said. “I’m happy that I decided to go ahead with it.” Japan’s complicated relationship with vaccines can be traced to successful class-action lawsuits brought against the health ministry by a small number of parents who claimed – without presenting evidence of a causal link – their children had experienced serious side-effects from the MMR vaccine in the 1990s. But Prof Kentaro Iwata, the head of the infectious diseases division at Kobe University hospital, said it was wrong to characterise Japanese people as fundamentally vaccine hesitant, noting the high take-up rate of the flu vaccine. “Japanese bureaucrats are quite hesitant when it comes to advocating vaccines, however, particularly after the government lost lawsuits regarding side effects from the MMR vaccine,” he said. Iwata has been critical of the government’s handling of the pandemic, but praised its approach to inoculations. “The Covid vaccination programme has been a great success,” he said. “I have never seen something implemented this pragmatically in the history of vaccinations in Japan.” Initially, however, even government politicians and health experts were cautious about encouraging people to have the Covid jab. The turning point came in the summer, as Tokyo was preparing to host the 2020 Olympics in defiance of public opinion. “The government was insisting that the Olympics would go ahead, and that made people fearful,” said Riko Muranaka, a lecturer at Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine. “Japan wouldn’t be in the good position it is in now had it not been for the Olympics. “There was also an element of ‘negativity’ in spurring people to get vaccinated. People decided they should have the vaccine so they could tell other people that they were not a threat. It was a social courtesy, and to protect themselves, of course.” The shift in attitudes is not limited to the Covid-19 vaccine. A panel on Friday said the health ministry should resume actively recommending the HPV vaccine – which is universally recognised as safe and effective – to teenage girls. Japan withdrew the recommendation – but kept the vaccine available free of charge – in 2013 after sensationalist media reports of alleged severe side-effects. Although no causal link between the vaccine and side-effects was established, the rate of HPV inoculation fell from 70% in 2013 to less than 1%. Hinako Sakikawa, a 19-year-old university student, said she initially shared her age group’s scepticism of the Covid-19 vaccine. “It was new, so I was anxious at first,” she said. “I thought it might damage my health or even threaten my life.” Sakikawa, who said she and almost all of her initially vaccine-hesitant friends were now fully jabbed, acknowledged that peer pressure had influenced their decision. “There was definitely a feeling that we should have the vaccine, since everyone else seemed to be having it, and we promised we would meet up once we were double jabbed. Now it’s easier to go out and meet friends and do the all the things we couldn’t do before.”Scott Morrison has backed a Senate inquiry into the public broadcasters’ handling of complaints, after extraordinary pushback from the ABC chair, Ita Buttrose, that it amounted to “political interference”. Morrison said the ABC was a government agency and “nobody was above the scrutiny of the Senate”, rejecting suggestions the ABC had been singled out for special treatment. On Thursday the Senate environment and communications legislation committee, chaired by Liberal senator Andrew Bragg, announced a snap inquiry into complaints handling by the ABC and SBS, to report by 28 February. The inquiry was announced after the ABC’s complaints division told Fox News it had not upheld any of the complaints made in a lengthy submission about a Four Corners program on Fox News, aired in August. In a blistering statement on Sunday, Buttrose called on the Senate to act to “defend the independence of the ABC” by passing a motion to terminate or suspend the inquiry until an independent process commissioned by the ABC Board last month had been completed. “This is an act of political interference designed to intimidate the ABC and mute its role as this country’s most trusted source of public interest journalism,” she said. On Monday Buttrose, who was appointed ABC chair by the Morrison government in 2019, described the relationship with the government as “strained”. “We do look at powerful people, we do investigate situations and sometimes there are situations where people wish we wouldn’t go,” she told Radio National. “I think it would be much better if the government and the national broadcaster had a better relationship. We are not the enemy.” Buttrose questioned whether the government believed that “politicians should be able to meddle and dictate to the national broadcaster about content” adding “because that’s where this is leading”. Asked about the controversy on Monday, Morrison said that it was a “matter for the Senate” and “there is nobody above the scrutiny of the Senate”. Morrison noted the government had to respond to Senate inquiries, including scrutiny of the chief medical officer through the Covid-19 committee. “[The ABC] is a government agency, they have their independence and nobody is questioning that, but that are not above the scrutiny of how they conduct themselves, using taxpayers money from any other government agency,” he said. “That is business as usual for the Australian parliament. I don’t know why they would consider themselves an exception to business as usual.” On Monday, Bragg said he was a “supporter of the ABC” but had pushed for the inquiry in response to “community feedback” from groups including veterans and multicultural groups. Labor’s representative on the communications committee, Senator Nita Green, opposed the inquiry which was pushed through by the government’s majority. On Monday, Green rejected suggestions from Bragg that the inquiry was not partisan, noting that he had used the legislation committee where the government has a majority rather than seek Senate support to refer the issue for inquiry.A possum has been released without charge after it held a woman “hostage” at her home, New Zealand police say. Officers received a call late on Sunday night from a distressed woman who said “a possum was holding her hostage” at her home in the South Island city of Dunedin. “When she would exit her house and attempt to reach her car, the possum would charge at her and she would flee inside,” Snr Sgt Craig Dinnissen said. When the police arrived and approached the front door, a juvenile possum came out of the dark and climbed an officer’s leg. Dinnissen suspected it was either an escaped pet or had recently been separated from its mother. After apprehending the suspect, police delivered the possum up to nearby lookout spot Signal Hill and released it into the wild “to prevent further citizen harassment”. No harm came to the possum or the officer, Dinnessen said. Veterinarian and animal behaviour expert Dr Rachael Stratton suggested the possum was acting out of fear rather than aggression. “The typical thing for most wild animals would be to run away. Unless, as it’s a juvenile, it is perhaps still learning how to deal with threats.” The possum may have had fewer options for places to run and hide, because it was in an urban environment, she said. But while the human population of Dunedin may rest easy once more, New Zealand’s native birds, insects and trees cannot. Possums have had a devastating impact on bird life, competing for food and habitat resources, and climbing into nests to eat eggs and fledglings. They have also destroyed native trees, especially rātā, totara, tītoki, kōwhai and kohekohe. The marsupials were first introduced into New Zealand from Australia in 1837, to establish a fur trade which never took off. With no natural predators other than cats, and a smörgåsbord of flora and fauna that were defenceless to predators, possum numbers exploded. A 2009 Landcare study estimated their population exceeded 47 million.Anti-vaccine protesters in New Zealand have been told to stop using the “ka mate” haka by the tribe who have ownership of it. The haka, a Māori war dance made internationally famous by its performance by the All Blacks at rugby matches, is considered a cultural treasure, or taonga, in New Zealand. It was performed last week by anti-vaccination and “freedom” protesters, who marched in their thousands to parliament. Ngāti Toa, the tribe that has legal guardianship of the ka mate haka, said on Monday that it “condemns the use of the Ka Mate haka to push and promote anti-Covid-19-vaccination messages” and “request that anti-vaccination and anti-mandate protesters cease the use of Ka Mate at their protests immediately”. The tribe’s request comes amid concerns from some that Māori sovereignty movements are being co-opted by anti-vaxxers, some of whom argue that vaccination represents a form of “modern day colonisation”. Vaccination rates among Māori are concerningly low in New Zealand: Ministry of Health figures show 77% of eligible (those aged 12 and over) Māori have had at least one dose of the vaccine and 61% are fully vaccinated. In the total eligible population, 90% have had one dose and 81% both. Even as vaccination rates gradually rise, an increasingly vocal dissenting cohort have begun to organise demonstrations against vaccine mandates and other public health restrictions. Several thousand gathered on Tuesday to protest in front of parliament, and their concerns were eclectic: among the signs and slogans were pro-Trump and QAnon flags, calls for violence against prime minister Jacinda Ardern, as well as flags of the Māori sovereignty movement. After a number of speeches, members of the crowd performed a ka mate haka. But Ngāti Toa leaders said that the tribe had lost many tupuna (ancestors) to pandemics during the course of colonisation – and that they were embracing vaccination to protect against this one. “Many of our tupuna lost their lives in previous pandemics and our iwi [tribe] suffered greatly,” Helmut Modlik, chief executive officer of the tribal authority Te Rūnanga o Toa Rangatira, said. “We are absolutely clear that the Covid-19 vaccine is the best protection we have available to us, and we are committed to supporting our whānau (family) to get vaccinated as soon as possible.” “Protests are promoting the views of individuals ahead of the needs of collective whānau.”Pacific representatives and negotiators have condemned the outcome of the Cop26 meeting as “watered down” and a “monumental failure” that puts Pacific nations in severe existential danger, with one saying that Australia’s refusal to support funding for loss and damage suffered by Pacific countries was “a deep betrayal” of the region. Some Pacific leaders expressed qualified optimism about the result of the critical climate summit, such as the Fijian prime minister, Frank Bainimarama, who tweeted: “The 1.5-degree target leaves Glasgow battered, bruised, but alive.” But many other Pacific experts and climate negotiators were disheartened by the result. “1.5 is barely alive,” said Auimatagi Joe Moeono-Kolio, a Pacific senior political adviser to the Fossil Fuels Non-Proliferation Treaty Initiative. “The first draft of an otherwise very unambitious text had one notable bright spot in it – the phase-out of coal. This was further watered down. For a planet in crisis, this represents a monumental failure in recognising the clear and imminent danger entire countries are now in, including my own. “For all the hoopla and greenwashing since yesterday, the fundamental fact remains: we are still headed for a two-degree-plus world,” he said. For Samoan negotiator Galumalemana Anne Rasmussen, who is the representative of Small Island Developing States (Sids) to the Cop bureau, the Pacific can only do so much. “The Alliance of Small Island States and Pacific Sids really pushed hard, everyone engaged, but unfortunately it is always up to the developed and rich to determine the fate and direction of these pledges and outcomes.” A regional oceans and climate expert from Tonga, Taholo Kami, agreed: “I think we may be finding leadership at subnational and national level, private sector and even consumer and community level offer more hope at this time than the lethargic Cop process where we are forced to celebrate painful and minimal shifts with text and leave not knowing if this will result in meaningful outcomes.” In particular, Pacific leaders were disappointed by the softened language on “phasing down” rather than “phasing out” coal, and also the lack of strong commitment for funding to pay for loss and damages suffered by Pacific nations due to the climate crisis. “Cop26 also failed to adequately recognise our present reality – we are facing the impacts of climate change right now,” said Auimatagi, who has worked with Pacific governments under the process of the UN framework convention on climate change. “Yet despite their historical responsibility for our current plight, developed nations like the US, UK and Australia refused to support a funding facility for loss and damage which, in Australia’s case, presents a deep betrayal and abdication of its responsibilities to its Pacific neighbours.” Hilda Heine, the former president of the Marshall Islands, who has been a key figure in climate negotiations in previous years, tweeted she was “disappointed EU and US [High Ambition Coalition] members did not rally behind funding facility to support the vulnerable respond to loss and damages caused by industrialised world’s addiction to [fossil fuels] and coal”. Despite travel restrictions, costs and risk to health, Pacific islands sent negotiations teams to Cop26 in the hopes of influencing outcomes and ensuring that Pacific concerns were heard. The minister for finance of Tuvalu, one of the atoll nations considered most at risk of disappearing due to sea level rise, gave an emotive speech to the summit in which he spoke of the impact of the climate criss on his country. “It is not fiction, it is not projected to happen in the future – our land is fast disappearing. Tuvalu is literally sinking. We must take action now.” But even the presence of Pacific negotiators could not influence the outcomes of the Glasgow summit, which as it stands – even if conditional and unconditional nationally determined contributions for the near-term target of 2030 were met – projected that warming might still spell the end for some Pacific atoll nations. “Going forward, it’s time we look at not only drastically reducing our fossil fuels consumption, but begin taking serious steps ahead of Cop27 to stop fossil fuel production altogether and begin a just transition before it is too late,” Auimatagi said. “Only then can we have a real shot of keeping 1.5 alive and ensuring our islands – and our planet – survives.”A “root cause” of the tragedy that led to 50 resident deaths at St Basil’s aged care home was an eight-day delay between the reporting of its first Covid case to Victoria’s health department and the testing of all residents, a coronial inquest has heard. New evidence of failures at the home was obtained in recent months, counsel assisting Peter Rozen QC said in his opening address to the inquest, which began on Monday with the names of those who died being read as the court stood in silence. Rozen referred to an independent expert report dated 11 November 2021 from a specialist emergency physician, Dr Ian Norton. Norton’s report said the delay between the first case at the home being reported on 9 July 2020 and subsequent testing was “the root cause of a serious outbreak not being contained and the subsequent issues at St Basil’s”. At the time, federal government protocols stated testing should occur within four to six hours of a case being identified in aged care. The report also said the decision by the state government to furlough the St Basil’s workforce, the repercussions of managing this falling to the federal government, and failures in coordination between both levels of government, was another “root cause” of the disaster. “A successful response to an outbreak of this very infectious virus necessitated a high degree of cooperation and coordination among the various government and non-government agencies involved,” Rozen told the court. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On 21 July the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton – who will give evidence to the inquest on 24 November – decided that all staff who worked at the home between 1 and 15 July 2020 would be deemed a close contact and furloughed in the interest of the health of both residents and staff. Rozen said the commonwealth had “great difficulty” in finding a suitable number of experienced staff to replace them, and this had a “devastating” consequence for the residents. Rozen told the inquest that a number of senior members of the original staff, including doctors from the medical team, warned senior state and federal government officials that furloughing the entire workforce would lead to neglect of residents. One doctor told government officials on 21 July that furloughing the entire staff was a “shocking idea”, using his recent experience at Estia Heidelberg – where a replacement workforce resulted in medications being lost, meals not being provided, residents not receiving fluids, and other neglect of care – to stress his concern. A senior geriatrician told the meeting that continuity of some regular staff was needed or “disaster” would occur. The facility manager at St Basil’s told the meeting that it would be “dangerous” to furlough all the staff, Rozen told the court. “Despite the concerns of the doctors and the operator of St Basil’s, the 3pm meeting on 21 July 2020 concluded with a decision to press on with the replacement of the entire staff at St Basil’s” the following day, Rozen said. Separately the secretary of the federal department of health, Dr Brendan Murphy, and the then aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, asked chief nursing and midwifery officer, Prof Alison McMillan, to go to St Basil’s on 22 July to assess the situation. Murphy wanted to move the residents out of the home and was concerned about the situation, the court heard, but wanted someone to assess the home to help make a decision. McMillan assessed the home alongside a senior officer from the Victorian department of health. “It appears that they spoke to the senior managers but did not assess the quality of the replacement workforce,” Rozen said. “They saw no residents, they did not tour the facility.” McMillan emailed Murphy to say she thought St Basil’s was a “fit for purpose facility’ and there was “no need for a significant evacuation of positive residents to hospital”. “On that basis, the question of transferring a significant number of Covid-19 positive residents out of St Basil’s was deferred, only to be revived in the form of a partial evacuation of the residents from late on the 24th of July as the true extent of the neglect became apparent to those at the highest levels of the commonwealth and Victorian governments,” Rozen said. Senior commonwealth public servants in Canberra were making decisions about a home they never set foot in, he added. Rozen stressed that the replacement workforce at the home were not to blame, and that a number had gone above and beyond in trying circumstances, working 17-hour shifts for more than a week straight trying to help the residents. “There were far too few of these workers at St Basil’s for them to have provided care at the level the residents deserved and the law required,” Rozen said. Christine Golding, whose mother Efraxia, 84, died in the facility after contracting Covid, was the first witness to give evidence. She described her mother’s experience as “extremely dehumanising, sad, and inhumane”. She remembered a call she received from a staff member before her mother’s death, when she was told that if all the staff were sent home, people would die from neglect rather than Covid. “It sent a shiver down my spine,” Golding said. While 45 residents died from Covid-19, five died from neglect, Rozen told the inquest. “I want the true story to be told and documented Australians deserve to know why our aged care Covid-19 preparedness was so poor, and contributed to premature death,” she told the court. The inquest continues.Want to know what’s within a 5km to 25km travel radius around you in Australia? Use our interactive radius map and calculator tool to see how far from home you can go under a range of potential Covid travel restrictions. This tool also allows for adding a second circle, to see the travel bubble overlap where you and another person are able to exercise together where applicable lockdown restrictions exist. Update: We have added a range of circles from 5km, 10km, 15km, 20km and 25km so you can check whatever situation applies to you currently, or see how far you can go under future rule changes.Ugandan security services held children for months in prisons after successive crackdowns against opposition activists earlier this year, witnesses and victims have said. Adults and children described systematic physical abuse, denial of basic legal rights and appalling conditions as they waited for trial on charges they claim were fabricated. The experiences of the children, revealed to the Guardian after their release, will increase pressure on Uganda, a key western ally in east Africa, over human rights failings that have grown significantly worse since the country’s president, Yoweri Museveni, started to face a significant political challenge in recent years. Since campaigning opened last year for elections, hundreds – possibly thousands – of supporters of the opposition politician, Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, also known as Bobi Wine, have been arrested and illegally detained for months in the worst repression for decades. Others, snatched off the streets by security services in a series of abductions, have disappeared into secret jails. More than 50 people were killed during protests in November. Most were shot by security forces. Museveni claimed victory in the election in January, which was marred by allegations of fraud and the harassment of opposition activists. The children included one who was 17 at the time of his arrest and others who were much younger. Fifteen-year-old Happy Mugisha, the adopted son of Kyagulanyi’s elder brother, was arrested on 21 March by masked armed men who raided his home. “They were looking for my dad, who had escaped. They told us to lie down at gunpoint then dragged us into their vehicle. I was blindfolded, beaten and tortured. When I refused to tell them my name, one soldier slapped me on the face and one kicked me on the chest and I fell down. They beat me. I was crying,” he said. A complaint to the international criminal court filed earlier this year by lawyers acting for victims describes hundreds of abductions. Some detainees have had their joints or genitals beaten with wires, have been burned with cigarettes or have had fingernails torn out. At least one detainee has been confirmed as having died in custody, although the true death toll is thought to be much higher. Many have been members of Wine’s party, the National Unity Platform (NUP). Ugandan military spokespeople have repeatedly denied responsibility for any abuses, and Museveni in a national address in February dismissed allegations that his forces had illegally detained civilians, saying the army was “a disciplined force” and that his party “does not kill” its opponents. Mugisha was held for 10 days in an overcrowded cell in at military facility in Mbuya in the capital, Kampala, where he was handcuffed, blindfolded and interrogated. “They asked me questions I didn’t have answers for … I told them I am a child and didn’t know anything. They would pour water on me, told me to remove clothes and beat me seriously. You could hear people screaming and crying. I was in very terrible pain. They told me I would be killed,” he said. Fifteen-year-old Elijah Walakira, another relative of Kyagulanyi, was detained in one of the first waves of repression in November 2020. The 15-year-old had been selling NUP merchandise near the party’s headquarters in Kampala when he was caught in a police raid. “I was pushed inside the back of the patrol car. We were driven to a police station. I was thrown into the cell. I was forced to share a cell with more than 80 adults. You didn’t have anywhere to sleep or stand at some point. We would sleep in turns,” Walakira said. After four days, Kyagulanyi came in person to the police station and obtained his nephew’s release. Museveni, 76, has been in power for 35 years and has strong support in some rural areas, as well as among the military, security services and police. The US and UK have given billions of dollars of development and security assistance to Uganda in recent years. Both have made their deepening concerns at recent human rights abuses clear. “It was a very bad experience … When I returned back to school, some students were sympathetic while others were making fun of me. They cooked up their stories, teased and mocked me. It caused a lot of pressure and trauma on me,” said Walakira. Kenny Kyalimpa, a 17-year-old student on Wine’s campaign team, was arrested in December, and held for six months at Kitalya maximum security prison outside Kampala. He described four days of beatings with rubber batons at a military barracks and a week in solitary confinement. “Day and night you are in handcuffs. I was told to strip naked, sit down and widen my legs. They squeezed my testicles and penis. I pleaded with them. But they didn’t want to listen,” Kyalimpa said. “They told me to say my last prayer because they were going to kill [me]. I told them: ‘If you want to kill, go ahead and kill me. God is on my side. My crime was supporting the opposition.’” Last month, Museveni moved to deflect mounting domestic anger and international concern in a new national address, saying abuses tarnish Uganda’s reputation and blaming “lazy” officers. “Evidence through torture is not reliable. Torture is unnecessary and wrong. It must not be used again if at all it was being used like I see some groups claim in the media,” the veteran ruler said.A mass of black cloud rolls over Harter Fell from the direction of the North Atlantic, spilling another icy shower over the rocky, intricate landscape of Duddon Valley. For the third time in an hour, we’re forced to fish out our waterproofs from our rucksacks. But autumn’s alchemy is at work, and not long afterwards, the leaden greyness transmutes into riches again as the November sun flares across the golden oakwoods, the shaggy, copper-red rush pastures, and silver birches jewelled with rain. A double rainbow materialises from the sunshower and vaults right across the valley, treasure at the end of it; one side of the arc falls into the hazy gold of a cluster of larch trees. Larches are one of just a handful of conifer species which are not evergreen – their needles turn a wonderfully bright, buttery yellow in autumn before they fall, allowing the tree, like all its fellow deciduous species, to sequester the nutrients stored in the foliage. Most of Britain’s larch is European larch (Larix decidua), essentially a tree of the Alps. Its historical use in this country is as a non-native timber crop. But at this time of year, those towers of turmeric form a striking visual counterpoint to the perennial gloomy green of Sitka spruce, providing precious variety to the visual monotony of forestry plantations. Larch is also one of the better conifers from a biodiversity perspective, with its lighter canopy helping understorey growth, and its abundant seed providing food for the likes of lesser redpolls and siskins. The creation of this particular plantation, Hardknott Forest, met with local opposition in the 1930s, but with the help of time and management, the larch here seems – to me, at least – to have become bedded into this landscape of craggy knolls and miniature mountains. Tragically, it may not be here for much longer. For the last 12 years, the Phytophthora ramorum blight has marched through Britain’s larch population, resulting in mass felling. It is another looming environmental tragedy to add to the list, but I do all I can, on this blustery autumn day, to savour the tree’s colour while both of us last. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAdele opened up about the pain of her divorce, losing the dream of a nuclear family, commentary over her weight and her strained relationship with her late father in a candid, ranging interview with Oprah Winfrey. During the sit-down in Winfrey’s rose garden, recorded prior to her first concert in more than four years for the CBS special Adele One Night Only, the singer revealed she felt “embarrassed” that she couldn’t make her marriage to Simon Konecki “work”. “I’ve been obsessed with a nuclear family my whole life because I never came from one,” said the 33-year-old singer, who shares nine-year-old son Angelo with Konecki. “I from a very young age promised myself that when I had kids, that we’d stay together. We would be that united family. “I was so disappointed for my son, I was so disappointed for myself, I just thought I was going to be the one that stopped doing those bloody patterns all the time,” she added. The singer, who is about to release her fourth studio album, also revealed the moment she knew her marriage of a year, after seven years of dating, was over. “We were all answering these questions in this very bougie magazine, and it was something like, ‘What’s something that no one would ever know about you?’” she said. “And I just said it in front of three of my friends, I was like, ‘I’m really not happy. I’m not living, I’m just plodding along,’” she said. She recalled a lyric from her song Love in the Dark, on the 2015 album 25: “I want to live and not just survive.” “I definitely felt like that,” she said. “And it was when I admitted to my own friends, who thought I was really happy, that actually I’m really unhappy, and they were all aghast. I felt like it was sort of, from there, that I was like, what am I doing it for?” The former couple, who live across the street from each other in Los Angeles, are still friendly; Adele disclosed that she trusted Konecki “with [her] life” and added the British entrepreneur “probably saved my life”. “The stability that he and [her son] Angelo have given me, no one else would have ever been able to give me, especially at that time in my life,” she said of her ex-husband’s purpose in her past. “I could’ve easily gone down some dodgy paths, been sort of self-destructive from being so overwhelmed by all of it. And he came in and he was stable, the most stable person I’ve ever had in my life up until that point.” Asked by Winfrey what Konecki thinks of her new album, which plumbs her heartbreak and guilt from the divorce, Adele answered: “He knows what kind of artist I am, that I have to dig deep and tell my stories.” The new album arose from a long period of introspection and commitment to sitting with uncomfortable feelings. “Whenever I noticed how I was feeling I would sit down and I would sit with it,” she said. “I was really ignoring myself for a long time, which was wild when I realised that.” The singer also addressed widespread fascination with changes in her body since her last public tour in 2017. She confirmed she’d lost about 100 pounds (45kg) – and became an “athlete” who could deadlift 170 pounds (77kg) at her best – over a two-year period as she coped with “the most terrifying anxiety attacks” while leaving her marriage. “I noticed how much I trusted my trainer’s presence when I was feeling so lost, but also I didn’t have any anxiety when I was out at the gym,” she said. “It became my time – me having a plan every day when I had no plans.” Asked by Winfrey about fans’ intense feeling over the weight loss, particularly from women who identified with her body shape, Adele responded that she “wasn’t shocked or even fazed by it, because my body has been objectified my entire career”. “I was body positive then and I’m body positive now. It’s not my job to validate how people feel about their bodies,” she continued. “I feel bad that it’s made anyone feel horrible about themselves, but that’s not my job.” Towards the end of the special, which included a live concert at LA’s Griffith Observatory attended by such celebrities as Drake, Selena Gomez, Lizzo, Melissa McCarthy and Seth Rogen, Adele discussed her rapprochement with her late father Mark Evans, who died of cancer in May 2021. Her father’s alcoholism and “lack of presence” in her childhood left a “void” the singer was “definitely always trying to fill”. She told Winfrey the “gaping hole” was filled before he died, as she played the new album, as well as the past records he had avoided listening to, as his health declined. “We found our peace,” she said. Asked by Winfrey if she feared getting too personal on the new record, which delves into divorce, self-acceptance and loss, the singer recalled fear that some lyrics could be too private, “but nothing has been as scary as what I’ve been through the past two, three years behind closed doors”.New mortgage lending rules will do little to curb Australia’s runaway property market, regulators have admitted. Stricter standards on households’ ability to pay back loans will have only a “fairly modest” impact on prices, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority executive director of policy, Renée Roberts, said on Monday. Housing prices have surged through 2021, with increases of 22% expected by the year’s end. But they are then tipped to flatten, with markets expecting interest rate rises sooner than the guidance of 2024 provided by the Reserve Bank of Australia. According to market analysts CoreLogic, Australia’s housing auction market experienced its second busiest week of the year, with 3,562 homes going under the hammer, up 8.2% from the previous week. Clearance rates are down due to increased supply, with 75.5% of sales successful, down from a peek of 84.4% in early October. In October Apra told mortgage lenders to ensure that borrowers could continue to repay their current interest rate with a buffer of 3% for further increases, up from the previous test of 2.5%. On Monday Roberts told the lower house standing committee on tax and revenue that Apra doesn’t “target house prices or matters of affordability” but is concerned with financial stability and ensuring households are able to make mortgage repayments. Roberts said the aggregate impact of the new lending rules on prices will be “fairly modest” as many people don’t borrow at their full capacity. Gideon Holland, Apra’s general manager of policy, said Australia’s financial system could withstand a decrease in house prices provided borrowers stayed in work and were able to service their loans. Apra was not concerned about house prices “in and of themselves” but when a drop in prices coincided “with poorer economic conditions” including higher unemployment, he said. The Reserve Bank assistant governor, Luci Ellis, told the inquiry she accepts that low interest rates have contributed to house prices and “at some level that is our doing”. But, Ellis said low interest rates and low inflation were preferable to higher inflation, which would cause Australia to have difficulty attracting investment. Asked about the impact of housing prices on inequality, Ellis conceded it is a “legitimate concern” and there is an “intergenerational issue” because people whose parents rent have much greater difficulty owning their own home. But people whose parents own their own home benefit because “the house doesn’t disappear – there’s a mechanism by which children can relatively easily end up being homeowners”, she said, in an apparent reference to parental guarantees helping children get loans or inheritance of real estate. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Liberal chair of the committee, Jason Falinski, prosecuted the argument that increasing land supply and decreasing the constraints of planning laws would boost construction and lower prices. Ellis countered that the supply of well-located land, near jobs and amenities, is constrained in coastal cities, particularly in Sydney. The RBA has kept interest rates at a record 0.1% and has said it won’t lift them until inflation is “sustainably” within its 2% to 3% target range. But borrowers are rushing to lock in low interest rates amid gathering expectations Australia’s central bank will declare an end to its record low cash rate earlier than its current prediction of 2024. Economists say the RBA has little choice but to revise its rate rise timing given mounting evidence the economy is recovering quickly from the lengthy Covid-triggered lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. In Monday’s hearing, Ellis declined to comment on future interest rate moves, but acknowledged that the market is reflecting its belief the RBA will lift rates sooner than 2024.For Rioch Fitzpatrick, a 39-year-old dubbing mixer for television, home is a tiny studio flat smaller than a standard Premier Inn hotel bedroom. At just 19 sq metres (204 sq ft), his north London “microflat” has a shower and lavatory separated from the main room by a partition, without even a separate wash basin. “It’s probably a bit odd, people coming in and seeing your bed in the kitchen, but I’ve just got used to it,” he says. “My neighbours live in a flat similar to mine – a couple with a two-year-old kid. That must be really tough.” Fitzpatrick moved into the studio, on the ground floor of an old townhouse converted into 10 flats, in May 2018 because he was fed up with living in a house share, and liked the area. The flat was refurbished but there are annoying things – I have to keep moving my bike around to get to the fridge,” he says. “I have to sleep with earplugs because the boiler is right above my bed and the fridge is also making noises all night. And my sink is my kitchen sink – that’s where I wash up and shave and do my teeth.” The rent is relatively affordable at £900 a month, including gas and electricity, while the rate for a standard one-bed flat in the affluent north London area of Crouch End would cost £1,200-plus. He is always on the lookout for a bigger place and would also like to get on the housing ladder, but has been put off by high property prices. Fitzpatrick is not alone. As many as one in 15 apartments in London fell below the national minimum standard of 37 sq m for a one-bedroom home between 2011 and 2021, according to analysis of energy performance certificate measurement data conducted for the Guardian by Dr Jon Reades, associate professor of spatial data science at University College London and Philip Hubbard, professor of urban studies at Kings’s College London. The median size of UK properties under 37 sq m dropped to 29 sq m this year and last, down from 30 sq m in 2019. The government has recommended a minimum space standard of 37 sq m since 2015, although it is not mandatory – local authorities have discretion to apply it or not. Micro homes have been on the rise since 2013, when rule changes designed to beat national housing shortages allowed developers to convert office blocks into apartments without planning permission. They were also allowed to bypass minimum space requirements, until a rule change in April this year allowed councils to apply the standards. Families have talked of the struggle to live in tiny flats, for example at Templefields House in Harlow, where some measure just 18 sq m. The average size of new-build flats in England – already the lowest in Europe – is declining: an analysis of 10,000 estate agency listings by LABC Warranty, one of the UK’s three main providers of new-build home warranties, showed that the average new home had fallen to just 67 sq m by 2018, down from 83 sq m in the 1970s. This trend is even more pronounced in London, where land prices are much higher. Barratt has recently become the first major housebuilder to launch pocket-sized apartments, in Harrow, north-west London, branded SMRT homes. It is selling 123 apartments off-plan at the former Kodak factory in Eastman Village, mainly one-bed flats with larger two-bed ones also available. Designed with built-in cupboards and wardrobes, slimmer kitchen worktops and pull-out shelves, the one-bed flats measure about 37 sq m, the minimum standard. Joseph Antoniazzi, senior sales manager at Barratt London, says they are aimed at the “Instagram generation” – young people who commute into London. If they take off, Barratt plans to roll them out across the UK. A buyer taking advantage of the government’s help-to-buy programme, which runs until March 2023, would need to earn about £40,000 a year to buy a one-bed flat. They would suit a single person or perhaps a couple “if you really like the person”, says Neal Hudson, a housing analyst. “There will be demand for this and it’s got to be attractive to first-time buyers. There are a lot of people who’d rather have a microflat than live in a shared house.” The flats start at £285,000, significantly cheaper than the average £321,988 price for homes sold in Harrow in the past 12 months tracked by Rightmove, and the average house price of £510,515 in Greater London, according to Halifax. However, when compared with Barratt’s standard one-bed apartments measuring 50 sq m, they cost about £1,000 more per square metre. Reades’ and Hubbard’s analysis found that micro apartments cost up to 30% more per square metre than average-sized London properties. This is partly because of the costs related to installing electricity and plumbing; every home needs a kitchen and a bathroom. On top of these inflated prices, they point out that residents often struggle with poor ventilation, noise, lack of light and privacy. Hudson believes micro homes should be for rent, rather than for sale, as “they are very much designed for a short period of someone’s life”. He is concerned that “people end up being stuck in this”, possibly even with a family. It would be better, he says, to “buy a home that you can live in for a long period so you can ride out any boom and bust”. In the face of the chronic housing shortage and soaring property prices, some developers specialise in building smaller homes. Pocket Living was set up in 2005 to build flats sized 37-38 sq m and sells them at a 20% discount to the average local market rate to help young, middle-earning Londoners buy their first home. Bolu Sofoluwe, 25, who bought a one-bed Pocket Living flat in Barking, east London, for £198,400 in January and works for a bank in Canary Wharf, is happy with her property. “I forget that it’s smaller than average,” she says. “It’s more than enough for me.” Research from the Intergenerational Foundation showed that the number of micro homes built in the UK increased almost fivefold in just five years, from 2,139 in 2013 to 9,605 in 2018. They are not just a London phenomenon but are also spread across north-west England, the south-east, and Yorkshire and Humber. Despite the boom in small homes, housebuilding is still far below the government’s target of 300,000 new homes a year by the mid-2020s. The number of new-builds declined to 148,000 last year from 178,000 in 2019, according to government figures. In the first six months of this year, construction started on 88,710 new homes. With the pandemic taking its toll on retailers and more people working from home, Hubbard is predicting more conversions of office blocks and retail schemes into micro homes. Every year, between 1,000 and 2,000 new micro apartments come on the market in London, 3% of all new homes. “A lot those are not going to be less than 37 sq m, they’re going to follow the national standard but they’re going to be barely above that. It might be fine as student living or as a crash pad but not for someone who wants to live in it for a number of years and make it their home.”From “Dirty Scrabble” dating to children’s board game afternoons, fans of living room games are taking their love affair into the real world as the desire for a digital detox and post-pandemic catch-up with friends and family fuels a boom in events. In the weeks after the pandemic took hold in March 2020, sales of board games, card games and jigsaw puzzles soared as families stocked up on in-home entertainment to while away lockdown. The easing of pandemic restrictions has also led to a sharp rise, but this time in fans meeting in cafes, bars and at large-scale events to share a rediscovered passion for traditional gaming with others. “We’ve all been looking forward to these logged-off moments for the last 18 months,” said Christopher John Eggett, the editor of the monthly Tabletop Gaming magazine, which covers the world of board, card and role-playing games. “Events are a celebration of that desire.” The live event boom has shown no signs of slowing down, according to figures from the online booking platform Eventbrite,which recorded 60% more tickets sold to fans in September than the same month in 2019. “Playing board games used to be seen as a niche activity by a dedicated but small community,” said Eventbrite’s Sebastian Boppert. “Today it seems that board games are being enjoyed by many more people than before the pandemic. I’d say the extended lockdown, a need for digital detoxing and a trend toward slower, more mindful activities all played a role here.” Events range from simple gatherings for enthusiasts, sometimes coupled with a pizza night, to kids’ board game afternoons. More unique and themed events have also emerged such as A Night of Bowie Board Games, Vintage Board Game Night and Board Games for Mindfulness. “Board games bring people together in a fun atmosphere and take our minds away from the daily routines and the tension,” said Nermine George, the managing director of La Chalet tea rooms in Leeds, which runs a monthly board game night with the organisers Cards or Die. The global market for playing cards and board games is expected to continue to grow strongly to reach $21.6bn (£16bn) by 2025, an annual growth rate of 8.7%. Gaming and so-called nerd culture have been on the rise in recent years, made cool by Silicon Valley businesses such as Google and Facebook and the spread in popularity of games from Fortnite and Grand Theft Auto to Call of Duty. The pioneer high street chain Games Workshop, which mixes the sale of products with fantasy in-store playing of its hit Warhammer franchise, has a £4.4bn market value, almost double that of the online retailer Asos and on a par with Marks and Spencer.Óscar Aibar’s latest film, a thriller anchored in grotesque historical fact, owes its existence to a random holiday meal a decade or so ago. The Spanish director was in Valencia for the summer when he looked up from his plate to study the pictures of famous people on the restaurant walls. “Among them was a very small one that showed five or six men wearing SS and Wehrmacht uniforms and with hairstyles from the 1960s,” says Aibar. “I thought they must have been dressed like that for a film or something, but when I asked about the photo, they told me they were the Germans from Dénia.” The “Germans from Dénia”, it transpired, were just some of the 300 high-ranking Nazis who sought refuge in Spain after the second world war. Not only were they welcomed and protected by the Franco regime; many flourished and built profitable businesses. The photograph was the inspiration for El sustituto (The Replacement), which tells the story of a jaded, alcoholic police officer who stumbles across a colony of proud and unrepentant Nazis in the Valencian town of Dénia in the early 1980s. In one of its set pieces – based on real festivities – the detective finds himself at a party where his fellow guests are wearing their SS uniforms and iron crosses. El sustituto is not alone in revisiting one of the more startling corners of 20th-century Spanish history. A documentary released last year – Europe’s Most Dangerous Man: Otto Skorzeny in Spain – chronicled the postwar career of the infamous SS officer who sprang Mussolini from captivity and died in Madrid in 1975. Skorzeny also appears in Los días rojos (The Red Days), a new novel by Miguel Herráez about a student tasked with obtaining a picture of the former lieutenant colonel as he travels to Valencia. And then there is Netflix’s Jaguar, a 1960s-set show about a Spanish survivor of the Mauthausen concentration camp and her search for justice. All have arrived a decade after Clara Sánchez’s prize-winning novel Lo que esconde tu nombre, which was published in English as The Scent of Lemon Leaves. Aibar, who made the film partly to educate younger people about what happened, attributes the mini-boom to a greater willingness to talk about the past – and to the resurgence of the far right in Spain and across the globe. “It’s happening all over Europe: a month ago, Mussolini’s granddaughter was re-elected as a councillor in Rome,” he says. “I’m not a journalist, I’m a film director, and the most important thing for me was to make a good thriller with a powerful story. But I felt I had a civic duty to use it as a mirror of what’s happening now.” Despite its police uniform, El sustituto is also a reflection on the fragility of democracy. The film is very deliberately set in 1982 – the last year when the Nazis of Dénia are known to have put on their uniforms to publicly celebrate Hitler’s birthday, and also the year when Spain’s post-Franco transition to democracy ended with the general election victory of the Spanish Socialist Workers' party (PSOE). As Aibar points out – and as his film shows – the country endured years of far-right terror between Franco’s death and the PSOE’s arrival in office, and memories of the 1981 coup attempt were still raw. El sustituto nods towards the current political situation in one of its final scenes, when the action moves to the present day and a key villain is revealed to be a candidate for a party that bears more than a passing resemblance to the far-right Vox. Herráez also believes the renewed interest in Spain’s Nazis may be informed by the contemporary political situation. “I think there’s a link between that and all the fragility we’re feeling at the moment,” he says. The writer, who is 64, reckons that while many Spaniards have always known about their Nazi guests, they didn’t know just how deep their roots went. “The facts are all coming out now about the uniforms and the bands and the runic symbols,” says Herráez. “I’m not young but I’m not that old, either. My generation thought all this was prehistory but it was happening during the Transition.” Joan Cantarero, an investigative journalist and the author of Bootprint – a book examining the social, economic, political and criminal legacy of the Nazis who settled in Spain – is not surprised by the cultural flurry. The world’s fascination with evil’s banal servants endures and, as Cantarero puts it, “Nazis sell”. Nevertheless, he thinks the increasing interest in the issue could help Spain’s efforts to come to terms with its past. “If they keep making films and documentaries about how war criminals ended up hanging out on Spanish beaches and going to parties, then a lot of Spanish society is going to feel pretty uncomfortable when they learn about it all,” says Cantarero. “It might also allow us to go further and to look into who let these gentlemen come to Spain for a life of luxury. And then maybe we’ll have films about what happened after the civil war, about the crimes committed during the [Franco] dictatorship, and about all the mass graves.” That day, however, may still lie a little way off. Aibar remembers a particular conversation he overheard while on location for El sustituto. “I was in an old guys’ bar in the town and they were talking about how a film was being made about ‘our Nazis’,” says the director. “They talking about these Nazis as if they were the local tomatoes, or the local church; as if they were something very typical of the region.”This summer, the Uffizi gallery threatened to sue Pornhub for using its masterpieces in a “classic nudes” video. “Some people think of museums as boring, stuffy or dull,” posed the adult streaming site. “But what if we told you they housed a collection of priceless porn?” The video re-enacted erotic scenes from art history using artworks including Botticelli’s Birth of Venus, housed in the Uffizi in Florence. Pornhub swiftly took down the unauthorised nudes, prompting debate about who controls the copying of cultural artefacts that are long out of copyright and in the public domain. Traditionally, museums have been protective of high-resolution versions of their artworks, charging stiff fees for photos or venue hire. There are multiple reasons: protecting copyrights, preventing forgeries and controlling lucrative revenues from brand deals. In 2019, the Uffizi made about €1m (£850,000) in revenue from the sale of photos of its collection. That year, global sales of licensed goods was $293bn (£214bn), with the art and non-profit sectors seeing the highest growth. Museums around the world are increasingly capitalising on the intellectual property of their priceless pieces, in unexpected collaborations from luxury lingerie to KFC packaging. China is leading this area, with Beijing’s Palace Museum reportedly making $222m (£162m) through product sales in 2018. These deals offer a lifeline for cash-strapped attractions after Covid triggered a plunge in visitor numbers. The Victoria and Albert Museum’s visitor count fell by 97% to 130,000, forcing it to cut opening hours to five days a week. The executive board has said admissions and finances might never return to pre-pandemic levels. But as in-person activity slumped, sales of licensed goods rocketed, with homeware the best seller. “Consumers have been decorating their homes with new furnishings, wallpapers and wall art, which plays to the strengths of the V&amp;A’s archives,” said Lauren Sizeland, V&amp;A’s head of licensing. While its doors were closed, the V&amp;A took on 22 new licencees – in line with normal years – and launched 1,400 licensed products, from wall art to jewellery and crafting. Merchandising museum masterpieces is not new. In 1998, Picasso’s name and signature was licensed to Citroën for an undisclosed sum paid to the painter’s son, Claude, the court-appointed administrator of the artist’s estate. Since 2019, the Louvre, the world’s most-visited museum, has stepped up its licensing efforts, teaming up with DS Automobiles, the Swiss watchmaker Swatch and the macaron bakery Ladurée. The Louvre’s brand partnerships reportedly generated €4.5m in 2020, compared with €2.7m in 2019, according to Le Monde. This year, it signed a four-year deal with Japanese retailer Uniqlo and launched a graphic T-shirt collection inspired by the Mona Lisa, Venus de Milo and Liberty Leading the People artworks. These recognisable women also star on Louvre-licensed phone cases and tech accessories manufactured by Hong Kong-based brand Casetify. While some designs are simply images of the artworks, others are designed to look like official tickets. In 2021, the British Museum launched an eye-shadow palette influenced by ancient Egyptian artefacts with Chinese makeup brand Zeesea. These creations are bold and contemporary, driving pop-culture interest from younger, global audiences. Yizan He, co-founder of a Shanghai-based intellectual property licensing agency, Artistory, said museums are turning to merchandise to tap Gen Z audiences, who are more likely to access museum content online, rather than in person. The aim is to make their archives familiar to all. Artistory’s designers opt for creative mashups of the old masters (Van Gogh’s Sunflowers is its guaranteed hitmaker). “We never slap the paintings on to the products, instead we create original patterns inspired by artworks and share them on TikTok and livestreamed events,” he said. “We want to transform something ancient and boring into something modern and exciting.” But these corporate gigs have riled those who fear museums’ cultural heritage is under threat. In 2019, the Louvre partnered with Airbnb on a competition to let one couple stay the night in its hallowed halls. Ian Brossat, Paris’ deputy mayor of housing, wrote in a letter to France’s culture minister, Franck Riester, that “this use of a public institution for commercial purposes by a digital giant is a shocking political gesture”. Brossat has campaigned to ban Airbnb apartments in Paris’ city centre, arguing that they are pushing Parisians out of the housing market. Others question why galleries should be free to profit from artworks no longer bound by copyright, which in the UK and EU lasts until 70 years after the creator’s death. Then, the work is freely available intellectual property, though in certain countries, including France, museums can claim perpetual moral rights of an author’s work. This gives custodians the right of attribution and ability to take down damaging reproductions. Dr Grischka Petri, a lawyer and art historian at the University of Glasgow, said it was problematic that museums were acting as trustees of long-dead artists whose works were no longer in copyright. “It becomes interesting from a copyright perspective when a museum wants to monopolise its public domain collections and prohibit reproductions.” He said museums risked being “hypocritical” if they promoted the commercialisation of their collection while also banning usage by others for moral reasons. “Many ancient artworks work in a soft pornographic way anyway,” said Petri. In recent years, as the internet has led to an explosion of low-quality copies, institutions are rethinking their strategy. Covid has accelerated open-access digitisation. Last year, the V&amp;A’s online portal, where audiences can search and view images of 1.5m objects from its collections, had record levels of engagement. The Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam goes further, by letting audiences download high-resolution photos of its collections that include Rembrandt, Vermeer and Van Gogh. Taco Dibbits, the director of collections, explained: “If they want to have a Vermeer on their toilet paper, I’d rather have a very high-quality image … than a very bad reproduction.”As weary delegates trudged into the Scottish Event Campus on the banks of the Clyde on Saturday, few realised what a mountain they still had to climb. The Cop26 climate talks were long past their official deadline of 6pm on Friday, but there were strong hopes that the big issues had been settled. A deal was tantalisingly close. The “package” on offer was imperfect – before countries even turned up in Glasgow they were meant to have submitted plans that would cut global carbon output by nearly half by 2030, to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Although most countries submitted plans, they were not strong enough and analysis found they would lead to a disastrous 2.4C of heating. The gap between countries’ targets and the emissions cuts scientists say are needed had been known since before the start of the talks – what was crucial in Glasgow was to find a roadmap to closing it, which involved forcing some highly reluctant countries to agree a timetable of swift revisions. Finally, after two weeks of wrangling, a “ratchet” had been settled, with countries agreeing to return next year, and the year after, with amendments. As the Cop president, Alok Sharma, approached the podium, the gavel was poised by his folder, ready to push through an agreement between all of the nearly 200 countries gathered in the room. But there was a last-minute hitch. What followed reduced Sharma almost to tears. China and India wanted to reopen a vital clause in the agreement that enjoined countries to “phase out” coal-fired power generation. No dates were given for the phaseout, and no more commitment than “accelerating efforts towards the phaseout of unabated coal power and inefficient fossil fuel subsidies”. Abandoning coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel, is essential to staying within 1.5C, the most stringent goal under the 2015 Paris climate agreement, and a level scientists regard as a planetary boundary beyond which some of the impacts of climate breakdown will become catastrophic and irreversible. The International Energy Agency has said 40% of the world’s existing 8,500 coal-fired power plants must be closed by 2030, and no new ones built, to stay within the 1.5C limit. Sharma had made “consigning coal to history” a personal mission through his presidency of the UK talks, and made numerous speeches on it. He had determined long before the start of the summit that he wanted a commitment on coal in the text. It may seem uncontroversial for an agreement on the climate to refer to the need to cut out fossil fuels, as they are the source of the problem. Yet since the Kyoto protocol was signed in 1997, there has been no such reference in a Cop decision, at the behest of the major fossil fuel producers and users, who hold a great deal of sway in a process that relies on consensus. The inclusion of such a commitment in the Glasgow outcome was thus a major step. At the last minute, China and India made it known that they objected to this wording. Sharma, who had been surviving the day on a diet of Lucozade tablets as he had no breaks for food, convened a meeting in the space behind the auditorium. The two countries – both major coal users and producers – would not accept the current wording. As the Indian delegates discussed the wording among themselves, Sharma answered them in Hindi to press the case for its retention – but to no avail. The two countries were adamant: a phaseout was unacceptable; but a phase-down, implying a longer-term future for some coal at least, was the most they would sign up to. The carefully crafted agreement was now in peril. “My fear was we would lose the whole deal,” he told the Guardian later. “This was a fragile agreement. If you pull one thread, the whole thing could unravel. We would have lost two years of really hard work – we would have ended up with nothing to show for it, for developing countries.” The man jokingly nicknamed “No Drama Sharma” by his team was on the verge of tears. To be forced to accept the change was bitter, and he was “deeply frustrated” according to an aide, but said it was the only way to protect the overall deal. Sharma has seen himself from the start as the champion of the most vulnerable developing countries at these talks, the only forum in which the poorest nations can confront the biggest emitters and producers of fossil fuels with the consequences of their actions. Choking back emotion, he addressed them directly: “I apologise for the way this process has unfolded. And I am deeply sorry. I also understand the deep disappointment. But as you have also noted, I think it’s vital that we protect this package.” Developing countries felt the disappointment just as keenly, but they understood the difficulties Sharma faced. “Although this is far from a perfect text, we have taken important steps forward in our efforts to keep 1.5C alive, and deliver the much-needed outcomes on adaptation,” said Milagros de Camps, of the Dominican Republic and the Alliance of Small Island States. “We acknowledge it was not an easy task.” The last-minute change of wording was galling, but did not materially change the agreement. Sharma insists that the deal as it stands shows “we are on the way to consigning coal to history”, and Nicholas Stern, the peer and climate economist, concurs: “The last-minute watering down of this statement is unfortunate but is unlikely to slow down a strong momentum past coal, a dirty fuel of an earlier era.” John Kerry, the UN climate envoy, was also visibly annoyed, telling journalists afterwards: “Did I appreciate we had to adjust one thing tonight in a very unusual way? No. But if we hadn’t done that we wouldn’t have a deal. I’ll take phase it down and take the fight into next year.” When countries meet next year, it will be very hard for any to rewrite the commitment now that it has been adopted. For the UK, it was a bitter pill but did not scupper the hard-fought diplomatic struggle to “keep 1.5C alive”. Returning to the ‘ratchet’ Agreeing to return next year to revise countries’ emissions targets may not sound like much of an achievement. But climate talks sometimes seem to move at the rate of a pre-industrial glacier. The UN climate Cops have been taking place almost annually since 1992, when the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, parent treaty to the Paris agreement, was signed. For most of that time, countries squabbled over who should have to cut greenhouse gas emissions and how. Meanwhile, carbon counts kept rising. The Paris agreement of 2015 marked the first time that developed and developing countries agreed to take the necessary action to limit temperature rises, to “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels, and to “pursue efforts” to limit heating to 1.5C. However, while the Paris treaty set the binding targets, the means to get there were contained in a non-binding annexe. These national plans on cutting emissions, called nationally determined contributions (NDCs), were drafted and presented by each country but they were much too weak to achieve the temperature goals – under the Paris NDCs, temperatures would soar by more than 3C, enough to swamp most of the world’s major coastal cities. So the accord also contained a mechanism to force countries back to the table. Informally known as the “ratchet”, this would require all signatories to return with revised NDCs every five years. That is why Cop26 was always going to be so important – it marked the first five-yearly revision (it was supposed to take place in November 2020 but was delayed by a year because of the Covid-19 pandemic). Since the Paris agreement was signed, however, scientific warnings on climate breakdown have intensified. In October 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – the world’s leading authority on climate science – produced a report showing that going beyond 1.5C would produce changes to the climate system that would rapidly become irreversible. The melting of the ice caps would accelerate, sea levels would rise to inundate small islands and coastal areas, coral reefs would bleach and extreme weather such as droughts, floods, heatwaves and fiercer storms would wreak havoc. Johan Rockström, the director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and one of the world’s foremost climate scientists, warned that the 1.5C target was not like other political negotiations, which can be haggled over or compromised on. “A rise of 1.5C is not an arbitrary number, it is not a political number. It is a planetary boundary,” he told the Guardian in an interview. “Every fraction of a degree more is dangerous.” These warnings, repeated in an IPCC report this summer, showed that the Paris timetable was too loose. To have a good chance of staying within 1.5C, the IPCC estimated, greenhouse gas emissions must fall by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels, and reach net zero by mid-century. Except for a short blip during the lockdowns, carbon emissions have been steadily rising since the Paris agreement was signed. When the UK took over the Cop26 presidency, countries were still in the early process of preparing their NDCs. Under the Paris agreement, they had no obligation to align them with the IPCC advice on halving by 2030 – just a looser obligation to strive to meet the Paris temperature goals. Sharma and his advisers decided that the conference must have a clearer objective – to focus attention not on the “well below 2C” limit, but on the tougher but far safer 1.5C. And if the NDCs that were presented were not good enough, countries would have to return not every five years as envisaged at Paris, but every year until they were good enough. That is because this decade is now crucial, according to scientists. António Guterres, the UN secretary general, warned after the latest IPCC findings in August: “[This report] is a code red for humanity. The alarm bells are deafening, and the evidence is irrefutable: greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel burning and deforestation are choking our planet and putting billions of people at immediate risk.” Yet at Glasgow some countries tried to claim that focusing on 1.5C and forcing a review of NDCs next year was an attempt to “reopen the Paris agreement”. Sharma was forced to deny this repeatedly: “We are not seeking to reopen the Paris agreement. The Paris agreement clearly sets out the temperature goal well below 2C and pursuing efforts to 1.5C. That is why our overarching goal of keeping 1.5C within reach has been our lodestar.” According to its architects, the Paris agreement was carefully written to be supple enough to allow for yearly returns, under provisions in article 4 of the accord. In the closing stages of the Cop26 talks, the trio behind the agreement – Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister who presided over the talks; his chief diplomat, Laurence Tubiana; and Christiana Figueres, the former UN climate chief – told the Guardian it was “essential” for countries to meet again next year to fulfil the terms of the Paris accord. “If that [five years] is the first time that countries are called to increase their ambitions, honestly that’s going to be too late,” said Figueres, founding partner of the Global Optimism thinktank. Forcing countries back to the table also provides the sort of pressure that countries need to feel in order to make the commitments needed, according to Tom Burke, a veteran government adviser who is co-founder of the E3G thinktank. “You need an anvil, as well as a hammer,” he said. “The anvil is that moment of pressure – a big event, like a Cop.” Cops have another advantage: they are the only forum in which the smallest developing countries have an equal say with the largest economies. At Cop26, more than 30,000 participants from nearly 200 countries roamed the halls, some in colourful national dress, others in sombre suits, all – this time – in masks. In these meetings, the people suffering on the frontlines of the climate crisis have an opportunity to directly confront those responsible for the emissions causing climate change. It is a powerful moral lever, notes Tina Stege, climate envoy for the tiny Marshall Islands, an archipelago with 60,000 inhabitants that leads the High Ambition Coalition at the talks. “We are a small nation, but we have moral authority – our position on the frontline gives us that,” says Stege. “We need to raise our voice, as these changes will affect the whole world in time.” The final stages of the Cop26 talks bore this out: Tuvalu’s representative received resounding applause for noting that his island would be under water if the talks failed, and Kenya for noting that a 1.5C global temperature rise would equate to an unbearable 3C rise in parts of Africa. For these reasons, the agreement to return next year to revise NDCs is far more important and powerful than it may at first appear. Stege said: “It is real progress, and elements of the Glasgow package are a lifeline for my country. We must not discount the crucial wins covered in this package.” Taking the lead Under the UN rules, Sharma will remain Cop president for the next year. That gives a clear opportunity for the UK to show leadership on the climate crisis before next year’s crucial meeting in Egypt, and to gee up countries to make further cuts in their emissions in line with a 1.5C target. “We will have a very active presidency,” he pledged to the Guardian as he left Glasgow by train. “Everyone who knows about these talks know that this is not about one big bang solution to climate change. It’s a building block.” But if the UK is to make such a mark, and help lay the crucial groundwork for a successful conclusion to next year’s Cop, much of that work will need to start at home. At Cop26, the UK government led a series of initiatives – on banking, forests, coal and electric vehicles – that failed to impress some observers, who worried they were motivated by greenwash. The forest announcement, involving a pledge to halt deforestation by 2030, was criticised as a repeat of a previous failed attempt; the 450 banks who signed up to net zero pledges turned out to be allowed to continue investing in fossil fuels; the world’s biggest coal users were left out of the much-vaunted promise to phase out coal; and major car manufactures shunned the electric vehicle pledge. Mohamed Adow, of the thinktank Power Shift Africa, complained: “These announcements are eye candy, but the sugar rush they provide are empty calories.” Campaigners and green experts have also been dismayed by the government’s habit of continuing to support high-carbon policies and developments, even while trumpeting its low-carbon credentials. They point to decisions such as the mooted Cumbrian coalmine; new oil and gas licences in the North Sea; cuts to air passenger duty; road-building and airport expansion; and most of all the cuts to overseas development aid, which have undermined the crucial message on climate finance to the developing world at Cop26. Rachel Kennerley, climate campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “The UK government cunningly curated announcements throughout this fortnight so that it seemed rapid progress was being made. With the Cop moment over, countries should break away from the pack in their race for meaningful climate action and let history judge the laggards.” If the UK wants to “follow through” the achievements made at Cop26, these are the policies on which ministers need to start. Otherwise, Sharma’s two years of hard work may still prove fragile and prone to unravel.Half of all ministers who have left office in the Boris Johnson or Theresa May governments later took up posts with companies relevant to their former government jobs, the Guardian has found. An analysis of those who left departmental ministerial roles up until the most recent reshuffle found more than 50 took up employment as advisers in industries where they had government expertise or as more general political consultants. Many of them are still parliamentarians – either in the Commons or the Lords – where they occupy second jobs in addition to their work as lawmakers. And at least a dozen were cabinet ministers, some of them with direct links between their jobs and former government briefs. Patrick McLoughlin, a former transport secretary, now lists remunerated employment with Airlines UK, an industry lobbying body, and XRail, a railway services company, while another former transport secretary, Chris Grayling, took a £100,000-a-year job as a strategic adviser to a ports company. Nicky Morgan, a former culture secretary, Treasury minister and now a peer, took on roles on the board of Santander bank, and as a consultant to Travers Smith corporate law firm, a senior adviser to the lobbying and PR firm Grayling, and last week became the independent chair of the Association of British Insurers. Several former ministers also took up roles advising foreign governments or their state organs, including the former Foreign Office minister Mark Field, who was approved for a job advising the Cayman Islands, and Philip Hammond, the former chancellor and now a peer, who got advisory roles to Kuwaiti and Bahraini financial authorities. Former health ministers including Lord O’Shaughnessy, Nicola Blackwood and Steve Brine took jobs with private health companies, while the former energy minister John Hayes accepted a role at an energy company. The analysis shows the extent to which the revolving door has become commonplace for former Tory ministers after leaving government office. Most of the appointments were approved by the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, which critics have claimed lacks teeth. The government has been hit by more than a week of revelations now about MPs, lobbying and their second jobs, including the furore over Owen Paterson’s direct paid advocacy for two companies, which led to his resignation. The government has also been in hot water over the extra legal work undertaken by former attorney general Geoffrey Cox, who was found to have been voting in parliament by proxy from the British Virgin Islands. Boris Johnson on Sunday came the closest so far to expressing regret for the government’s actions over the scandal after it was forced to pull attempts to overhaul the standards system in a way that would have let Paterson off the hook. The prime minister stressed he was now leaving the issue of finding cross-party consensus on reform to the Commons standards committee, which is working on recommendations for changing the system. After being asked what he would say to those who think he had “got it wrong”, Johnson replied: “Of course, I think things could certainly have been handled better, let me put it that way, by me.” The prime minister also said he had confidence in the independent parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, whose role was at one point queried by the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng. Johnson told a Downing Street press conference: “I think the commissioner has a job to do and a huge amount of work to do and she needs to get on and be allowed to do it. Now, on whether the system is capable of improvement or not is a matter for the standards committee and for the house.” Stone has investigated Johnson several times already and rebuked him over late financial declarations. However, her finding that he could have been more open about the funding of a holiday to the Caribbean paid for by a Tory donor was later overturned by the standards committee. She is soon due to decide whether to launch an investigation into the funding of a refurbishment of his Downing Street flat following calls from Labour MPs, after the Electoral Commission has finished its own inquiry. Johnson also told the Downing Street press conference that all MPs should work “above all” for their constituents. “Anybody who lobbies on behalf of a commercial interest is clearly in breach of the rules,” he said. “You can take from what I’ve said that all MPs should follow the rules, and I think that the rules are there to protect them, protect the public, they’re very simple to understand, and we should just get on with it.”Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic Game of Thrones dined out on its bloody battle episodes and, after some truly rancorous buildup, the Waystar Royco AGM should serve up a similarly brutal mass spectacle. Will an out-of-sorts Logan (Brian Cox) care to finesse concerned shareholders? Or will rival Sandy Furness (Larry Pine) and his daughter Sandi (Hope Davis) – who are now the major shareholders – take control of the boardroom? Ultimately, can the whole Roy clan put the infighting aside long enough to keep it in the family? Graeme Virtue Dispatches: Did Brexit Work for Businesses? 8.30pm, Channel 4 In short: not hugely. Certainly, as tonight’s investigation reveals, there’s been a distinct absence of sunlit uplandery, with many of the UK’s small import and export businesses struggling in the face of increased costs, new tariffs and ever-diminishing profits. As Dispatches reporter Harry Wallop asks, have we really “taken back control”? Ali Catterall The Outlaws 9pm, BBC One There’s a lot happening in Stephen Merchant’s busy crime/comedy/drama. Tonight’s episode flashes back to Frank’s (Christopher Walken) glory days in the 80s. In the present day, he’s still hiding that stash of cash in the attic but the police are sniffing around. Elsewhere, Christian (Gamba Cole) fails to keep his sister out of trouble. Hollie Richardson Diana: Queen of Style 10pm, Channel 4 The enduring fascination with Diana, Princess of Wales continues, this time by marking 40 years since she walked down the aisle in the world’s most famous wedding dress. This film sartorially satisfies with much archive of her many outfits (yes, including the Revenge Dress) and contributions by designers such as Elizabeth Emanuel and Jacques Azagury. HR Dexter: New Blood 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic After a somewhat methodical start, the snowy revival of the serial killer drama accelerates into pleasantly familiar territory: Dexter, playing the role of an earnest civilian, pretends to help the police track a murderer who is, in fact, him. It’s still not clear why we need the show back, but at least it has returned to full form. Jack Seale Witch Hunt 12.10am, Channel 4 At a law firm where slick-haired, besuited men go swinging their – ahem, egos – around, Ida Waage is the ace CFO that every finance team should have. But what happens when an invoice for €450,000 lands on her desk? When Ida’s colleague threatens her, it’s clear something is afoot. This Norwegian drama will be available to binge on All 4 after tonight’s debut. HR Live sport World Cup football: San Marino v England 7pm, ITV. Group I qualifier at San Marino Stadium. World Cup qualifiers: Scotland v Denmark 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Group F match at Hampden Park.A groundbreaking inquiry into sickle cell disease has found “serious care failings” in acute services and evidence of attitudes underpinned by racism. The report by the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on sickle cell and thalassaemia, led by Pat McFadden MP, found evidence of sub-standard care for sickle cell patients admitted to general wards or attending A&amp;E departments. The inquiry also found widespread lack of adherence to national care standards, low awareness of sickle cell among healthcare professionals and clear examples of inadequate training and insufficient investment in sickle cell care. The report notes frequent disclosures of negative attitudes towards sickle cell patients, who are more likely to be people with an African or Caribbean background, and evidence to suggest that such attitudes are often underpinned by racism. The inquiry also found that these concerns have led to a fear and avoidance of hospitals for many people living with sickle cell. Care failings have led to patient deaths and “near misses” are not uncommon, leading to a cross-party call for urgent changes into care for sickle cell patients. Among the most notable of cases reviewed by the APPG was the death of sickle cell patient Evan Nathan Smith in North Middlesex university hospital in April 2019. An inquest found that Evan’s death would not have happened were it not for failures in the care he received. In preparing the report, the APPG took oral and written evidence from sickle cell patients and healthcare. Among those to give evidence was sickle cell patient Zainab Garba-Sani. She said: “Sickle cell is not something you can see. So I’ve had it in the past where I’m in hospital in absolute agony and someone’s said, you don’t look very ill. I think a lot of patients with sickle cell are therefore scared to go into hospital because they wonder whether it’s going to be a battle and if they have the energy to face the harsh realities. “I remember there was one time I went to A&amp;E and I had this black nurse and she was lovely. She came up to me and said, ‘I know you have sickle cell and I know your pain is probably pretty high right now, but the doctor won’t prescribe you anything stronger. I’ve already told them that this is not going to be enough. But let’s see anyway.’ And, it wasn’t enough. But that delay they took just meant that I was in pain for much longer.” Garba-Sani hopes the report is a catalyst for change that patients desperately need and leads to better care and accountability. McFadden said: “This is the most comprehensive report on sickle cell care that our all-party group has ever published. It has shown us that while people living with sickle cell generally had high levels of confidence in specialist haematology departments, there was a big gulf between this and the experience of A&amp;E departments and generalist wards. “One of the key findings in the report was the lack of communication between these two areas when treating people with sickle cell. This, along with tragic and avoidable deaths, has caused a serious and damaging impact on the levels of trust in the health system among sickle cell patients.” John James, the CEO of the Sickle Cell Society, said: “The APPG inquiry’s findings are appalling, but will sadly not come as a surprise to many people who have found themselves in need of urgent medical help for the symptoms of sickle cell.”Programmes by Yorke Dance Project often refer to past works and traditions. Their current evening traces a lineage to founder-mother of American modern dance Martha Graham through the figure of Robert Cohan, a Graham dancer who was central to the establishment of contemporary dance in the UK, and whose extraordinary late flowering of creativity the Yorke company facilitated, right up until his death earlier this year. It opens with Yolande Yorke-Edgell performing Graham’s iconic early solo Lamentation (1930). The movement itself is minimal and mostly concealed: Yorke-Edgell is sheathed in a cloth tube that shows only the surface effects of the torque and tension within her body. This is expressionism given physical form: it’s all about what happens on the inside. Ballet choreographer Kenneth MacMillan is by no means a direct descendent of Graham’s, yet his Sea of Troubles (1988) resounds with her influence. Danced barefoot, it is full of twists, flexes and floorwork, and its storytelling, based on symbol and psychodrama, recalls Graham’s heightened, declamatory style. Six dancers play characters from Hamlet – Hamlet, Gertrude, Claudius, the Ghost, Ophelia and Polonius – but switch roles between scenes, each change signalled by a simple prop or costume such as cloak, crown or shroud. There’s no storyline, but rather a sequence of cameos expressing the dramatic turbulence between characters. Fascinating as a choreographic study, it’s hard going as a dance: highly strung yet curiously detached, and pretty confusing even if you know your Hamlet. Afternoon Conversations with Dancers comprises eight solos (five shown during any single performance) that Cohan began before Covid, then continued to create over Zoom. Its rewards are rich: Pierre Tappon’s startled leaps and plunges, Freya Jeffs spiralling floorwards as if towards some buried enigma, Romany Pajdak in pointe shoes, her torso stretched between poise and strain; best of all, the underlying conviction that the shape and phrasing of the human body is all that a dance needs. For all that, it feels like an unfinished work. Yorke-Edgells’ So It Is is a homage to Cohan for eight dancers, built on the sculptural Graham technique of tension and release, tilts and spirals that Cohan learned, taught and developed – a stately, somewhat polite mix of tribute and reverence, leavened by outbursts of lyricism. Yorke Dance Project presents a special evening dedicated to Robert Cohan at the Linbury theatre, London, on Monday 15 November.A British environmental activist is stepping up her campaign against single-use plastics in period products by calling on the world’s bestselling manufacturer of tampons to make greener alternatives. Ella Daish, the founder of the #EndPeriodPlastic campaign, will go to the European headquarters of Tampax-maker Procter &amp; Gamble in Geneva on Monday to present executives with a giant tampon applicator, made of 1,200 discarded Tampax applicators found littering British waterways, rivers and beaches. She wants the US multinational, which makes the brands Tampax and Always, to reduce and then remove plastic from its period products, and develop reusable options. Her priority is for the company to end single-use plastic tampon applicators, which are used for seconds and take hundreds of years to decompose. Procter &amp; Gamble had increased its product lines containing single-use plastic, she said, in contrast to other companies that had taken action. The British campaigner said she had met more than 10 retailers and manufacturers since launching her campaign in 2018, but Procter &amp; Gamble had been the least responsive. “I am just fed up. I’ve been doing this campaign for over three and a half years and despite being the global leader of these products they are not doing anything. They are falling behind and every other manufacturer and retailer I’ve met is moving in the right direction.” In 2019, Sainsbury’s said it would stop producing plastic applicators for its own-brand tampons, removing 2.7 tonnes of plastic annually. It has since been followed by Aldi, Superdrug and tampon maker Lil-Lets. Daish met Procter &amp; Gamble executives in the UK in 2019, but accused the company of “constantly avoiding the problem”. She said that in response to her critique of single-use plastic, P&amp;G executives told her about their renewable energy supply. “They say, ‘We use renewable energy to power our factories,’ which is a cop-out … It’s irrelevant. What are you saying: ‘It’s OK to pump out billions of products containing single-use plastic using green energy?’ That doesn’t make it OK. It’s constantly avoiding the problem. There is never any traction and that is what I’m really frustrated about.” After a call on social media, she asked people across the UK to send her plastic tampon applicators they found polluting their local environment. She was sent boxes filled to the brim with discarded plastic applicators, found in all parts of the UK from the River Clyde to the Isles of Scilly. She said she hopes to return the giant tampon applicator to Procter &amp; Gamble executives in Geneva. “I wanted to create something that you can’t ignore. “It is clear that we need collective and sustained action on all levels to tackle the plastic pollution epidemic, and that includes industry. Manufacturers like Tampax and Always often put the blame on consumers to avoid ownership of the problem, but they must be held accountable.” In 2019 the European Union passed a law banning single-use plastic cutlery, plates, straws, stirrers and cotton buds, which came into effect in July 2021. The law did not ban the use of plastics in tampons, pads and applicators, but requires companies to mark these products as containing plastic, with information about how to dispose of them correctly. Wet wipes, cigarette filters and takeaway beverage cups also have to be marked in this way. All these items, as well as plastic cutlery, straws and cotton buds, are in the top 10 most commonly found items littering European beaches. The government announced in August that it was banning single-use plates and cutlery, and polystyrene cups in England. A spokesperson for Procter &amp; Gamble it had been in conversation with Ella Daish for a few years. “We wholeheartedly agree with Ella that plastics do not belong on beaches and we’re working to address this in line with European waste infrastructure, encouraging correct disposal of the product and applicator in bins to reduce plastic pollution. “We know we have an important role to play in ensuring our products have the lowest impact on the environment, recognising that all products have an impact but in different ways. But solutions are not straightforward, take time and we need to balance the needs of our consumers while striving to find alternatives.” Procter &amp; Gamble made reusable period products, as well as tampons with cardboard applicators, the spokesperson added. “We know that periods are a highly personal topic and what’s right for some is not necessarily right for all. Our goal is to find a solution where people with periods don’t have to compromise quality, while also having the absolute least impact on the earth.”This week, a full moon occurs on 18-19 November, and for some around the world it will be an “almost total” lunar eclipse. A lunar eclipse occurs at full moon, when the moon travels directly behind the Earth and so crosses through our planet’s shadow. More than 97% of the moon’s disc will be in the darkest part of Earth’s shadow, known as the umbra. The eclipse begins at 6.02 GMT, when the moon’s western limb touches the outer edge of the Earth’s shadow. This edge does not block out all the sunlight, and is known as the penumbra. It produces a subtle dimming effect that is easily overlooked. Contact with the umbra takes place just before 7.19 GMT, and will cause a distinct shadow to begin crossing the lunar disc. The midpoint of the eclipse, the almost total phase, occurs at 9.03 GMT. The moon then leaves the umbra at 10.47 GMT, and the penumbra just before 12.04 GMT. Visibility from the UK is not great, with the moon setting at 7.24 GMT. From the Americas and the Pacific, however, much if not all of the eclipse will be visible. East Asia will see the middle of the eclipse, and Australia will catch the final penumbral phase.Florida lawmakers will meet on Monday for a week-long special legislative session called by the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, with the goal of thwarting coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by businesses or government agencies. DeSantis recently announced he is running for re-election in 2022 but is seen by many as a potential presidential candidate in 2024 – particularly if Donald Trump decides not to run again. The special legislative session will be about “a combination of policy and politics”, said Aubrey Jewett, a political science professor at the University of Central Florida, adding that DeSantis is following Trump’s lead in being staunchly against mask and vaccine mandates. According to an agenda released by the governor’s office, a body of legislators dominated by Republicans will consider four bills to impose penalties on businesses and local governments that require workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19. “No cop, no firefighter, no nurse, nobody should be losing their job because of these jabs,” DeSantis said in a media release, echoing a previous plea for first responders from other states to relocate to Florida if they do not wish to be vaccinated by mandate. “We’re going to be striking a blow for freedom,” DeSantis said. Resistance to vaccine mandates and other public health measures to combat Covid-19 has spread in Republican states and among Republican politicians using it to buttress their pro-Trump bona fides and attack the Biden administration. By Sunday, the US had recorded nearly 763,000 deaths from Covid-19, out of more than 47m cases. Florida has recorded the third-highest state death toll, with more than 62,600, behind only California and Texas. Around 58% of the population is fully vaccinated. On Friday, a conservative federal court in New Orleans refused to lift a stay it imposed on a Biden administration rule which says businesses with 100 or more employees must insist on vaccinations or masks and regular testing from 4 January. The administration has said it is confident the rule is legal and will ultimately prevail. DeSantis has railed against vaccine mandates but is vaccinated himself, according to media reports. The governor “knows that Trump supporters don’t like masks or this vaccine”, Jewett told Reuters. “There’s no denying it’s politics with an eye not only on the governor’s race, but an eye toward the White House.” If passed into law, the new Florida bills considered in the special legislative session will impose fines on private businesses that do not allow employee exemptions to Covid-19 vaccine requirements. “This is something that his base will love,” Jewett said. “[DeSantis] is establishing himself as a freedom fighter.”Rob Delaney – comedian, actor, writer, tweeter, activist – co-wrote and co-starred in the Channel 4 sitcom Catastrophe with Sharon Horgan. Now he has a starring role in the film Home Sweet Home Alone. He has also written and spoken movingly about the death of his two-year-old son, Henry. Here, he answers questions from readers about all of this, as well as being an American in London – and how he keeps his hair looking so great. When you were offered the role in Home Sweet Home Alone, did you hesitate and think that maybe another remake of a successful movie would be pointless? Bernard Hautecler, Brussels, Belgium And similarly … What part of the new Home Alone seemed like a good idea? It’s a Christmas classic, loved by millions worldwide; why did you feel it was appropriate to star in a carbon copy? James Burgess, Lake District Those are entirely legitimate questions. When I heard they were going to make a new Home Alone film, I thought: well, that’s not necessary. But when I was sent the script I thought: sure, I’ll read it. I love to read scripts, good or bad – they help me as a writer. I was immediately won over – the script was gorgeous and hilarious. If anyone doubts me, I would just say watch some Saturday Night Live sketches written by these guys, Mikey Day and Streeter Seidell. That should put your concerns to rest. They are wildly clever and inventive. Yes, you have all the wonderfully violent stunts that you would hope to have in a Home Alone film – but the story is genuinely original. It’s perfectly understandable to be terrified or angry that they are making a new Home Alone film – until you see it. I am at peace with questions like that, because I used to be like those people. How’s that lizard of yours? David, Sheffield Very well. Jackie the bearded dragon is alive, happy. We live in a tall, skinny house and she’s too many storeys up to go and show you, but Jackie is doing great. As a fresh set of eyes, do you feel the NHS is an outdated model of care, or an under-resourced gold standard? Solomon Kamal-Uddin, Amersham Despite the efforts of some, the latter – under-resourced gold standard – and I feel I can say that with some authority. I moved here at 37, so I had nearly four decades of the American healthcare system and then discovered the NHS, which we were just wowed by even before our son got very sick and had a very long, almost two-year, experience with the NHS. If you have a fairly small thing like the flu, you go to the local GP, you get taken care of, you’re not charged and it is dealt with. If you have a catastrophic event like a brain tumour or a heart attack, even if you’re in a private hospital, then they immediately get you in an ambulance to an NHS hospital where you will be treated with an amazing standard of care. The trouble is – and this is stuff people experience especially when they age – if you need knee surgery that isn’t urgent, you’re going to be waiting a while. That’s when you can feel that it is a political choice by parliament. They say: oh, that’s not an emergency, even if you are in crippling pain. So it’s a funding issue, a political choice that is made each morning by the people in power. Rob, you have done us a huge service by speaking and writing about aspects of your personal life. Your writing about the loss of your beautiful son Henry has been raw and incredibly valuable to people. How do you and your family [Delaney and his wife have three other children] decide what to share and what to keep private? And how do you protect your mental health while sharing these painful parts of your life? Nancy, London As a family, we are very concerned with things like children’s hospices, and we do a lot to raise money for kids and families with life-limiting illnesses, but I don’t just trot it out. My family’s grief isn’t a commodity to fill airtime or space – it’s more precious and when used consciously can really help people. What if someone lives in a really rural area? I live in London; I can go to a bereaved parents’ group once or twice a week if I want. What if someone lives in a tiny town in the Yorkshire Dales and it’s not readily available? Then it might be great, if they have lost a child or have a child who is dying, to hear my family’s experience with that. It might be of genuine use to them. And I know, because of how other bereaved parents’ stories have been useful to me. Your character in Catastrophe, Rob, became very intense, almost hostile, towards the end of the series. How much of your personality did Rob contain? Makbul Patel, Bolton I like that question. You can really divide Catastrophe: the first two series we made when all my family was alive and healthy, the third series we made when Henry was in the hospital post cancer diagnosis, post massive brain surgery that crippled him, and then the fourth season was written and shot after he died. We never, ever lost sight of the fact that it was a sitcom; for Sharon and me, our prime directive was to have the show be funny. That said, within that framework, I was in an incredible amount of pain; there was a lot of anger, there was a lot of hostility in my heart and mind during the last two seasons – and that absolutely went into the show. And I’m glad it did, because I think it made the show truer and better. I saw the relationship between Sharon and Rob in Catastrophe as honest, loving, witty and, to some degree, aspirational. My boyfriend said it was a toxic relationship that should probably end. With whom do you agree? Christine, London My wife and I have been together for 17 years. We have learned and we continue to learn about the work that a relationship requires and the humility required to nurture love and a close relationship. So, for me, Catastrophe is a great example of two people who, of course, have faults and foibles (and we sharpened the edges to make it funnier TV), but we tried to keep them as real people – real people who fall in or out of love. The characters continually make the choice – even when the odds are against them – to stay together and work it out; that is an expression of how real relationships are and what they look like. So, I’m strongly in the camp of the questioner, not her boyfriend. I’m sorry to be the one to bring this up, but has it ever occurred to you that your wife may be having an affair with her karate sensei? Marc, Sunderland Sometimes on Twitter I pretend my wife is clearly having an affair with her karate teacher and I am oblivious. It’s a long-running gag that I don’t know if anyone else enjoys, but for some reason it makes me laugh. In real life, my wife doesn’t take karate – and if she is having an affair with any kind of trainer or person more athletic than myself, she’s doing a good job hiding it. What are the books that you have loved and recommend? Mary Buck, Virginia, US My favourite writer is Alice Munro, the Canadian short story writer. I discovered her at the beginning of lockdown and she has dethroned every other favourite writer I have ever had, because of her ability to twist your guts with deceptively simple domestic stories. Delaney’s mum, Nancy, is visiting from the US and briefly joins the video call to deliver a cup of coffee. Sadly, there are no reader questions for her, but she says that Delaney is a wonderful son and always has been. As a kid, he was inquisitive, thoughtful and funny; on car journeys, he would entertain them all. One thing that could be worked on? “Like me, he could have more patience. But I don’t know: I’m a fan, I think he’s the best.” Rob, if you had been born British, which aspects of you would be different? Grant Evans, Mumbles Mmm, I don’t know. I really enjoy scary nature. It’s difficult to find an animal in Britain that could kill you, whereas in California there’s rattlesnakes and mountain lions – that was always thrilling about going on a hike. Here, there aren’t too many beaches with waves that could absolutely end your life quickly; in Malibu, there are. But the thing is, I know a lot of British people who are really adventurous and find that stuff anyway. So, I was going to say maybe I would be more averse to big, scary nature, but I know so many British people who love to do the craziest stuff. So I’m not sure what would be different about me. I don’t think this is a great answer. You’ve been here a few years now. How different do you find the UK from the US, and what do you think about the direction America is heading? Anthony, Lancashire I think the US and the UK suffer from many of the same problems. The root of it all is income inequality and the widening gap between the super-rich and the poor masses. It’s easy and fun to point to the US and say: oh, what a disaster, but the fact is, if you die of poverty in the UK, you still get incinerated at a similar crematorium or buried at a graveyard that looks just like the one in the US. The real endemic problems in both societies are pretty similar. That said, gun culture in the US is a massive blot on the nation and the people who run it. And there is still a stronger social safety net here. I lament the direction the US is headed in politically. Biden is the definition of mediocrity and the Senate is a nightmare – it’s such an obstacle to necessary progress. There are things that are wonderful about America – millions of incredible, beautiful people, wonderful nature. I can’t slam the US wholesale, but the US’s billionaires and senators are doing a good job of ruining things for a lot of people. I should say the proof is in the pudding: I am American, but I choose to live here. Do you feel that the way you look at life and your sense of humour is more accepted in the UK than in your own country? David Gow, Edinburgh No, I don’t. I feel comfortable making jokes here and I feel accepted as a person of humour. But the idea that my comedy would appeal to one populace over another makes me physically sweat. In Catastrophe, which was most watched in the US and the UK, we would always try to make sure that jokes would work in both places – unless we found one that would be such a home run in one place that we didn’t care what the other place thought. Are there any British quirks that you still struggle to understand? Lee Lugard-Davies, Maidstone British people make holiday plans psychopathically early, so if we try to do something for half-term and it’s a mere nine weeks before, everything will be booked. Will you relax, British people! Do you ever find it difficult to reconcile your political views with the work you do as an entertainer? And can anti-capitalist art ever exist, undiluted and sincere within a media culture driven by profit? Jonathan Evans, Oxford Any socialist model aspires to create significant swathes of time for people to consume and enjoy and make art, so I think entertainment is entirely compatible and necessary. The only show I wrote that made it to television was Catastrophe and we really endeavoured to make Rob’s work [advertising for a pharmaceutical firm] look awful. I was pleased – and I think this will support an affirmative answer to the question – when a friend of my dad who works in the pharmaceutical industry asked me: how did you nail what it is like in the pharmaceutical industry? Who did you consult? I was like: oh, we just tried to think up the most cash-hungry, monstrous people and scenarios that we could. I feel that Catastrophe would comfortably fit in the canon of … you know [Robert Tressell’s 1914 novel] The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists? That book would be like the Bible and Catastrophe would be like a starter pamphlet for idiots. In the pantheon of good anti-capitalist art, they would sell copies of Catastrophe outside that pantheon. Throughout lockdown, your hair always looked fabulous in social media posts. How did you keep your mane looking so terrific while you were stuck at home? Paul Tandy, London How kind of that person to ask that. I guess just not cutting it? And certainly not washing it with any kind of frequency. All those natural oils – and just letting it be what it wanted to be. In this age of the hairless, metrosexual man, have you ever been tempted to wax or shave your body hair? Jackie Hughes, London No. And I think we have equalised a bit there – where there was a big rip-all-your-hair-off thing for a while, I think people now are like: that’s a lot of work, and the pendulum has swung back in the right direction. I never thought I should shave my body or anything like that. Never felt it, never did it. When historians look back on this period, how do you think they will judge the influence of social media – something that was a force for good or for bad? Frank, Germany A force for bad, on aggregate. Let’s use America as an example. Somebody in West Virginia – you know, a low-income voter for Trump – and me – a comedian, previously Los Angeles and now London – there’s just so much less difference than we are led to believe by the media. They sow division so that they can control us – and it works. Social media has been a successful tool in creating that division where we really police ourselves and police each other and subscribe to one camp or the other. I should say it is a tool that is frequently used for bad, like a machete. A machete can clear a path through the jungle to get medical supplies to people who need it, or it can be used to hack somebody apart. And so people use it incorrectly. Whereas I use it beautifully. Home Sweet Home Alone is exclusively on Disney+Jim Mason knows the exact moment, shortly before he retired, when he realised he was falling in love with his assistant. Liz was 33 years his junior. As she climbed into the car one day, she turned to him and said: “Come on – let’s go.” Mason doesn’t recall where they were heading. “It was the way she said it as though we were a complete item.” They had worked together for the NHS for several years. “There was never anything in it. I went in and she coped with me, and I coped with her.” But his marriage had ended in his mid-50s and he had “imploded in on himself” in the lonely years that followed. He liked watercolours, and Liz liked photography. They began to hang out at weekends, at first as friends; then the relationship developed. After a while, Liz told him: “I love being with you but I’ve got a life to lead and I want children.” Mason already had a son and a daughter, of similar ages to Liz. “I could have bailed out there,” he says. Instead, Liz moved in and, at 61, Mason became a father again. At antenatal classes and hospital appointments, he says, “Liz was the brave one. She toughed it out. But I felt embarrassed … You have to appreciate that everyone thinks I’m Liz’s dad.” After a while, Mason realised that “age exists but it doesn’t matter. I became more happy and contented with me.” On the day their first child, Isobel, was born, Mason bought a clock. “I remember it distinctly because I wanted to leave her something.” He doesn’t know why it had to be a clock, only that it needed to be in a state of disrepair and he would be the one to fix it. “I think it’s something to do with new beginnings,” he muses. Each day he visits his workshop at home in Normanton, Nottinghamshire, and sets his 40-odd clocks ticking. “People say: ‘Aren’t you ticking your life away?’ But it gives me a sense of wellbeing.” Three years after Isobel, now 12, came Elsie, nine – and Mason began to discover that he was a different sort of parent this time around. At 73, he lives in the house where all four of his children have grown up, but he occupies it very differently. “I used to walk out in the morning and come back at night, hot, tired and dusty. Now when Liz comes back from taking the kids to school, everything is tidied, breakfast put away.” He spends quality time with Isobel and Elsie. “I sit and draw with them for hours – tractors, mainly. I’m here living it,” he says. At work, Mason managed multimillion-pound programmes. “One thing you can’t do is act spontaneously.” When he and Liz moved in together, everything changed. “I became much more outrageous in my approach to life.” He eschewed hotels to go backpacking with Liz. He bought a paddock. Rare-breed sheep followed. (As a child he loved visiting his uncle’s farm, also in Normanton.) He visited an auction for clocks, returned with a beehive and now keeps 500,000 bees. Mason says he believes in “happy accidents” – by which he means “no plan, but something at the back of your mind”, a hankering or hope noted and saved for future action. “The brave people seize on them.” Has Mason’s whole personality changed, or is he giving expression to a self long hidden? “I think that’s probably a better description,” he says. “I have come more and more free of the trammels of life.” Mason’s son, Chris, and his daughters Elaine, Isobel and Elsie “all think they are brother and sisters”, he says. “They will not entertain the word ‘step-’.” Mason and Liz discuss the future, though he wonders if he’ll live to see Isobel and Elsie have children of their own. “I might get there, but who knows?” Meanwhile, when the car appears on the drive, Isobel and Elsie “rush in, the door slams, they come straight to find me and kiss me. Can you imagine the joy that gives an old fogey like me?” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Last May, the playwright James Graham found himself in the unfamiliar environs of Question Time. He hadn’t planned to become a spokesperson for theatre during the pandemic, but he happened to be promoting the ITV version of Quiz, his hit 2017 play, just as the sector was screaming for a bailout, and he used his platform wisely. One thing led to another. At the same time, he was researching his new play, Best of Enemies, about 11 landmark televised debates between Gore Vidal and William F Buckley Jr in August 1968. “I heard the Question Time music and my brain emptied of every single thing I’d ever thought,” he says with a comical shudder. “I’m not naturally good at broadcast media. That’s why it’s fascinating to spend time in the heads of Vidal and Buckley. I was ashamed by the distance between what I could do and what they did. They were impossibly articulate.” Best of Enemies, which will be staged at London’s Young Vic, is based on a 2015 documentary of the same name. “I went to bed completely obsessed with it,” says Graham. “As a political dweeb, I was embarrassed that I’d never heard about these debates.” During the 1968 party conventions in America, the struggling ABC network attempted to juice its ratings by pitting Vidal, aristocratic chaos agent of the left, against Buckley, arch-conservative editor of the National Review, for the ensuing culture-war fireworks. It worked all too well. The documentary argues that their combative theatricality (they “hated each other” Graham says) began the process of reducing political disagreement to a wrestling match, yet in 2021 the idea of 10 million viewers watching two eloquent public intellectuals debate the future of a bitterly divided America seems remarkable. “I’m asking: what is a healthy conversation between two people who disagree?” Graham says. “Like everyone else, I’ve been preoccupied with how we talk to one another on our new platforms and how unhealthy and dangerous that sometimes feels. There’s no exchange of ideas, no listening, no empathy. We’re in a really bad place.” Physically, at least, the two of us are in a very nice place. We’re having lunch in a busy restaurant near the Young Vic, where Graham is busy rewriting the script during rehearsals. The draft he sent me five days ago is already out of date and the final version will be something else again. “I take a huge block of ice into a rehearsal room and then we start chipping away at it,” he says. “You just have to not care about embarrassing yourself.” It helps that he is so self-effacing. He shrugs off the bumper ratings of Quiz (“Everyone was bored and stuck at home”) and frequently frets about sounding “wanky”. He also just loves the process of collaboration. A boyish 39, Graham has enough contagious excitement to make anyone consider jacking in their job and joining a theatre company. “It’s the best job in the world,” he says. “I’ve really missed it.” Vidal is played by Charles Edwards of Downton Abbey and The Crown (for which Graham wrote a standout episode about Prince Charles) and Buckley, counterintuitively, by Homeland’s David Harewood. So in the play’s flashback to Buckley’s 1965 Cambridge Union debate with James Baldwin, both actors are black. “David’s brain is extraordinary,” Graham says. “He pulled me up and said, ‘You can’t temper the more unattractive aspects of his politics because I’m playing him. If he hates black people, I need to own that thought in my head.’” Buckley was guilty of homophobia as well as racism. In the penultimate debate, Vidal called him a “crypto-Nazi” and Buckley notoriously turned feral, calling Vidal “you queer” and threatening to “sock you in your goddamn face”. Shocking enough in 1968, it seems unforgivable now. How can a modern audience still sympathise with him? “That’s a good question,” Graham says. “The most generous view of Buckley is we’re all capable of being the very worst version of ourselves at the very worst moment. I think audiences can feel, not sympathy, but empathy for his loss of control.” Graham is known for giving both sides of a political conflict their due. His 2012 breakthrough This House dramatised the scheming of the whips’ offices during the 1974-79 Labour government with such even-handedness that the audience included a cross-bench alliance of politicians. He’s that rare beast: a political playwright who doesn’t tell you where to stand. “A psychologist would probably assign to where I grew up my interest in differences of opinion,” he says. This was the Nottinghamshire mining village of Annesley, where the miners’ strike led to a kind of civil war. His forthcoming BBC drama Sherwood explores how a double murder years later reopened old wounds. “To this day people cross the street because of a political choice they were forced to make 40 years ago.” In hits such as Quiz, Ink and 2019’s Channel 4 drama Brexit: The Uncivil War, Graham harnesses the exhilaration of seeing underestimated outsiders pull off a gamechanging upset to even make you root, at least emotionally, for Rupert Murdoch’s Sun or Dominic Cummings’ Vote Leave – before he pulls the rug and exposes the grim ramifications. “Basically, everything is a sports movie when I start writing it,” he says. “It’s either Moneyball or Cool Runnings: the underdogs who change the world. I like missions, and the unintended consequences of those missions.” Buckley and Vidal are no longer around to pass comment but Murdoch saw Ink twice, which led to mutterings that Graham had a little too much sympathy for the devil. “The very valid question was: should he have been comfortable watching it?” he says. “All I can say is that there was a deliberate intention to make people like him, or people who read his newspapers, feel like they could get a defence, but then they have to sit there and listen to the prosecution.” Far more controversial was Benedict Cumberbatch’s rendering of Cummings in Brexit: The Uncivil War. The Guardian journalist Carole Cadwalladr accused Graham of portraying Cummings (not then a public figure) as a Sherlockian maverick. Now, after Barnard Castle and all that, does he worry that he wasn’t hard enough? “I go back and forth all the time. Sometimes I think I was too hard, but not very often.” Cummings’ gung-ho contempt for journalists, MPs and judges while he was at No 10 did make Graham think twice. “He was perpetuating this civil war in a really reckless way given that a woman got killed in that referendum. I wish I’d needled that a little more – the consequences of that contrary approach to politics.” Still, he refuses to villainise easy targets because that would mean preaching to the choir. “It’s inert, dramatically and politically. I have sleepless nights about that balance and I’ll probably never get it right but I go into it sincerely.” For that reason, Graham is strategically cagey about discussing his own voting history. “It’s a genuine desire to allow any audience member to come to the work as cleanly as possible,” he says. “I hope that’s a generous instinct and not a self-preservation instinct. I believe we live in a world of polarised extremes and that would be a barrier.” Although, he adds, his general political orientation is hardly a mystery. “I believe in the power of government and of progress. Basic social democracy.” He picks his battles, like campaigning for greater diversity in theatre and access to the arts. “We don’t talk about class enough. I come from a working-class background in a town that is culturally deprived. How we find people in Mansfield and Kirkby-in-Ashfield a way to experience live arts, and possibly contemplate making some, has gone unanswered. It’s not just doing it because you think you should but because of all the stories you’ll miss if you don’t. I don’t know why we think of art as this sacred thing that takes place in cities with posh people.” Graham says he was “a bit of a mess” during lockdown, which he spent alone in south London, but he was certainly productive. Alongside Best of Enemies and Sherwood, he worked on a musical about the televangelist Tammy Faye Messner with Elton John and Jake Shears, the screenplay for an Ink movie, and a livestreamed lockdown play, Bubble. After seven years, he’s still attached to Paul Greengrass’s movie version of George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four. “It’s still alive as a prospect,” he says. “Where I think I failed is – I was chasing the modern world. That book is already a metaphor so you don’t need to shrink it by saying, ‘Is Big Brother Facebook?’” His output may seem eclectic but to Graham there’s a common thread: “Great stories from our recent past that are useful vessels for exploring anxieties and tensions that we’re all dealing with today. Quiz was about truth, information and mob mentality. The theme of Ink was populism. Sherwood takes the social divides of Brexit and finds an equivalent in a town torn apart by the legacy of the miners’ strike.” He laughs. “None of my shit gets put on in Germany because it’s so unapologetically micro-British.” Graham finishes his coffee and heads back to rehearsals, where he will continue to wrestle with the two men who, he says, “live rent-free in my head”. He’s always working towards understanding his characters better, especially the ones he doesn’t agree with. “That’s why I think the death of drama in schools is terrifying,” he says, “because drama forces you to interrogate and empathise with people you don’t like. Twitter is an outrage machine and theatre is an empathy factory.” Best of Enemies is at the Young Vic, London, 3 December-22 January.It was the beginning of a beautiful friendship. Robert Weide, 23 years old with a debut film about the Marx Brothers under his belt, wrote to his literary idol, Kurt Vonnegut, proposing a documentary on the Slaughterhouse-Five author’s life and work. “He wrote me back, which was shocking to me, and gave me his phone number and welcomed me to call him, which I did,” recounts Weide, who like many had fallen under Vonnegut’s spell at high school. “Then we got together the next time I was in New York, which was later that year, and we hit it off.” That was 1982. Vonnegut was about to turn 60 and Weide came to refer to him affectionately as “the old man”. Now, Weide himself is 62 and finally releasing the documentary that was a labour of love four decades in the making: Kurt Vonnegut: Unstuck in Time. It is a beguiling film about the author of Cat’s Cradle, Breakfast of Champions, Mother Night and God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater who was described as an “oracle for the baby boomer generation” when he died aged 84 in 2007. Such is the easy intimacy between film-maker and subject that the viewer feels like they have spent a couple of hours’ in Vonnegut’s affable, smart and funny company. There is also what Weide calls a “meta” dimension to the piece. Director Don Argott was recruited to tell the story of Weide befriending Vonnegut, following him to book talks and launches and patiently trying to get the documentary off the ground (the fundraising site Kickstarter helped with $300,000). Weide reasons in the movie: “When you take almost 40 years to make a film, you owe some kind of explanation. Full disclosure.” It was 1988 before Weide had pulled together enough money to start filming. He first captured Vonnegut conversing on a train while on his way to a speaking engagement in Buffalo. “Then because the film was never properly financed – it was always out of my own pocket - it just became a hobby project where any time I had some spare time and some spare money, we’d get together and film,” he recalls via Zoom from Los Angeles, where countless tapes are shelved behind him. “It worked this way on and off for years until shortly before he died.” In 1994 Weide took the author back to his childhood home in Indianapolis. Vonnegut is seen touching imprints of his child-size hand, and the hands of of other family members, that remain in concrete poured in the 1920s. The project received a boost when Vonnegut’s brother, Bernie, handed over some 16mm home movies that had been gathering dust in a closet. But the memories also carried pain. In 1958 his beloved sister, Alice, died of breast cancer days after her husband drowned in a train accident. Weide reflects: “He would say how much he missed his her and how ‘she taught me what was funny; she imbued my sense of humour; we thought the same things were funny’. “A lot of what they thought was funny had to do with a lot of good comedy, which is a tragedy befalling other people. If they saw somebody fall down on the street in Indianapolis, they’d laugh about it for years sometimes. He talked a lot about his sister in very fond terms. He never was that vocal specifically about how her death affected him but his daughter says in the film all these years later, ‘I don’t think he can even now get his arms around it’.” But the defining horror of Vonnegut’s life had come earlier in 1944 when, just a few months after his mother had committed suicide, he was taken prisoner during the Battle of the Bulge in the second world war. He was sent to Dresden and put to work in a factory. He survived the allied firebombing of the city in 1945 by hiding in an underground meatlocker, only to be sent into the ruins to collect and burn the corpses. Weide says: “I said, you were 22 years old, something like that that was going to change you, and his answer was: ‘The dogs in my neighbourhood where I was growing up had more to do with shaping my character than anything that happened during the war.’ OK, that’s interesting. And then his daughter says, oh, he’s full of it; he’s in denial; how can that not change you? “When I was 22, I was just hanging out with my friends and having a good time, and doing what 22-year-olds do and getting into little kinds of trouble. He was pulling bodies out of basements and piling them up and torching them for sanitation purposes.” The producer and director, whose credits include several seasons of HBO’s Curb Your Enthusiasm, continues: “But what’s interesting about Dresden is how he’s always trying to deal with it. He had witnessed something that happened that was huge and when he came back to the States after the war, nobody was writing about it, nobody was talking about it, unlike Hiroshima.” Having written for his school and college newspaper, Vonnegut’s journalistic way of thinking made him wonder: why is nobody reporting this? Weide goes on: “He first approached it as somebody who just wanted to say, ‘This happened and I was there’. But he was struggling with how to tell the Dresden story for years. We see in the film all the iterations, all the attempts to tell the story. “There are little intimations of it in some of his short stories and novels. Cat’s Cradle is a book about an apocalyptic event, which I’m sure was based on his experience there. God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater has a reference to Dresden and a fantasy about Indianapolis being caught up in a firestorm. But he could never crack the code and then, with Slaughterhouse-Five, he told his Dresden story and it made him wealthy and successful and famous.” But this wealth and success and fame came at a price. Fans turned up at his door and sometimes stayed for days. Vonnegut started a relationship with a photographer much younger than his wife, Jane, whom he eventually divorced. Family members interviewed in the film say: “It was pretty clear that Kurt’s famous now and he’s left his drab life behind on Cape Cod and now he’s living the celebrity life in the fast lane of Manhattan;” “I wish it didn’t hurt him in the way it hurt him but I think fame is a horrible destructive thing to do to people;” “It wasn’t until he died that I stopped doing this but I thought that I hated him. I hated the way that he treated Jane.” Weide reflects: “It’s the old story, isn’t it? It happens all the time. I was talking with somebody about the similarities with Arthur Miller, who was a struggling writer and then Death of a Salesman made him a huge international playwright overnight. The next thing he does is he leaves his wife of many years and I was joking that his wife was probably saying, ‘Go ahead, leave me now that you’re famous, who do you think you’re going to wind up with, Marilyn Monroe?’ Then he would say, ‘Well, actually,..’ “I think the marriage to him felt like it had petered out; I don’t look at it as good or bad or a huge betrayal. His wife was OK: she continued to have a good life, met a guy and got remarried. She and Kurt stayed friendly to the end. I didn’t feel it was something to spend an inordinate amount of time with, nor something to shy away from. It’s warts and all.” Late in the film Vonnegut is seen railing against President George W Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney over the Iraq war. What would he have made of Donald Trump? Weide comments: “His daughters have said, thank God he died before Trump was elected because he would have just given up. “During the Bush administration I wouldn’t say he had lost his sense of humour but he had at that point said, OK, there’s nothing funny about this anymore. He was disgusted about the invasion of Iraq. “He would have seen Trump as a disaster, which he was. But Trump also is a character out of a Vonnegut book. God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater has to do with people who have way too much money and don’t know what to do with it and still need more somehow. Trump would have been a character that he would have satirised.” Weide remembers Vonnegut as having a down-to-earth midwestern sensibility and genuine interest in people. When fans approached him during their walks around Manhattan, he would surprise by asking their name and where they were from. Above all, Weide remembers his humour; they shared a mutual love of old film comedy. “We laughed a lot together. In fact, the main thing I remember when I just reflect on our relationship was all the times we spent laughing and joking. There was a lightness to our relationship because there was no baggage. Unlike some of his kids who had this more complicated dynamic that you have with a parent than with someone else’s father, there was nothing but lightness. “He was very prone to laugh. He loved bad jokes. He loved puns. In fact, there was so much laughter over stupid jokes and puns in our friendship that when I go back and I pick up one of his books and I remember how brilliant he was and how profound he could be, there’s really a moment where I think, that guy that I know wrote this book? “How did that happen? I have trouble reconciling the two. A lot of it was dark laughter. We see in the film him talking about the demise of some of his high school and college buddies. He’s doubled over laughing and it seems kind of inappropriate but you chuckle.” Vonnegut, who would have turned 99 last week, did not coin the phrase “so it goes” but made it his own by using it more than a hundred times in Slaughterhouse-Five. Weide comments: “The idea is you can’t mourn every loss and every death or else you’ll be doing nothing else because we’re just surrounded by loss and death. You acknowledge it, but you also know that you move on from it.” Kurt Vonnegut: Unstuck in Time is released in US cinemas and to rent digitally on 19 November with a UK date to be announcedThe killing of a pet dog whose owners were in quarantine has sparked outrage on Chinese social media and raised questions about extreme measures health authorities are taking to battle a continuing Delta outbreak. On Friday a resident of Shangrao, in Jiangxi province, posted allegations on Weibo that her pet dog was beaten to death by health workers inside her apartment while she was quarantining in a hotel that didn’t allow animals. In video purportedly from her apartment’s security camera posted online, one of two PPE-wearing individuals is shown hitting the dog with what looks like a crowbar. Shangrao city authorities apologised on Saturday night for not communicating with the dog’s owner and said the worker in question had been dismissed from the role. It claimed the dog had been “dealt with”. The notice said people in quarantine were supposed to leave their apartment doors open for quarantining but hers had been locked. With the assistance of police the workers accessed her apartment and discovered the dog. A hashtag related to the response was viewed about 210m times. Commenters questioned the suggestion the worker had acted without authority and also criticised the censoring of online posts about the incident. “Without the instructions of the leaders above, who would dare to pry the door and kill the dog?” said one. It follows a similar case earlier this month when cats belonging to a Chengdu resident quarantining as a close contact were euthanised. The animals had not been tested for the virus. After the cat case, An Xiang, director of a Beijing law firm, said on Weibo the science around pet infection was not conclusive. “Emergency measures such as hunting and killing should not be taken … The relevant unit has no evidence to prove that these pets have been infected.” In September, Harbin officials were accused of overreacting when they euthanised three cats that had returned positive readings for the virus while their owner was in hospital. The cases have prompted waves of fear among pet owners and confusion among local authorities about laws and official processes, the South China Morning Post reported. Local media noted previous measures to care for the animals while owners were quarantined. As China pursues a zero-Covid strategy and battles a stubborn outbreak of the Delta variant, the criteria for people to be quarantined have widened. There is no conclusive research on the risk of Covid-19 transmissions from pets to their owners. Advice from various national disease control centres is that a Covid patient should be isolated from both people and animals. In July the BBC reported that a study by researchers at Utrecht University found rates up to 18% of Covid in animals belonging to patients, but that the most likely transmission path was from humans to animals. No case of a pet infecting an owner has been recorded.Top story: Streets sealed off as MI5 assist police Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and here are the top stories to start the week. Three men have been arrested under anti-terrorism laws after a taxi explosion outside Liverpool Women’s hospital that killed the passenger. The men – aged 29, 26 and 21 – were detained in the Kensington area of the city and arrested under the Terrorism Act, police said. In the early hours, a street in the city’s Sefton Park area was cordoned off by armed police and some residents evacuated as part of “ongoing enquiries”. The explosion, which happened shortly before 11am when the Remembrance Sunday silence was due to begin, engulfed the taxi in a fireball. The driver, who managed to escape with minor injuries before the flames spread, is not one of the people arrested. The dead man has not been named. The focus of the police investigation is on whether the blast – partially captured on this video – was caused deliberately and whether there is significance in the location. The inquiry is being led by counter-terrorism police who are being assisted by MI5. Here’s everything we know so far about the incident. * * * Climate deal – India and China will “have to explain themselves to poor nations”, warned the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, after the two Asian countries succeeded in watering down the Glasgow climate pact. Sharma was almost reduced to tears by the last-minute change of wording which committed the world to “phasing down” rather than “phasing out” the use of coal. He said he was “deeply frustrated” but the final agreement was still better than losing the whole deal. Boris Johnson said that even with the weaker wording, the agreement thrashed out over two weeks in Glasgow “sounded the death knell” for coal. Some analysts stressed that it was unfair to single out India as the villain because it cannot phase out coal at the same pace as more developed economies. Pacific countries said the summit was a “monumental failure” that left their island nations in peril. Our environment correspondent looks at how the deal was nearly lost, but why there is still hope for change. * * * Ambulance alarm – Delays outside hospital A&amp;E departments are causing fatalities and up to 160,000 more people a year are coming to harm because they are stuck outside hospitals unable to be offloaded, a report has revealed. Patients are also dying soon after finally getting admitted to hospital after spending long periods in the back of an ambulance, while others still in their own homes are not being saved because paramedics are trapped at A&amp;E and unable to answer 999 calls. Nursing leaders meanwhile have highlighted 10 pressures on health and social care services which they say have created “unsustainable, untenable” conditions. * * * Vaccine hope – A UK company has developed an easy-to-use, skin-patch Covid vaccine that could offer longer-lasting immunity than current treatments. The Emergex vaccine will soon start trials and uses T-cells to remove infected cells from the body quickly after infection, thus preventing viral replication and disease. While the antibodies produced by the current Covid vaccines stick to the virus and stop it infecting cells, T-cells find and destroy infected cells. * * * Tampon protest – An environmental activist is stepping up her campaign against single-use plastics in period products by calling on the world’s bestselling manufacturer of tampons to make greener alternatives. Ella Daish will present Procter &amp; Gamble bosses with a giant tampon applicator, made of 1,200 discarded Tampax applicators found littering British waterways, rivers and beaches. “I wanted to create something that you can’t ignore,” she said. * * * ‘Walking through concrete’ – Adele has opened up to Oprah Winfrey on divorce, losing weight and how much she can deadlift, as well as explaining the meaning of new songs on her eagerly awaited album, 30, which is set for release on Friday. Quizzed on some of the “dark” lyrics, the British star says she has struggled in the aftermath of her divorce from charity chief Simon Konecki while maintaining her stellar career and looking after her nine-year-old son. “I juggled those things as well. And I felt like not doing it any more. It made my feet hurt, walking through all that concrete.” Today in Focus podcast: where now after Glasgow? We analyse how the global climate deal reached in Glasgow makes some progress but goes nowhere near far enough to avert devastating global heating. Lunchtime read: James Graham – ‘I’ve really missed theatre’ James Graham, the playwright whose hits include Quiz, Ink and Brexit: The Uncivil War, has turned his attention to the febrile politics of 60s America for his new project. Graham explains what made him write Best of Enemies, which is about the TV debates between Gore Vidal and William F Buckley Jr in August 1968, why he’s loving being back in theatre and whether he was too soft on Dominic Cummings. Sport Against the odds and defying the numbers, Lewis Hamilton won the Brazilian Grand Prix, storming to victory from 10th on the grid to cut Max Verstappen’s title race lead to 14 points. Serbia clinched an automatic berth at the 2022 World Cup after a 90th-minute header by the half-time substitute Aleksandar Mitrovic gave them a comeback 2-1 win over Portugal. Álvaro Morata scored the only goal of the game against Sweden in Seville to ensure Spain finished top of Group B and qualified for Qatar. After Australia completed a remarkable comeback to win their first T20 World Cup, Aaron Finch insisted that even at their lowest ebb he never saw his side as anything other than champions in waiting. England rugby union coach Eddie Jones wants his team to deliver a statement victory over South Africa in their grudge match this week. England’s footballers plan to discuss how to express their concerns about human rights in Qatar once they have qualified for the 2022 World Cup. The WTA Tour has called on the Chinese government to investigate allegations of sexual assault made by Peng Shuai against a former Chinese vice-premier while also demanding an end to censorship of the former top-ranked doubles player. Roger Federer will almost certainly miss the Australian Open for the second year in a row, with the Swiss maestro said to be recovering slowly from a third round of knee surgery in 18 months. And the Essex chief executive, John Stephenson, is “extremely shocked and saddened” by allegations the club’s former batter Zoheb Sharif received racist abuse that included being called “bomber” by his teammates after the September 11 attacks. Business Weak EU vehicle emissions targets could allow Europe’s biggest carmakers to produce millions more petrol and diesel cars than necessary up to 2030 in a “wasted decade” for cutting carbon pollution. And more than 300,000 workers in the UK will get a pay rise from today as the charity behind the voluntary real living wage raises the minimum hourly rate by 40p to £9.90. The FTSE100 will open down around 0.1% this morning while the pound is on $1.343 and €1.172. The papers The explosion in Liverpool makes a dramatic lead for many titles today. The Mirror says “Terror probe after taxi blast” and the Times has a very similar “Three held by terror police after fatal blast”. The Mail links the explosion to Remembrance Day with “Poppy day ‘bomb’ rocks maternity hospital”, as does the Express – “Terror probe into poppy day blast” – and the Telegraph: “Remembrance ‘terror plot’: three held after fatal explosion”. The Sun says “Hospital terror blast hero”. The Guardian goes with “Frustration at India and China over watering down climate deal” and the FT has “Business groups add to chorus of dismay at watered down Cop deal”. The i splash is “Rail plans scaled down in blow for ‘levelling up’”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Yedel Bah would move home if she could, but she can’t. With no income of her own, four children to feed and a husband who just about manages, her family lives from day to day, and from flood to flood, on the banks of a litter-strewn, stagnant canal. Every rainy season, the neighbourhood of Tobacco Road in the Gambian capital, Banjul, braces for downpours of such intensity that the canal overflows, spilling its murky, pungent depths into the slum-like homes that run alongside it. After one particularly bad flood this summer, the waters remained in Bah’s rooms for 11 days. “Everything was spoiled,” she says. “Food, everything, even our mattress.” This would be bad enough if the canal were even moderately clean, but it isn’t: until recently, a local MP says, a pipe was dumping raw sewage into it. Crocodiles have been seen lurking nearby, and a couple of years ago one made its way out of the canal into a mosque just a few doors down from Bah’s compound. Bah, 45, worries about her children growing up here and what will happen during the next flood – for it is a question of when, not if, this will happen. But she can do little to improve her situation. “I have no choice,” she says. Life in Tobacco Road, a poor neighbourhood in the low-lying coastal capital, has never been easy, but it is becoming more and more difficult. It is places like this – where physical vulnerability is exacerbated by abject poverty and failing infrastructure – that needed more from Cop26 than they appear to have got. “We need help,” Bah says simply, when asked about her message to political leaders. But it is not clear where that help will come from. The Gambia is a small strip of low-lying land in west Africa along both banks of the river from which it takes its name. As one of the world’s poorest and least-developed countries, it is suffering the effects of a climate crisis it did very little to cause. On an island jutting out into the Atlantic, less than a metre above sea level, Banjul is particularly exposed. But residents say human-made failures have made its future even more perilous. Ousman Sillah, the national assembly member for Banjul North, the constituency that includes Tobacco Road, fears that unless concerted action is taken soon, disaster looms. “Well, we are going to lose Banjul at the end of the day. It’s going to be uninhabitable unless the country is prosperous [enough that] we can have a city on stilts.” He laughs wryly as if to acknowledge how far-fetched that sounds in a country where nearly half the population live in poverty. “We are not ready for that. If you look at Banjul now, people are so poor they cannot afford that.” In a worst-case scenario, envisaged by experts in a 2020 survey, global heating of 4.5C above pre-industrial levels could mean a sea level rise of between 0.6 and 1.3 metres by 2100. That would be enough to inundate most or all of Banjul. Many experts fear the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s forecast of a 1.1-metre rise is optimistic. In either scenario, one thing is clear: the city is in serious jeopardy. As signposts by the road state: “There is no planet B. Protect Banjul.” One man believes it is time for the government to think about plan B. Nfamara Dampha, a Gambian research consultant at the World Bank, wants plans drawn up to move the country’s administrative capital away from the coast. “Make no mistake: Banjulians love Banjul,” he says from Minnesota. “And if Banjul can be protected … people will still love to live there.” But he adds: “The option of having an administrative capital elsewhere is imperative, in my opinion.” Although about 380,000 people live in the greater Banjul area, the population of the island is just 35,000. But Dampha believes that, with the National Assembly, central bank, biggest hospital, seaport and many schools, the city is too big – in administrative terms – to be allowed to fail. “It’s a capital asset of the country,” he says. “If it falls or is severely impacted, the [Gambian] economy [will be] on the verge of collapse.” The drastic idea has some support. But for Sillah, a fourth-generation Banjulian, it is unrealistic: too costly and “not a priority”. What the city needs, he says, is improvements to its basic infrastructure that would make it more resilient in the face of erratic rainfall, rising sea levels and coastal erosion. When he was a boy, he says, “on a daily basis, we would see cleaners going down into the gutters. They were so clean that we as kids used to play in [them] … Sometimes you could even see live fish in the gutters, the water was so clean.” Now, gutters and drains in Banjul are clogged with waste, so when the rains come, there is nowhere for water to flow safely. Sillah says the solutions range from the prosaic – better waste collection and gutter cleaning – to the ambitious, such as building stronger, more elevated housing, rather than the slum-like homes of Bah and her neighbours. The drainage canal should be given concrete sides to enable it to withstand greater rainfall, he says. Construction on the wetlands just beyond Tobacco Road should stop immediately. At the end of September, when heavy rains brought more flooding to Tobacco Road, the mayor of Banjul, Rohey Malick Lowe, visited the area and announced she and other relevant authorities were tackling the problem. “The safety of the people of Banjul will always be our concern and we believe this will reduce the level of the stagnant water in the city,” a statement said. “In the service of the community, we will continue to remain!” A committed band of young people believe part of the solution lies in nature. To preserve Banjul beach, activists with Clean Earth Gambia started planting thousands of coconut trees in the sand, hoping the palms will defend the coastline against the encroaching sea. With funding from a €3m (£2.6m) EU partnership with the Belgian city of Ostend, they have planted 7,000, and saplings stretch for more than a mile along the beach. Maimuna Treira, 23, a physics student at the University of the Gambia, says: “In the Gambia, the people advocating for climate change are not many. So we decided it was high time that youths take ownership of this. We know the rising sea level is a threat to Banjul, so that was why we decided to make Banjul our main focus. “We have to act now,” she says. “We don’t have to wait till later because it’s our generation, it’s our time, so let’s do what’s needed.” For months, Treira and her fellow activists came to the beach every weekend to plant trees. Their work was not without opposition: young boys playing football were annoyed their spot was being used. But the project also has plenty of fans. On a sweltering November morning, Abdul Karim Mbatch steps from sapling to sapling along Banjul beach, giving each a good watering. The city council employee wants the trees to go even further along the coast, hoping they will help save his city. “This will keep the sea away,” he says. Only time will tell if he is right. Additional reporting by Omar Wally Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Q Should I spend the equivalent of a quarter of the value of my home to reduce its carbon footprint? This cost would replace windows and add insulation and cladding. It should keep the heating bills down – it already has a ground source heat pump. I intend to live in the house for at least the next five years. I can afford it but does it make economic sense? JK A As I don’t know what the value of your home is, I can’t say for sure that you’ll have to spend as much as a quarter of it to reduce its carbon footprint but it could be a lot less. Because you already have a ground source heat pump, you have already made a good start. According to the Energy Saving Trust heat pumps “are much more efficient than gas boilers” and “will always help to cut your carbon emissions”. In its “Top tips to reduce your carbon emissions”, the Energy Saving Trust is also a big fan of insulation. “For a quick fix,” says the trust, “insulate any exposed hot water pipes along with your hot water cylinder if you have one”. But “insulating the building itself will make a bigger difference, making your home warmer in winter, as well as lowering your energy bills and cutting your carbon emissions”. It is keen on putting a stop to heat loss through gaps around windows and doors, between floorboards or up a chimney: “Draught-proofing these areas is a cost-effective way to save energy and reduce your household’s carbon emissions [and] it’s easy to do.” According to the trust, cladding your walls could cost about £10,000 if you opt for external insulation, and could save you up to £350 a year, depending on the type of property in which you live. Over at Propertyroad.co.uk, it says double glazing will improve the energy efficiency of your home and add as much as 10% to its value. All of this suggests that as well as making total environmental sense, spending money on improving energy efficiency makes a lot of economic sense as well.Just 124 landowners own the majority of England’s deep peat – its single largest carbon store – new analysis has found. From the low-lying wetlands of the Fens, to the bogs of the North York Moors, 450,000 hectares (1m acres) of peat soils store 584m tonnes of carbon, according to Natural England, equivalent to the annual emissions from 540 coal-fired power stations in the US. England’s peatlands emit around 11m tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere every year because of degradation and draining. Improving their management and encouraging their restoration are part of the UK’s net zero strategy, and the government is aiming to restore 280,000 hectares of peatland in England by the middle of the century. A new report by Guy Shrubsole, environmental campaigner and author of Who Owns England?, has revealed that 60% of England’s peatlands are owned by a small group of people. In the uplands, 249,000 hectares of peat are owned by 101 grouse moor estates, while 20 landowners oversee 43,706 hectares of lowland peat in the Fens, about one-third of the total, according to the analysis. Alongside large areas owned by the Duchy of Cornwall, Forestry Commission and the Ministry of Defence, just 124 landowners control more than 450,000 hectares of England’s peat. Shrubsole, a former policy and campaigns coordinator with Rewilding Britain, said: “England’s single largest carbon store is owned by a vanishingly small number of landowners, whose mismanagement of this ecosystem by burning and draining it is currently adding to the climate disaster. “The public urgently needs to challenge these landowners to protect and restore our peatlands, so that they help fix climate breakdown rather than making it worse. And the UK government must tighten its peatland-burning legislation, so that landowners can no longer set fire to our carbon.” Last week, the John Muir Trust, a charity set up to protect wild places in Britain, said taxing deer and grouse estates for failing to ensure their land properly locked up carbon dioxide could play a crucial role in fighting the climate crisis. In response to the analysis, the Moorland Association, which represents grouse moor owners in England, said its members protected, restored and enhanced deep peat on their land, which required careful management for sustainable grouse shooting. It defended burning, saying: “Controlled burning in the winter is a crucial tactic for moorland management which removes excess vegetation but does not affect the underlying peat. Managed burning helps prevent and limit the spread of wildfires through the creation of firebreaks and reducing the burnable fuel loads.” A Defra spokesperson said it had been clear about the need to phase out rotational burning of protected blanket bog and had brought forward protective legislation, while supporting landowners with restoration.Rising greenhouse gas emissions from the incineration of waste and stagnating recycling rates will stop the UK reaching net zero by 2050, according to analysis presented to government. Experts who advise ministers on key areas of infrastructure spending highlight waste and recycling as a key area of concern. Recycling rates in the UK are lower than in many other European countries, and have plateaued since 2013. Meanwhile burning waste to produce energy has increased in the past six years causing total greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector to rise, the National Infrastructure Commission said in a report on Monday. Just over 4% of total UK greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 came from the waste sector, which produced 22 megatonnes of CO2. Energy from waste incinerators produced about 5 MtCO2, nearly a quarter of the total emissions from the sector. While energy from waste incineration has increased, rates of recycling – the preferred government option for waste to reduce its environmental impact – has stagnated, the NIC said in its baseline report. “The significant decrease in local authority waste going to landfill has been accompanied by a greater proportion being incinerated for energy recovery rather than recycled or composted in England. This has caused waste emissions to rise since 2014,” the NIC said. “The net zero target is a key driver for change in the waste sector over the next three decades. “An increasing reliance on energy from waste, alongside stagnating recycling levels, will make it difficult to achieve net zero emission targets without carbon capture and storage technologies.” The authors said further progress on greenhouse gas reduction was needed to meet net zero emissions by 2050. Reduction, reuse and recycling are the top priority choices in UK government policy for waste. But recycling rates are stagnating at about 43%; far off a target of 64% by 2035, which the government has signed up to in its Resources &amp; Waste Strategy. The move by local authorities to increased energy from incineration is deeply controversial in many areas. In north London campaigners are fighting an expansion in an energy-from-waste incinerator which serves seven authorities. The recycling rate in the area is about 30% – below the national average. Recycling is a cheaper option for local authorities. Over the year 2020-21, households paid an average of £29 for recycling, compared with £95 for waste disposal, the report said. England generated 187m tonnes of waste in 2018, a rise of 12% in 10 years. Local authorities in England collected 26m tonnes of waste in 2018/9. Use of landfill – which made GHG emissions peak in the mid-90s – has plummeted since the introduction of a landfill tax. Landfill still accounts for 14 megatonnes of CO2 annually, more than half the total emissions from the waste sector. The report points out that emissions from energy recovery plants are still significantly lower than landfill and displace emissions that would otherwise be created by alternative forms of electricity generation. The former chief scientific adviser to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs warned MPs in 2018 against further investment in energy-from-waste capacity in the UK, saying they encouraged the production of more waste to feed them. Prof Ian Boyd said: “Incineration is not a good direction to go in. I think that if you are investing many tens of millions, hundreds of millions, in urban waste incineration plants – and those plants are going to have a 30- to 40-year lifespan – you have to have the waste streams to keep them supplied. “Now, that is the market pull on waste, so it encourages the production of waste, it encourages the production of residual waste, it encourages people to think that we can throw what could be potentially valuable materials … into a furnace and burn them.” A spokesperson for the North London Waste Authority, which is building the new incinerator in Edmonton, said: “Our number one objective is to produce less waste and recycle more. Right now our recycling rate is about 30% but we’re doing everything we can to reduce waste and increase recycling to 50% or more, including building more recycling facilities. “There is absolutely no incentive for us to produce more rubbish as it costs councils less to recycle materials than sending it to energy from waste facilities. But really, we need government and businesses to wake up to the link between unsustainable consumption, the waste it generates, and its real and devastating consequences for the climate emergency … “We’re not expanding the existing facility but building a world-class replacement which will have even greater benefits for the environment … Our facility will stop the rubbish produced by 2 million people being trucked out to the countryside and buried in the ground.”Michael Flynn, Donald Trump’s first national security adviser, was widely condemned after calling for the establishment of “one religion” in the US. Religious freedom is enshrined in the first amendment to the US constitution, which says “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof”. Regardless, at a rally staged in San Antonio on Saturday by the Christian “nonprofit news media network” American Faith, Flynn said: “If we are going to have one nation under God, which we must, we have to have one religion. One nation under God and one religion under God.” In response, the Minnesota Democrat Ilhan Omar, one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress, said: “These people hate the US constitution.” Mark Hertling, a retired general and media commentator, called Flynn, himself a retired general, “an embarrassment to the US army”. “His words are disgusting,” Hertling said. On Sunday, the veteran reporter Carl Bernstein told CNN that Flynn, as one of the “knaves and fools and dangerous authoritarian figures” with whom Trump surrounded himself in and out of office, was “saying out loud things that have never been said by an aide or close associates to the president of the United States”. Bernstein added: “It should be no surprise to know that Michael Flynn is saying the kind of things that he is saying, but what’s most significant here is that much of the Republican party … something like 35% in in exit polls said they favour Trump because Christianity is being taken away from them. “So Michael Flynn is not that far away from huge numbers of people in this country.” Flynn is no stranger to controversy. Fired from a senior intelligence role by Barack Obama, he became a close aide to Trump before resigning as national security adviser after less than a month in the role, for lying to the FBI about contacts with Russians. Flynn pleaded guilty to one criminal charge under Robert Mueller’s investigation of Russian election interference and links between Trump and Moscow, a plea he sought to withdraw before receiving a pardon from Trump. He has since emerged as an influential figure on the far right, linked to the QAnon conspiracy theory and appearing to advocate armed insurrection. In San Antonio, Flynn called the indictment of another Trump ally, Steve Bannon, over the investigation of the Capitol attack, an “abuse of freedom of speech” – another first amendment freedom. The Capitol was attacked on 6 January by Trump supporters seeking to overturn his election defeat. Flynn is himself the subject of a subpoena from the investigating House committee. On Friday, he told Fox News he had nothing to hide. In Texas, Flynn called the House investigation “a crucifixion of our first amendment freedom to speak, freedom to peacefully assemble”. His remarks about religion attracted support from a prominent contender in a vicious party fight for a Republican Senate nomination in Ohio. Josh Mandel, a former Ohio state treasurer, tweeted: “We stand with General Flynn.” Mandel’s own religion has been the subject of debate and controversy. In September, the Forward published an op-ed which asked if he was “obscuring his Jewishness” in order to appeal to far-right Christian voters. In response, Mandel described himself as a “Proud American. Proud Jew. Proud Marine. Proud Zionist. Everything Democrats hate.” Mandel’s religion was the subject of a controversial attack ad from another Republican hopeful, Mark Pukita, who denied charges of antisemitism. Amid criticism of his support for Flynn, Mandel said “freedom of religion [is not equal to] freedom FROM religion”. He also said: “America was not founded as a secular nation.”The planchette slides across the surface of the ornate Ouija board. It settles on one letter, then another. This is what I’ve been dreading. We’re sat around a table in Avenue House, a Grade II listed Victorian mansion in Finchley, north London, in a dark room that was once a tuberculosis ward. Across the floor, a children’s lullaby suddenly starts playing from a music box activated by motion sensor. “Who is SG? Are they your initials?” a woman in our group asks the darkness. I’m agnostic, and scared. If there is a beyond, I don’t want to open the door. “Did Henry VIII take your land?” someone else asks, which strikes me as random, until I learn we are on a site that once belonged to the Knights Templar. Earlier this evening, ghost-hunting facilitator Craig advised us to be mindful of our questions. These ghost hunts involve 45-minute vigils throughout the night at sites of noted paranormal activity, “calling out” the spirits to make contact. “You might be meeting a departed spirit, loved by someone in the room,” he says gravely. “If you ask them if they’re OK, and they say no – what are you going to do with that?” Haunted Happenings run events at a former orphanage in Liverpool, a nuclear bunker in Essex, a former prison in Shepton Mallet and the tombs under London Bridge. They sell out months in advance – one person here is on her 11th visit. Elsewhere in the room, people carry devices that register changes in temperature, humidity, electromagnetic frequencies (the last of which are more commonly used by electricians to find wires in walls). Sceptics are welcome, which is a relief. “Their value is eliminating false positives,” says Craig. “If the temperature changes, is the device near a window? Is that noise just a pipe? You have to rule out everything you can.” Craig’s partner, Karen, also assisting tonight, describes herself as on the fence about the paranormal. “The mind is good at finding patterns,” she muses. But most of the 32 guests tonight are firm believers. Arguably too firm. Whether we sit a vigil in a former schoolroom or the governess’s turret chamber, it’s the same people who announce there are ghosts touching their hand. Every nasal whistle or tummy rumble is seized upon as significant. Someone can see a man. Someone else can too. Has he got a beard? Yeah, I think so. There are faint children running around in smocks. Can you hear that piano playing? Why are ghosts so often Victorian, I wonder. People expire every minute. There should be ghosts in Reebok or hi-vis tabards, haunting the human resources department. Death isn’t Scooby-Doo. But I do get a taste of modern ghostery: a few visitors have ghost-hunting apps running in the background. “Why are you here?” someone’s phone asks. Such apps – NecroBox, DibbukBox, Djinn Box – often use a “ghost dictionary”. According to another app, GhostTube, “words are selected based on raw readings from your phone’s magnetometer”. Hmm. “Lady of the night!” another phone announces. It’s creepy, but cliched. Even the Ouija board loses its terror. The name Ouija, trademark of toy company Hasbro, is a portmanteau of the French and German for “yes”. They’re yes-yes boards, and this insistence underpins their working. “Use our energy,” Karen exhorts the spirits. Watching hands, it seems to me the group’s fervent wish to commune is being expressed in tiny, probably subconscious, movements, forever nudging the planchette. (Later, I learn this is called the ideomotor effect.) Nothing moves when no one is touching it. At our next vigil, in a dark conference room, we take it in turns to use a spirit box: listening to rapidly cycling radio frequencies through noise-cancelling headphones, repeating any phrases that come through. I like the ingenuity of this, but with every random utterance of Radio Belgium excitably woven into a story of a boy who died in a fire here, I get frustrated. What are ghosts? Frustrated DJs who don’t hate dead air? What I do like is the opportunity to wander round a beautiful building after hours. Avenue House was once the residence of the bishop of London, and we are given time to explore it alone, by torchlight. I appreciate the high ceilings and restored stairs, tall columns of velvet curtain, a strange, brick-walled channel in the basement. I open a door on the top floor, setting off a fire alarm. It’s the biggest jump scare of the night. Our last vigil is in the basement, and we turn our torches off. “My hand is itchy. Are you hot?” someone says, with much agreement and elaboration from others. I feel cold, because basements are cold, and frustrated by the over-excitability. We’re trying to scare ourselves, like kids around a campfire, but it’s nearly 3am and I want to go home. I’ve detected high spirits among the living, nothing from the other side. I’m leaving less convinced, I tell Craig outside. He’s sympathetic, with a high belief bar too. “For me, paranormal means unexplained. Not necessarily ghosts, or the supernatural. Only unexplained.” It’s a humbler attitude I can get behind; one that doesn’t attempt to squash cosmic mystery. If the hauntings within us, or the roiling unknown without, were routinely available for inspection, life and death wouldn’t be adventures worth the name. Let the ghosts have their peace. A comedown can feel like death? I try GhostTube in my newbuild flat, where no one has died, on a Wednesday afternoon. It spouts nonsense like “rituals” and “life” and “what year is it?”, sounding less haunted, more like it’s on pills. Smugness points Non. Nein. Bored. 2/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.It’s a truism that so many of Britain’s high streets look alike, but often, a few steps away from the main shopping areas the particular character of a town or city can still be discerned. Manchester is ringed by canals and railways built in the 18th and 19th centuries. Liverpool slopes down to the sea via streets lined with old shipping agents’ offices and chandlers’ workshops. In Edinburgh you just have to look up and around to see history bursting out of the bedrock. We still tend to think Paris owns flâneur-ing – the art of strolling and observing urban life. But wandering our cities and towns is just as rewarding – here are six of our favourites. Liverpool: maritime glories The decline of a port city offloads more ghosts of lost grandeur than you’ll find in any inland metropolis. It’s impossible, almost, to imagine Liverpool as the second city of empire, the busiest port in the world, the gateway to America. The Mersey, brown-grey and sluggish, is mostly empty these days, crossed only by commuter and tourist ferries, occasional boats from Ireland and oversized cruise vessels. And yet, the river does still draw people to its edge; many of Liverpool’s most important streets end up there. The famous Three Graces and Albert Dock are almost too big to admire, unless you’re actually on the river, but, as Unesco notes, no fewer than 380 of the city’s buildings are of historic value. World heritage status might have gone but the maritime mercantile past is still everywhere. My favourite landmarks include the Portland stone and redbrick Albion House, former HQ of the White Star Line, on James Street; the tug-shaped Baltic Fleet pub; the British and Foreign Marine Insurance Company Building, on Castle Street, with its marine-themed mosaics; the Victorian buildings of Water Street and Dale Street and their shadowy alleyways and cross-streets; the Western Approaches museum on Rumford Street, of a second world war operations room (there’s no map like a naval map); and Regent Road, with its tobacco warehouse and the last few “unregenerated” wharves – go soon, as development is coming. The sea and its stories are everywhere; there’s even a porthole in the ground outside John Lewis, where you can peer down to the Old Dock, built by pioneering civil engineer Thomas Steers in 1709-1715. Online there are countless maps and resources to chart a sea-themed walk, but why not explore Liverpool like a lost ship, heading this way and that and looking out for hints and names and connections? Swansea: a seamy, dreamy city An “ugly, lovely” place to Dylan Thomas; a “pretty shitty” one to Terry Walsh in Kevin Allen’s 1997 comedy caper Twin Town. Wales’ second city is both of these things, as is starkly obvious when you glance along the sweepingly curvaceous front and glistening sea, and then turn round to gawp at the ranks of dead-eyed pebble-dashed terraces swarming the surrounding hillsides. The Lexuses and electric BMWs take the coast road to the Gower; the modified old bangers still bounce around Townhill. To cut a poetic line through the sprawl, you could do worse than explore a few Dylan-linked places: Cwmdonkin Park (The Hunchback in the Park) is small and bosky; 5 Cwmdonkin Drive, his birthplace and now a museum, is on an utterly bourgeois street in the Uplands district; the Dylan Thomas Centre in the port area has a decent collection of memorabilia, photographs and books; the Kardomah on Park Street is not the original one where Thomas and his arty “gang” met, but it is a pleasingly retro eating place suited to talking about books and manifestos over a frothy coffee; and Salubrious Passage, which has the seamy character of LA’s Skid Row of yore, and will eventually pour you out on to Wind Street and the no sign Bar, which featured in Thomas’ story The Followers, renamed as Wine Vaults. Then, after all this urban exploration, you should take that seafront prom and hike westward along the route followed by the world’s first passenger train (the 1805-built Mumbles Railway – a horse-drawn tramway), not stopping till you get to the end of the pier at dreamy, lovely, pretty Mumbles – where Twin Town also concludes, as it happens. Greater Manchester: in Lowry’s footsteps Every great city offers its walker/reader multiple narratives. In Greater Manchester (and yes, you may need trams and buses for this “walk”), I feel the musical ones have been told to death. Has anyone got anything more to say on Tony Wilson/Joy Division/“Madchester”, really? But LS Lowry remains beguiling because he is simultaneously mega-famous and massively ignored. He is too popular to be cool, too English to be stylish, too idiosyncratic to front a school or movement. He is also a vital visual conduit to the north’s industrial past and the industrialised souls of its inhabitants. There seem to me two interesting ways of tracing the steps of Lowry. One is to seek out those places where he dashed off rough sketches, places like Peel Park in Salford, Ancoats, or the streets around Pendlebury and Victoria Park close to where Lowry lived; or perhaps Crowther Street in Stockport, where he tightened the angles to get just the effect he was after. But so many of the mills, factories and houses have been razed, and it is a feat sometimes to conjure a picture of the places featured in the masterworks. An alternative approach, and one with which he would surely have empathised, is to try to find your own vantages and create your own “composites”. Lowry is famous for layering multiple images and scenes – real and imagined – to populate his teeming tableaux and give them their alienating perspective. Manchester at street level can often feel too confining to take a view, but at vantage points beside the Rochdale Canal, at the Temple in Heaton Park, or even in a rooftop hotel bar that sells aerial views with its overpriced drinks, you can Lowry-ise the modern city, glass-and-steel high-rises standing in for the glorious red-brick chimneys of a century ago. London: TS Eliot and other wastelands London is written to death. It has generated biographies, guidebooks, poetry books, novels, memoirs, atlases, apologias. The only way to see anything new, or anew, is to shun all these and randomise your ramble. Ironically, one of the most famous of all London poems, The Waste Land, can be a useful place to start. The last stanza of the opening section, The Burial of the Dead (which, incidentally, quotes from flâneur-in-chief Baudelaire’s Les Fleurs du mal), floats morosely around that part of the City close to where Eliot worked in Lloyds Bank’s Colonial &amp; Foreign Department. Nicholas Hawksmoor’s Saint Mary Woolnoth, St Magnus the Martyr, London Bridge and King William Street are all key sites in the poet’s Unreal City. Over the course of its five sections, the poem mentions Greenwich, the Isle of Dogs, River Thames, the Cannon Street hotel (the venue for the foundation congress of the Communist Party of Great Britain in 1920, bombed during the Blitz) and Metropole hotel (now the Corinthia), the Strand, Queen Victoria Street and, for those who need a suburb to make a walk feel complete, Richmond and Kew. The poem has a ponderous, melancholy quality (listen to Eliot reading it to get the full effect) that, if piped in to ear buds as you tick off its sites, can fill even the glitziest and most garish new development with an air of gloom and discomfort. During the 2012 London Olympics build-up, many sages based in the Great Wen – to use William Cobbett’s disparaging 1820s phrase – lamented the fact London was losing its empty spaces, its liminal zones, its broken buildings, its wastelands. Poetry is a good way to impose peace and quiet, sadness and shabbiness, on the clamorous, thrusting capital. Plymouth: coasting around capitalism A city that only gives up its true beauty when you turn your back on it and face the Sound, Plymouth is a conundrum worth trying to solve. Capitalism has not been kind to our conurbations and it forces on us the obligation to try to connect disparate elements in order to make sense. Here, I glance up at the 10ft-tall statue of Francis Drake with a globe that looks like one of his bowling balls – is that story, like Alfred’s burnt cakes, still told in schools? Then I look over the tops of the mid-rises to see if I can spot Drake Circus, the shopping mall. I look at the beautiful natural harbour and think of Darwin, joining the Beagle at Devonport; this was, along with Falmouth, one of the last places to board before open sea. I walk through the post-Blitz grid city – a bargain-basement Brasilia, but a genuine attempt to create a future – and then stand before the 14-storey Crescent Point building. Plymouth is a uni-city, its undergrads bankrolling ill-conceived additions to an already chaotic-looking centre. In any case, the Point’s double towers of student flats sit empty,, a weekly fixture in the local newspapers. It’s all a bit much, but there is a flâneuring solution to Plymouth in the shape of the South West Coast Path, which skirts Plymouth on a fascinating section between Wembury Point and the Tamar Bridge, taking in Fort Bovisand, the art deco Tinside Lido and Royal William Yard – with ferry services to Cremyll in Cornwall if you want to skip the jagged edges and ins and outs of Plymouth’s various harbours and bays. Always on view is the Great Mewstone – the inspiration for Turner’s famous watercolour. Edinburgh: steep in history In 2017, Edinburgh came top in a survey of walkable cities carried out by campaigning charity Living Streets; it rated high for safety, access to nearby parks, pavements and the overall quality of its streets. It is, though, a city of many levels, with the Castle and Old Town on a volcanic plug that, along with Arthur’s Seat, are the best known of its alleged seven hills (so many places like to make this Roman connection). Is the breathless flâneur able to process his or her observations? You could try, by exploring Edinburgh’s many stairways, which link up the levels and create shortcuts as well as atmosphere. Plotting an urban hike by taking on News Steps (St Giles’ Street, off the Royal Mile, down 124 steps to Market St), Vennel Steps (in Grassmarket), Warriston’s Close (off Cockburn St) and Scotsman Steps (connecting North Bridge and Waverley Station) will open up unexpected views and your lungs. While taking a rest in a coffee shop or pub, spend half an hour enjoying the 1948 expressionist short Waverley Steps – free on the BFI site.Homeowners could end up £326,000 wealthier over a 30-year period than those who rent, and that is before potential property price growth is considered, according to the Equity Release Council, a trade body. Adding to the burden on generation rent are escalating prices, fiddly tenancy agreement clauses and hefty bills. Here’s how to limit the damage. Negotiate – and back up your offer Don’t just assume you have to pay the advertised rent on your chosen property but do your homework before you make a lower offer – it’s good to go in with a host of reasons to add credit to your bid. Research the local property market to understand how other properties in the area are priced, what features they offer and how well presented and located they are. If you find several similar properties that are cheaper than the one you want, show the details to the landlord and ask whether they will match the price. Alternatively, seek out features present in other properties but lacking in the one you like. For example, if your desired place comes unfurnished, explain to the landlord that you need to buy a furniture at your own cost, so would need to bring the rent to be brought down. You can sweeten the deal by offering to sign up to a longer tenancy term, which gives landlords more security and saves them any costs associated with finding new tenants. If they won’t agree to negotiate, see whether they will cover certain bills or redecorate the property (always set a deadline for completion). Scrutinise your tenancy agreement Before you sign anything check the fine print, including the start and end date of your tenancy, details of your obligations and any agreed repairs you want completing before you move in. Housing is a devolved issue, so legislation governing landlords and renting varies across the UK. The most commonly overlooked clause in tenancy is the notice period, says Portia Msimang, a project coordinator at the campaign group Renters’ Rights London. “I’ve seen some odd clauses in a tenancy contract, so make sure you read it all.” As well as being sure you know what you are agreeing to, you may spot some opportunities to save. For example, your contract might require you to pay for professional cleaners before moving out. To save on cleaning fees, see whether you can get this condition removed and do it yourself. Become a property guardian You could save more than 60% on rent by living in empty commercial or residential buildings, from pubs to mansions. But these property licences often differ from traditional assured shorthold tenancies (ASTs) – most notably by only requiring 28 days’ notice before eviction action. For normal tenancies, two months’ notice has to be given. Most property guardian companies will ask for a deposit – normally equivalent to a month’s licence fee – although unlike with an AST, there is no legal requirement for it to protect your cash within a government-approved scheme. Weigh the costs of renting direct Since the tenant fees ban was imposed in 2019, you cannot be charged for administration or referencing fees, however you find your property. Using a letting agent tends to be pricier than renting directly because landlords are charged fees for agency services that will be passed on to the tenant through rent. Olly Croft, a lettings negotiator at the estate agent Winkworth, says he has rented two properties privately, and that you can get a better deal. “But it’s a gamble,” he says. “I’ve heard of horror stories where the landlord just doesn’t know how to manage the property, is unfamiliar with the law or won’t pick up your calls.” Letting agents must by law sign up to a regulated redress scheme, such as the Property Ombudsman, which enables tenants to file an independent complaint. If you want to cut out the agent, Croft says: “Get to know the landlord first, if you can.” OpenRent, Gumtree and SpareRoom offer direct connections between tenants and landlords. Get your full deposit back The law says that in England and Wales, if you have an AST your deposit should not be more than five weeks’ rent and should be protected in a government-backed scheme. Before you move in, take photos and agree an inventory with whoever is managing the property. This is a checklist of everything provided in the property. As an official record of the state and contents of the place before you lived there, it offers a defence if the landlord wants to claim money from your deposit to repair damage. The landlord cannot deduct from your deposit because of normal wear and tear, such as scuffed paintwork, Msimang says. You can dispute unreasonable deductions via the independent adjudication service in the deposit scheme. It is highly probable that you will win the case, she adds: “Very few adjudications find fully in favour of the landlord, so it’s worth using that service. Keep everything in writing.” If your deposit should be protected but isn’t, or is protected late, you may be able to claim compensation of up to three times the amount, and get your full deposit back through the courts. Even pointing this out to the landlord in writing can encourage them to negotiate with you, and return your deposit without going through the costly legal process, Msimang says. Check energy efficiency By law, landlords need to provide an energy performance certificate before letting, and the building needs to be graded at least band E. A high EPC rating means your home is the better insulated – and won’t be as expensive to heat. You can ask landlords to take steps to improve the energy rating but make sure you do this before your tenancy starts. “If you view a place which is E-rated, think again before renting it. Look for the most energy efficient buildings,” Msimang says. When you move in, take a photo showing the energy meter reading and record the date and time to make sure you don’t pay for the previous tenant’s use. Challenge rent increases In England and Wales, your rent cannot go up during a fixed-term tenancy, unless specified in the contract. The landlord may offer you a new contract but you are not obliged to sign it. The landlord may ask you for higher rent by using a rent review clause, which allows them to raise the payments during a rolling (periodic) lease. You can try to change their mind, by showing their price is higher than local rents and that you have consistently paid your rent on time. You can challenge an unfair increase by asking a tribunal to set your new rent but you must lodge an application before the start date of the proposed rent increase. Beware that this can backfire, and you could end up with a higher rent than your landlord demanded. Consider seeking damages if essential repairs are not done Under section 11 of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985, your landlord must carry out big repairs. A later piece of England-only legislation, the Homes (Fitness for Human Habitation) Act, which came into force in March 2018, means landlords can be taken to court over 29 hazards, including inadequate ventilation and serious mould and damp caused by structural problems. Once the Renting Homes (Wales) Act 2016 commences, possibly in spring 2022, Welsh tenants will have similar additional rights. Tell your landlord as soon as you notice disrepair. If you have had to replace damaged property yourself, keep the receipts; you could claim compensation in court. If the problem continues, contact your council’s environmental health department to inspect your home. The local council has powers to act against the landlord, by issuing notices to make the landlord intervene. • The headline of this article was amended on 19 November 2021 to remove a reference to the UK. The article is about renting in England and Wales only.I am writing to bring your readers’ attention to a very convincing scam BT phone bill which, I suspect, will have caught out others. It looks exactly like a normal BT bill, with my name and address, and came in an envelope with a BT logo, using its prepaid delivery service. The only difference is the account number. It should start GB, rather than the GP as on the fake bill. The thing that alerted me to the demand, which was for £222, is that I pay by direct debit. I have tried for weeks to get BT to respond, but no one ever listens. I have reported it to Action Fraud, which plans to take no action. And I have no idea whether the Barclays account that people are invited to pay into is legitimate, or not. KA, Horley Scam letters are ten a penny, and my initial reaction was to agree with you that this was the most realistic one that I’d seen in a long while. But the more I looked at it, the more I became convinced this was a real bill – albeit one that did not feature your phone number and with a different account number to yours. When I checked the details – the phone line to call, and the BT bank account number and sort code to pay via online banking – they were the correct numbers for a BT business, rather than domestic, account. What makes this case even stranger is that when you gave BT the bill’s details, you were told there was no record of this account, confirming your view that it must be a scam. However, BT has finally admitted it is a real bill for a business account, meaning you are being double charged for the same line. This would not be the first time the company had set up a shadow account in error, but at least we have got to the bottom of it. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.Ever since the first reports of a coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, a megacity in central China, the origins of Covid-19 have been steeped in controversy. Was Sars-CoV-2, to give the virus its official name, the result of a natural spillover event from animals to humans or was it the product of laboratory experimentation? Although most cases clustered around a seafood market that also sold wild animals, it did not escape the attention of western intelligence agencies that nine miles to the south lay the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV). Nor that for many years researchers at the secure biosafety facility had been exploring caves in Yunnan, in southern China, in search of bats that harbour Sars-like viruses and isolating genetic material from their saliva, urine and faeces. When it emerged that one of these isolates, labelled RaTG13, shared 96% of its genome with Sars-CoV-2 and that WIV researchers had been experimenting with chimeric versions capable of infecting human cells, speculation intensified. Never mind that similar “gain-of-function” experiments had been conducted at western biosecurity facilities and showed that such stepwise changes in virulence could occur naturally. The fact that the outbreak had begun in the same city as the WIV was too much of a coincidence to ignore. As two Chinese researchers put it: “The probability was very low for bats to fly to the market.” Alina Chan and Matt Ridley are similarly puzzled why, if the virus had a natural origin, it was first detected in Wuhan and not closer to Yunnan, 900 miles to the south. “Of all the gin joints in all the towns in the world…” they write. The stakes could not be higher: if the virus was engineered in a Chinese lab and deliberately released on the world, it would amount to the crime of the century. Wisely, Chan and Ridley do not go that far. Presenting themselves as champions of rigorous, evidence-based science, they write: “we are not alleging malfeasance, only a mistake”. Ridley, a Conservative hereditary peer best known for his sceptical writings on climate change, and Chan, a molecular biologist at the Broad Institute in Cambridge, Massachusetts, have every right to scrutinise the evidence. Indeed, we now know their concerns were shared by several leading coronavirus experts who, at the time, publicly condemned suggestions of a non-natural origin and insisted the virus bore none of the hallmarks of being engineered. But is this the impartial and balanced inquiry the world has been waiting for? Chan and Ridley are clever writers and in their “search for the origin of Covid-19” they venture into the deepest recesses of cyberspace, aided by an eclectic band of internet sleuths who go by such names as the “Seeker”. The result is a viral whodunnit that is sure to appeal to armchair detectives and sceptics of scientific orthodoxies. There is just one problem: nowhere do they present proof that Sars-CoV-2 was manufactured. Take Chan’s claim that it appeared pre-adapted to human transmission “to an extent similar to late epidemic Sars”. This claim rests on a single mutation in the spike protein that appears to “slightly enhance” (Chan and Ridley’s words) its ability to bind to human receptor cells and suggests that by the time it was first detected in Wuhan it had “apparently stabilised genetically”. But this is highly misleading. As the subsequent alphabet soup of variants demonstrates, the coronavirus has undergone repeated mutations that have steadily increased its fitness. Furthermore, studies of viruses isolated from pangolins, one of the animals suspected of being an intermediary host, bind to human receptor cells even more efficiently than Sars-CoV-2, suggesting capacity for further adaptation. As two leading virologists put it, the virus was not perfectly adapted to humans but was “just good enough”. Another supposedly suspicious feature of Sars-CoV-2 is that it possesses a molecular key, known as a furin cleavage site, that enables it to prise open the receptor protein on human cells and kickstart the infection process. The same sequence is seen in highly contagious flu viruses and had previously been employed by researchers to modify the spike protein of Sars. Chan and Ridley suggest this is exactly the sort of insertion you would expect to find in a bat virus that had been modified in a laboratory. However, 21 leading scientific experts recently pointed out that the furin sequence is suboptimal and that “near identical” sequences have been found in coronaviruses that commonly infect humans and cattle. In other words, although the feature is absent from known bat coronaviruses, it could just as easily be the product of natural evolution. Tellingly, Chan and Ridley do not go so far as to suggest this feature of the virus was inserted deliberately. Merely, that there is “no way to know”. Nor is there any way of their knowing whether RaTG13 is the progenitor of the pandemic virus. This suggestion rests on the oddity that in 2013 WIV researchers recovered the bat isolate from a disused mine shaft in Mojiang, in Yunnan, close to the border with Laos, and a year earlier six men who had been clearing bat guano from the cave developed a mysterious respiratory illness and three died. However, the 4% genetic divergence between RaTG13 and Sars-CoV-2 is equivalent to 40 years of evolutionary change. And researchers exploring caves in northern Laos have since discovered three bat coronaviruses that are more closely related and which attach to human cells more efficiently than early strains of Sars-CoV-2. This suggests it most likely emerged naturally, either via passage through another animal host or directly via spillover from a bat, perhaps when a farmer ventured into a cave in Yunnan or Laos in search of guano. That is the most parsimonious explanation and fits with both the forensic and epidemiological evidence: samples recovered from the Wuhan seafood market are identical to human isolates and most of the original human cases had a history of prior market exposure; by contrast, there is no epidemiological link to the WIV or any other research facility in Wuhan. Admittedly, the case for a natural origin would be stronger if scientists could produce evidence of prior infection at the Wuhan market or other Chinese wildlife markets that sold pangolins, civet cats and raccoon dogs (the most likely intermediary species). Yet although following the Sars outbreak numerous animals tested positive for sibling human viruses, in the case of Sars-CoV-2 scientists have yet to turn up any evidence of prior infections in animals. But as every schoolboy knows, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence – it may simply be that samples have yet to be taken from the right animal. Of course, the same could be said of the absence of evidence for the lab leak theory. But no major pandemic has ever been traced to a laboratory, whereas history is littered with examples of pandemics that began as transfers of viruses from animals. In other words, a zoonotic event is the null or default hypothesis; the onus is on Chan and Ridley to demonstrate otherwise. The tragedy is that in their desire to make a plausible case for a lab accident, Chan and Ridley neglect the far more urgent and compelling story of how the trade in wild animals, coupled with global heating and the destruction of natural habitats, makes the emergence of pandemic viruses increasingly likely. That is the more probable origin story and the scenario that should really concern us. Mark Honigsbaum is the author of The Pandemic Century • Viral: The Search for the Origin of Covid-19 by Alina Chan and Matt Ridley is published by Fourth Estate (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyApple’s latest super-sized smartphone is a beast in all directions, but is bigger really better? The iPhone 13 Pro Max is Apple’s most expensive smartphone, starting at £1,049 ($1,099/A$1,849) – at least £100 more than other models. With the same chips, software, design and camera as the regular sized 13 Pro, size is the key differentiator. The 6.7in 120Hz OLED screen is fantastic: crisp, bright and super smooth, matching Samsung’s very best. As with pin-sharp retina screens before them, faster screens are like a ratchet: once you use one it is very difficult to go back. But while it looks great, its large size and solid-feeling stainless steel sides come with a major downside: weight. Last year’s iPhone 12 Pro Max was already heavy at 226g, but the 13 Pro Max is even weightier at 240g. Direct competitors weigh significantly less with Samsung’s Galaxy S21 Ultra at 227g and Google’s Pixel 6 Pro at 210g, while the regular iPhone 13 Pro weighs 204g. Many other phones are under 200g and the difference is quite discernible. You can feel the 13 Pro Max’s weight in the hand, in your pocket or bag, and it makes it hard to hold one-handed for any extended period without fatigue. Specifications Screen: 6.7in Super Retina XDR with ProMotion (120Hz OLED) (458ppi) Processor: Apple A15 Bionic RAM: 6GB Storage: 128, 256, 512GB or 1TB Operating system: iOS 15.1 Camera: Triple 12MP rear cameras with OIS, 12MP front-facing camera Connectivity: 5G, wifi 6, NFC, Bluetooth 5, Lightning, ultra wideband and GNSS Water resistance: IP68 (6 metres for 30 mins) Dimensions: 160.8 x 78.1 x 7.7mm Weight: 240g Rapid performance and impressive battery life Apple’s latest A15 Bionic processor is one of the fastest you can get, which combined with the 120Hz screen makes the 13 Pro Max feel super responsive. Battery life is class-leading. The phone lasts well over 48 hours on battery requiring me only to charge it every third day, while still using the screen for almost eight hours with various apps, photos and music, including a good four hours on 5G. That’s a solid six-plus hours longer than smaller 13 Pro and should last a day for even the heaviest of users. Sustainability Apple does not provide an expected lifespan for the iPhone 13 Pro Max’s battery but it can be replaced for £69. Batteries in similar devices typically maintain at least 80% of their original capacity after 500 full charge cycles. Out-of-warranty screen repairs cost £316.44. The 13 Pro was awarded five out of 10 for repairability by the specialist site iFixit. The 13 Pro Max uses 98% recycled rare earth metals, 99% recycled tungsten and 35% recycled plastic in various components, plus 100% recycled tin in the solder of its main board and battery management unit. The company breaks down the phone’s environmental impact in its report. Apple also offers trade-in and free recycling schemes, including for non-Apple products. iOS 15 The 13 Pro Max ships with iOS 15, which runs on all Apple’s smartphones from 2015’s iPhone 6S and newer, including the 13 Pro. The software has a few additions for the larger screen, such as two-pane views in the calendar, the settings app and others when held in landscape orientation. Apple provides software updates for its smartphones for longer than any other manufacturer. You an expect at least five years of software and security updates but potentially as long as seven years, so you can use the phone safely for longer. Camera Unlike last year’s 12 Pro models, the 13 Pro and 13 Pro Max use the same cameras: three 12-megapixel cameras on the back including a really good 3x optical zoom, a top-class main camera with excellent low light performance and a great ultrawide camera. New for this year is a dedicated macro photography mode for capturing closeups of flowers or insects. For more detail see the 13 Pro review. Price The iPhone 13 Pro Max costs £1,049 ($1,099/A$1,849) with 128GB of storage, £1,049 ($1,199/A$2,019) for 256GB, £1,249 ($1,399/A$2,369) for 512GB or £1,449 ($1,599/A$2,719) for 1TB. For comparison, the iPhone 13 costs £779, the iPhone 13 Pro costs £949, the Galaxy S21 Ultra costs £1,149, the OnePlus 9 Pro costs £829 and the Galaxy Z Flip 3 costs £949. Verdict The iPhone 13 Pro Max is a beast with Apple’s biggest screen, longest battery life and highest price. There aren’t many phones that can last more than 48 hours on a charge, particularly with top-class chips, cameras, a 120Hz screen and upwards of six years of software support. But all that size and power comes at a very heavy cost. Literally. The phone is just too heavy. If you’re an iPhone buyer looking to replace a worn-out handset, you can stomach spending over £1,000 and need it to last at least two days of use on battery, the 13 Pro Max is it. For everyone else there are better, lighter options. Pros: great cameras, 3x optical zoom, Face ID, very long battery life, great performance, large and brilliant 120Hz screen with smaller notch, 5G, long software support. Cons: no USB-C, need your own charger, very heavy, very expensive, huge and difficult to use one-handed, not cutting edge compared with folding-screen devices.The song that is my karaoke go-to Lady Marmalade. “Back in the day”, quote unquote, I would just sing it as it was done by Labelle. Now I quite enjoy doing all three parts of the Moulin Rouge version, and the tricky bits, and adding in the rap by Lil’ Kim. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to Oh my God, most musical theatre. And I say: most. But I’m actually proud. I know every single word, backwards and forwards, from Grease because I saw the musical, then the movie. Any song that was popular before I was 14 years old, I know every single lyric still. The song I’ve streamed the most Castle on the Hill by Ed Sheeran. I’m a huge fan of Ed Sheeran. Every summer my son and I pick an album to play in the car, and one time it happened to be Ed Sheeran. He was also my son’s first concert. My son is also a redhead so I thought it was very inspirational. The best song to work out to I go hiking a lot, for hours at a time, and I tend to play Pink over and over. She just inspires me because she works out so much. I like So What a lot, Just Give Me a Reason is great. I like singing along. I think it gives me extra workout points. The best song to have sex to Oh my God, that’s going to say so much about me. It depends what kind of sex and with who, that’s the problem. It used to be You’re the First, the Last, My Everything by Barry White, one of the great sexy singers of all time. But then he came on Ally McBeal, a show that I was on. Now that I’ve met him, it kinda took the sex out of it for me. It got a little too personal. Best song to play at a party Formation by Beyoncé. It was so freakin’ killer at Coachella. Or classic, old-school Michael Jackson: ABC. The song I want played at my funeral When I was on 30 Rock, I said it would be really humorous if we played Muffin Top – that song Jenna did – at my character’s funeral. But then they wrote an episode where Jenna faked her death and they actually played a slow version of Muffin Top. My original idea has already been done. I’m hopefully not in the phase where I have to pre-plan that – now it would be Bruce Springsteen’s Jersey Girl. Jane Krakowski stars in Dickinson which is on Apple TV+ now.David Copperfield’s History of Magic is a beautiful new book by the eponymous magician (coauthored with psychologist Richard Wiseman and magician David Britland), which tells the story of magic through objects in his private museum, the largest and most impressive collection of magic memorabilia in the world. The International Museum of the Conjuring Arts is housed in a gigantic building on the outskirts of Las Vegas, the city where Copperfield, aged 65, still performs 15 shows a week. (His industriousness has helped make him the highest grossing solo entertainer of all time.) Copperfield’s new book has a chapter on Angelo Lewis, a Victorian barrister who wrote magic books under the pen-name Professor Hoffman. Hoffman’s Modern Magic, which was published in 1876, “played an essential role in elevating the art of conjuring and may have acted as a catalyst for the entire golden age of magic,” Copperfield writes. The museum’s collection includes Hoffman’s personal copy of Modern Magic as well as his letters and notebook. Hoffmann was also a puzzle lover and in 1893 published Puzzles Old &amp; New, one of the definitive puzzle books of the Victorian era. Today’s ten puzzles are taken verbatim from that text. Oldies, but goodies. The questions mostly involve lateral thinking; like a magic trick they present something seemingly impossible, easily solved once you look at it in the correct way. 1. Required, to take one from nineteen and leave twenty. How is it to be done? 2. Place three sixes together so as to make seven. 3. How would you write in figures twelve thousand twelve hundred and twelve? 4. Out of six chalk or pencil strokes—thus, | | | | | | to make three, without striking out or rubbing out any. 5. You undertake to show another person something which you never saw before, which he never saw before, and which, after you both have seen it, no one else will ever see again. How is it to be done? 6. You undertake to put something into a person’s left hand which he cannot possibly take in his right. How is it to be done? 7. You undertake to place a lighted candle in such a position that it shall be visible to every person save one; such person not to be blindfolded, or prevented from turning about in any manner he pleases. How is it to be done? 8. A window in a certain house has recently been made twice its original size, but without increasing either its height or width. How can that be? 9. A draper, dividing a piece of cloth into yard lengths, found that he cut off one yard per second. The piece of cloth was 60 yards in length. How long did it take him to cut up the whole? 10. How many hard-boiled eggs can a hungry man eat on an empty stomach? I’ll be back at 5pm UK with the solutions. PLEASE NO SPOILERS. Please discuss the your favourite magicians, magic books and the links between puzzles and magic. UPDATE: You can read the solutions here. David Copperfield’s History of Magic, by David Copperfield, Richard Wiseman and David Britland is out in the UK and the US. You can buy it at the Guardian Bookshop. Thanks to Richard Wiseman for helping me with today’s column. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m also the author of several books of popular science, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, out in paperback in the UK, and just out in the US.The Victorian government will water down its controversial pandemic legislation after 11th-hour negotiations with key crossbenchers. But sweeping powers, giving the premier the responsibility of declaring a pandemic, which can be extended for three months at a time for as long as considered necessary, will remain despite ongoing protests and death threats against MPs supporting the controversial legislation. The premier’s office has confirmed the laws will now go before the upper house on Tuesday. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has faced mounting pressure from human rights bodies and legal groups to amend the pandemic bill for its powers to rule by decree. Three upper house crossbench MPs needed to pass the bill including Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice Party’s Andy Meddick were in ongoing discussions on Monday which are expected to continue into the evening. Guardian Australia has learned they have pushed for, and will be granted, a number of amendments to the bill, including scrapping proposed harsh fines, reducing the two-week timeframe for public health advice to be published and granting Victorians the right to appeal detention orders at the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. All three MPs are expected to support the amended legislation. Ratnam said the state of emergency was no longer fit for purpose and she was pleased the current proposal offered better transparency, accountability and fairness. “We’re still in a pandemic, we’re likely to need public health measures to keep us safe,” she said. “You’re faced with a choice about whether you support a bill with improvements on the status quo, rely on the state of emergency or deny the government any ability to implement public health measures despite being in a pandemic.” Ratman said she understood public frustration but feared elements of the far right were exploiting anxieties. The crossbenchers have faced ongoing abuse and death threats from people opposed to the bill. “It’s got more graphic and violent as the days continue,” Ratman said. Patten said she was furious the “disingenuous politicisation of the legislation” had instilled fear in the community and created a “perfect storm” for violence. “I’m seeing political operatives trying to stir it up further, I am concerned. I feel somewhat silenced, I feel nervous, but it’s not going to stop me from doing what’s right,” she said. “It would be very easy to vote no, but that’s not the right path of action … it will end up being model legislation.” Victoria’s health minister, Martin Foley, confirmed there was room to move on the details on the legislation. “If we can make this even more transparent, even more accountable, an even more effective piece of government response then we’re open to … suggestions,” he said. “We’re working through all these issues with crossbenchers who have chosen to engage constructively.” Federal Labor MP Andrew Giles questioned why prime minister Scott Morrison hadn’t publicly condemned the protests, which were attended by thousands of demonstrators over the weekend. The state opposition on Monday announced it would attempt to move 18 amendments to the legislation, limiting the scope of the bill, which the Coalition has called the “most dangerous laws” in the state’s history. The opposition leader, Matthew Guy, said he would repeal the laws “as a first act of government”. Law Institute of Victoria president, Tania Wolf, said the bill improved on the existing framework designed to manage an emergency rather than an ongoing pandemic, but called for significant amendments and said the enormous rush for it to pass this week was unjustified. The state government’s emergency powers are due to end on 15 December, placing pressure on Andrews to push the legislation through before the Public Health and Wellbeing Act expires. “It’s important the government makes decisions effectively during a public health crisis to protect the community, but there needs to be an effective, independent oversight body to review pandemic orders,” she said. “The current proposal doesn’t achieve that, and there’s a time lag when information is tabled and when orders are made of two weeks, when it should be as soon as possible.” Wolff said she was concerned the committee that would oversee the new laws would be “significantly constrained” and an independent oversight committee, like the ombudsman, would be far more effective in reviewing pandemic orders. She also said an aggravated offence proposed in the bill contained extraordinarily high fines for those found flouting the legislation, and excessive imprisonment terms. Individuals risk two years’ imprisonment or up to $91,000 in fines under the aggravated offence if they fail to comply with a pandemic order. Businesses face fines of up to $452,500 for breaching the rules. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The government needs to be able to effectively make orders but it ought not be so broad, not because we distrust the government today, but we’re making laws for future governments and unknown circumstances,” she said. “It needs to be justifiable, reviewable, proportionate and limited to the extent we know it can be. The legislation is new, so it’s OK if it takes a little time to get it right.” Human Rights Law Legal Centre legal director Daniel Webb said the bill was a significant improvement on the current law and a welcome step forward. “There is increased transparency around the health advice and some improved oversight and scrutiny processes,” he said. “[But] there should be an outer limit on how long a pandemic declaration can extend for, and … people should be able to appeal against their detention and other decisions which affect their rights. “The law should also make clear that the health minister needs to act consistently with Victoria’s human rights charter when imposing health restrictions.”Three men have been arrested under terror legislation after a taxi explosion outside Liverpool Women’s hospital that killed the passenger. The men – aged 29, 26 and 21 – were detained in the Kensington area of the city and arrested under the Terrorism Act, police said. A street in the city’s Sefton Park area was cordoned off by armed police on Sunday and some people were evacuated from their houses as part of “ongoing enquiries into the car explosion”, police said. A convoy of seven unmarked vehicles – three vans and four cars – entered the cordon early on Monday morning, while officers wearing vests marked “Negotiator” were seen entering the cordon earlier. A fire crew was on standby nearby but most armed officers had reportedly left by 3am, witnesses said. Investigators believe it is unlikely that the explosion, shortly before 11am when the Remembrance Sunday silence was due to begin, was caused by a fault with the vehicle. The flames spread rapidly, engulfing the taxi in a fireball. The cab driver, who managed to escape before the flames spread, has not been arrested. Police said he is in hospital in a stable condition. The explosion happened outside the main entrance to the hospital, and police are trying to determine if the explosion was deliberate and whether there is significance in the location. The site is also not far from Liverpool cathedral where the city’s Remembrance Sunday event was taking place. Police have been working on establishing the identity of the deceased man, and any associations that might shed light on the explosion. The investigation is being led by counter-terrorism police who are being assisted by MI5, which has the lead role in developing intelligence to counter terrorism. In a statement, counter-terrorism police north-west said: “We are leading the investigation with support from Merseyside police, and are keeping an open mind as to what has caused the explosion. We are working at a rapid pace to try and establish the circumstances behind this and will update in due course.” Liverpool’s mayor, Joanne Anderson, described the incident as “unsettling and upsetting” as she thanked the emergency services for their swift response. Police were called at 10.59am on Sunday morning to reports of a car explosion outside the city centre hospital. Photographs of a burning car quickly circulated on social media, as well as reports that the bomb squad was in attendance, alongside police, fire crews and the ambulance service. “Unfortunately, we can confirm that one person has died and another has been taken to hospital where he is being treated for his injuries, which thankfully are not life threatening,” Merseyside police said. “So far we understand that the car involved was a taxi which pulled up at the hospital shortly before the explosion occurred. “We are keeping an open mind as to what caused the explosion but given how it has happened, out of caution, counter-terrorism police are leading the investigation supported by Merseyside police.” Boris Johnson said: “My thoughts are with all those affected by the awful incident in Liverpool today. I want to thank the emergency services for their quick response and professionalism, and the police for their ongoing work on the investigation.” It is understood the three arrests took place around Boaler Street in the Kensington area. The PA news agency reported locals saying armed officers swooped on a terrace house in Sutcliffe Street, off Boaler Street, in the afternoon and arrested one suspect. Sections of Boaler Street and Sutcliffe Street remained cordoned off, with a heavy police presence at the scene as inquiries continue. A similar police scene was in place at Rutland Avenue in Sefton Park, with counter-terrorism officers sighted in the neighbourhood. Locals said police arrived from about 1pm as officers went on to guard a terraced property as the immediate surrounding area was cordoned off. The chief constable of Merseyside police, Serena Kennedy, later offered her reassurance over the incident. She said: “While I understand that today’s incident may cause concern in our communities, it should be pointed out that events of this nature are very rare. “Merseyside police will continue to liaise with community groups, community leaders, partner agencies and individuals in the coming days and weeks to make sure any concerns are addressed and ensuring that we provide the best possible service to local people. “There will also be an increased and visible police presence on the streets of Merseyside and I would encourage people to engage with my officers and raise any concerns they may have.” She urged people not to speculate about what had happened. Liverpool Women’s hospital said visiting access had been restricted “until further notice” and patients had been diverted to other hospitals “where possible”. Carl Bessant, whose partner had just had a baby, was inside the hospital at the time of the blast. He told the BBC: “We were so close and she was feeding the baby when it happened. We heard a loud bang and looked out of the window. We saw the car on fire and someone jump out ... screaming, and there was someone inside the car.” In a statement, the hospital said: “We are reviewing our patient activity for the next 24-48 hours and patients should wait to be contacted for updates about any planned appointments or other attendance at the hospital. “Our staff are being permitted to leave and enter the hospital under the supervision of Merseyside police. We would like to say thank you for the cooperation and support of our patients, visitors and staff who have been impacted by this incident, in particular those members of staff who were at the scene at the time of the incident.” Phil Garrigan, the chief fire officer of Merseyside fire and rescue service, said the car fire was “fully developed” when two appliances arrived shortly after 11am. He told reporters at the scene: “The operational crews extinguished the fire rapidly but, as has been reiterated by the police chief constable, there was one fatality. Another individual had left the vehicle prior to the fire developing to the extent that it did. Our thoughts are with them and the families of those involved.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, tweeted: “I am being kept regularly updated on the awful incident at Liverpool Women’s hospital. Our police and emergency services are working hard to establish what happened and it is right they are given the time and space to do so.” Cordons remained in place on Sunday evening, alongside some road closures. The UK terrorism threat level remains at “substantial”, meaning an attack is likely. In October, the Conservative MP Sir David Amess was killed in an alleged terrorist attack while holding his constituency surgery in Leigh-on-Sea in Essex. A man has been charged with his murder and is due to stand trial next March. Counter-terrorism officials say most plots they thwart are motivated by a violent extremist Islamist ideology, with the next category being those motivated by far-right beliefs.Businesses and governments must stop the growing rush of commodities-driven land grabbing, which is “trashing” the environment and displacing people, says new research. Palm oil and cobalt were extreme risks for land grabs according to an analysis of 170 commodities by research firm Verisk Maplecroft published last week. It also warned that, alongside cobalt, other minerals used for “clean” technology, including silicon, zinc, copper, were high risk and undermined the sector’s label. The research showed that goods such as coconuts, garlic, tea and cocoa were also high risk for land grabbing. In 2007, a world food price crisis led to a land rush as companies tried to secure production and costs. A UN report in September said commodity exports in the decade after grew 20%, to $4.38tn (£3.27tn) by 2019. Verisk Maplecroft said the demand for more land to produce goods had been accompanied by displacement of indigenous communities and damage to natural capital – “such as clean air and water, pollinating insects, and soil quality” – crucial to battling the climate crisis. Will Nichols, Verisk Maplecroft’s head of environmental research, said investors should scrutinise supply chains and pressure companies they work with to do more. “There is a lot of money to be made from trashing the environment rather than saving it when you are a landowner or someone looking to invest in these kinds of industries and you’re aware that the government isn’t going to stand in your way,” said Nichols. “The onus falls on corporations to be diligent about where they are sourcing, auditing suppliers, making sure commodities are coming from where they are told they are coming from.” Nichols added that governments were responsible for enforcing regulations and eliminating corruption. Campaign group Focus on the Global South published a letter signed by 257 organisations last Tuesday rejecting carbon-offsetting pledges from corporations and warning that initiatives such as tree planting will displace indigenous populations while land is still exploited for industrial agriculture. Despite world leaders agreeing to stop deforestation at Cop26 this month, Ward Anseeuw, at the International Land Coalition, said there was a gap between government pledges and action on the ground. Anseeuw highlighted Madagascar, where he said a new land law voted in this year by parliament actually reversed efforts to allow poorer farmers to secure land rights. He said the law would strip away land rights handed out since 2005. “It gives government very strong central power over these lands and they can decide unilaterally what can happen. That opens up the door for a huge land grab. More than 3 million households could be affected,” he said. “It really shows the contradiction of what is being discussed, and the actions or decisions being taken at a global level, and what is going on in the field with governments and specific companies.” Land Matrix, which monitors land deals globally, said in a September report that an increase in land acquisitions starting in 2008 had peaked, but there was potential for a new land rush as economies try to recover from the Covid pandemic, with countries like India and Indonesia opening up their land markets. Kirtana Chandrasekaran, a programme coordinator at Friends of the Earth, said agribusiness was driving land grabs. “There is a huge connection. In Indonesia, for example, there are several million hectares that have been grabbed from small-scale producers. Sometimes they do produce some palm oil for their own consumption but the problem is when it becomes needed for high-scale production for export,” said Chandrasekaran. “You see huge lands rights violations, where people are completely thrown off land and or harassed and threatened.” She said displacement often affected indigenous people who are key to protecting biodiversity. Chandrasekaran said the increasing production of commodities was driven not by demand but by companies’ desire to lower prices, as well as trade agreements, such as the EU’s proposed deal to import beef from South America. She said this drive for commodities was despite most of the world’s food being produced by family farms, not by big corporations. “People are still consuming things that are produced locally by small-scale producers. Commodities production can be considered food, but it’s highly processed, not accessible outside urban centres and not very nutritious,” she said.The Nationals did not sign the final communiqué of the Glasgow climate summit that commits to doing more to cut medium-term emissions, deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has said, adding Australia is “happy with our targets”. Joyce, who was campaigning in the NSW coal town of Singleton on Monday, said the government had already determined its 2030 emission reduction target, and the Nationals had not agreed to the Cop26 pact signed by the Australian government on Sunday. “The Nationals did not sign it. I did not sign it,” Joyce told the ABC. “I am an executive member of this government. We are happy with our targets, with the negotiations the Nationals had with the Liberals (and) we said that we wouldn’t be changing our 2030 targets.” Joyce also targeted the president of Cop26, Alok Sharma, saying he was “cynical” about the suggestion he was emotional about the outcome of the summit. “Give me a break. These people are not worried about the environment, they just want to end up on television,” Joyce said. “He [Sharma] was with his gavel and ‘oh, I’m almost crying, I can’t do this’. He wants to shut down our coal industry but he never talked about shutting down the oil fields in the North Sea.” “He wants to shut down industries in other people’s countries, not in his country.” When asked why he was “mocking” Sharma, Joyce said he was “cynical” about the Glasgow summit. Earlier, prime minister Scott Morrison all but ruled out adopting a more ambitious 2030 emissions reduction target, dismissing calls from moderate MPs who want Australia to revisit its commitment at next year’s UN climate summit. Under the Glasgow pact arising from this month’s Cop26 summit, Australia was a signatory to a joint “request” for countries to re-examine and strengthen 2030 targets when countries return to the negotiating table at Cop27 in Egypt. Morrison on Monday said Australia had no plans to change its policy but would “meet and beat” its Paris target of a 26% to 28% cut on 2005 emission levels. This was in line with a statement released on Sunday that described the 2030 target as “fixed”. “We are going to achieve a 35% reduction in emissions by 2030. That is what we are going to achieve and that is what actually matters,” Morrison said on Monday. “What matters is what you actually achieve. We are well above our target because our policy is to meet and beat, that is what we do.” Australia was the only major developed country that refused to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets at the Glasgow summit, rebuffing calls from allies and experts that stronger medium term targets are needed to prevent catastrophic global warming. The NSW Liberal MP Dave Sharma said Australia should consider a target of 40% to 45% by 2035, building on Australia’s forecast of achieving a 35% reduction by 2030 – largely driven by state targets. “It’s a modest stretch, but it’s not a big stretch,” Sharma told Sky News on Monday. “Particularly when you consider the number of new technologies we’re investing in and the cost of things like battery storage that are coming down now at an exponential rate.” Fellow moderates Jason Falinski, Katie Allen and Trent Zimmerman are also pushing for the government to revise its medium term target in the wake of the Glasgow resolution. The Glasgow pact also included a resolution to “phase down” coal and accelerate efforts away from “unabated” coal power, but this clause was watered down after a push by the Indian delegation objected to the term “phase out”. Sharma said the resolution indicated a clear shift “away from fossil fuels”, while Queensland Nationals senator Matt Canavan said the result was “a big green light for us to build more coal mines.” Joyce had earlier said the government’s position on fossil fuels was clear, and Australia had different considerations as a major coal exporter. “We will tell the Australian people quite clearly that if you stop using Australian coal, you’re just going to use more Indian coal or other coal from other parts of the world, from Indonesia, from Mongolia. And you’re going to get more emissions, not less,” Joyce said. He said that shutting down Australia’s coal industry would lead to a drop in export earnings, a fall in the value of the Australian dollar and a rise in the cost of imports. “If you start shutting that (coal) down, you of course are going to start shutting down your standard of living in Australia,” Joyce said.” “We’re doing our part. We’ve always done our part, but we have to be tempered and understand quite clearly, you know, where our money … comes from.” Morrison said he did not believe the Glasgow summit had been the “death knell” for the coal industry, saying there would be a transition but over a long period of time. “For all those working in the industry in Australia, they will continue to work in the industry for decades to come,” Morrison said. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, criticised the government for signing the Glasgow resolution but then refusing to consider a change to Australia’s 2030 target. “I find it completely extraordinary that 24 hours after the federal government signed up to having a higher 2030 target in 2022, they’ve walked away from that commitment that they voluntarily signed up to in Glasgow,” Albanese said. Albanese, who is expected to release Labor’s updated climate change policy later this month once the party resolves its position in the wake of the Glasgow summit, indicated Labor would be more ambitious than the Coalition. “I’m confident that a Labor Government will tackle climate change and will join the world rather than being in the naughty corner,” he said. “Labor will always engage with the world and will punch above our weight.”If a bus were hurtling towards a child in the middle of the road, no one nearby would take merely one step to get that child out of the way. They would rush, at speeds previously unbeknownst to them, using every muscle in their body, to get that child to safety. On the climate crisis, a bus is careering toward us and we have still not flexed all our muscle power to get ourselves or future generations to safety. Emissions continue to rise. The loss and damage is devastating. Trust has been breached. The resulting frustration, anger and incredulity at the pace of progress is warranted. As activists of all stripes remind us constantly, we need systems change, not climate change. And they are absolutely right. At the same time we should understand our double predicament. First, we are actually in the midst of a systems change, and it is precisely the systemic nature of the change that slows the pace for now – until we hit positive tipping points. If we only had to transform one sector, or move one country off fossil fuels, we would have done so long ago. But that is not what it takes. All sectors of the global economy have to be decarbonised, even the hard-to-abate ones, and all countries must switch to clean technologies, especially those that have depended on exporting or importing fossil fuels for decades. It is a deliberate metamorphosis that is more complex and far reaching than any transformation we have ever attempted. Second, just as the transition gathers pace moving from gradual to exponential, the window within which we need to achieve it constantly shrinks. The speed of change foreseen in Paris in 2015 has been superseded by improved scientific understanding and the shocking escalation of impacts being felt by the most vulnerable. We now know that we must halve global emissions no later than 2030. It is as though the bus suddenly accelerated as we were approaching the child. And yet none of the above can keep us from doing what needs to be done – the consequences are simply too dire. Cop26 had to reset the pace of transformation to be commensurate with the increasing urgency we face. And it was challenging. Diametrically opposed interests were exposed. Pressure inside the negotiating rooms was intense. Common ground was elusive. Compromise was inevitable. And still, the Cop increased the speed of action with at least three resets. First, 1.5C is the new 2C. The final decision reflects the intention to keep 1.5C not just alive, but front and centre of our efforts. The first set of reduction commitments registered in Paris brought the forecast trajectory of a 6C rise above pre-industrial levels by the end of the century to a 3.7C path, better but catastrophic for humanity. The second set of reductions committed to in Glasgow has taken us down to a 2.4C course, better again but still dangerous. We are still far from where we need to be, but we now know that the task is to not surpass the ceiling of 1.5C. No one in their right mind is talking about “well below 2C” any more. The science is undisputed, and this understanding will continue to force us to accelerate all efforts over time. Second: the yearly ratchet. Thanks to a strong push by the most vulnerable countries, the third set of national efforts to reduce emissions and contribute to climate solutions is now scheduled for the end of 2022, instead of waiting another five years. This is a much-needed tightening of the multilateral system: ratcheting commitments annually to ensure we are halving emissions by 2030 is what will keep 1.5C in sight. It comes with complications – including with emissions accounting – but this accelerated pace already makes the previous five-yearly schedule look outrageously out of whack. Third: nature is finally recognised for its solution potential. All the emissions reductions in the world will mean nothing to future generations if we do not also protect and restore nature. Nature is our greatest protector from the worst impacts of the climate crisis, and this was recognised with $20bn in commitments of public and private money for forest protection – a first for a climate Cop. In addition, more than 100 countries pledged to reverse deforestation by 2030 at the latest. The decision text rightly emphasises the importance of protecting, conserving and restoring nature in order to achieve the Paris agreement temperature goal. So, while the energy revolution – from coal to clean – is already well under way, Cop26 marks a new push to achieve the necessary land use revolution this decade: from degeneration to regeneration if we are to keep 1.5C in sight. There are remaining areas of deep disappointment; the “phase-out of coal” being weakened to a “phase-down of unabated coal”, for example. The intended finance facility for developing countries was reduced to a dialogue. But the most acutely felt, glaring void is the lack of support for the most vulnerable nations to cope with quickly accelerating loss of homes and livelihoods and damage to lands and infrastructure. Much work needs to be done to address this before nations reconvene in Egypt for Cop27 – as the climate crisis is hurtling towards us at terrifying speed. The success of Cop26 lies in the eyes of the beholder. Many will say that we continue to irresponsibly spin the political wheels, and from some vantage points that is true, but no one can deny that Cop26 has hastened the speed of the wheels of change. However, the question still remains, will we ultimately end up under the bus, or will the added speed of action deliver us and our descendants to safety? The answer to that is up to all of us. Christiana Figueres was head of the UN climate change convention that achieved the Paris agreement in 2015, and is the author of The Future We Choose.In 2020, the match-making website OkCupid asked 5 million hopeful daters around the world: “Could you date someone who has strong political opinions that are the opposite of yours?” Sixty per cent said no, up from 53% a year before. Scholars used to worry that societies might not be polarised enough. Without clear differences between political parties, they thought, citizens lack choices, and important issues don’t get deeply debated. Now this notion seems rather quaint as countries have fractured along political lines, reflected in everything from dating preferences to where people choose to live. Just how stark has political polarisation become? Well, it depends on where you live and how you look at it. When social psychologists study relations between groups, they often find that whereas people like their own groups a great deal, they have fairly neutral feelings towards out-groups: “They’re fine, but we’re great!” This pattern used to describe relations between Democrats and Republicans in the US. In 1980, partisans reported feeling warm towards members of their own party and neutral towards people on the other side. However, while levels of in-party warmth have remained stable since then, feelings towards the out-party have plummeted. The dynamics are similar in the UK, where the Brexit vote was deeply divisive. A 2019 study revealed that while UK citizens were not particularly identified with political parties, they held strong identities as remainers or leavers. Their perceptions were sharply partisan, with each side regarding its supporters as intelligent and honest, while viewing the other as selfish and close-minded. The consequences of hating political out-groups are many and varied. It can lead people to support corrupt politicians, because losing to the other side seems unbearable. It can make compromise impossible even when you have common political ground. In a pandemic, it can even lead people to disregard advice from health experts if they are embraced by opposing partisans. The negativity that people feel towards political opponents is known to scientists as affective polarisation. It is emotional and identity-driven – “us” versus “them”. Importantly, this is distinct from another form of division known as ideological polarisation, which refers to differences in policy preferences. So do we disagree about the actual issues as much as our feelings about each other suggest? Despite large differences in opinion between politicians and activists from different parties, there is often less polarisation among regular voters on matters of policy. When pushed for their thoughts about specific ideas or initiatives, citizens with different political affiliations often turn out to agree more than they disagree (or at least the differences are not as stark as they imagine). More in Common, a research consortiumthat explores the drivers of social fracturing and polarisation, reports on areas of agreement between groups in societies. In the UK, for example, they have found that majorities of people across the political spectrum view hate speech as a problem, are proud of the NHS, and are concerned about climate change and inequality. As psychologist Anne Wilson and her colleagues put it in a recent paper: “Partisans often oppose one another vehemently even when there is little actual daylight between their policy preferences, which are often tenuously held and contextually malleable.” This relative lack of divergence would, of course, come as a surprise to partisans themselves. This is the phenomenon of false polarisation, whereby there is widespread misperception of how much people on the left and the right are divided, not only on issues but also in their respective ways of life. When asked to estimate how many Republicans earn more than $250,000 a year, for example, Democrats guessed 38%. In reality it is 2%. Conversely, while about 6% of Democrats self-identify as members of the LGBT community, Republicans believed it was 32%. New research from Victoria Parker and her colleagues finds that partisans are especially likely to overestimate how many of their political opponents hold extreme opinions. Those overestimates, in turn, are associated with a disinclination to talk or socially engage with out-party members, avoidance that is likely to prevent people from forming more accurate impressions of the other side. What drives these misperceptions? And why do citizens so dislike one another if they aren’t necessarily deeply divided on policy matters? Politicians certainly have incentives to sharpen differences in order to motivate and mobilise voters, rallying support by portraying themselves as bulwarks against the barbarians on the other side. Divisiveness also plays well on social media, where extreme voices are amplified. Moral outrage is particularly likely to go viral. In a recent project led by Steve Rathje and Sander van der Linden at Cambridge University, we examined more than 2.5m posts on Twitter and Facebook. We found that posts were significantly more likely to be shared or retweeted if they referenced political opponents. Every word about the out-group increased the odds of a post being shared by 67% – and these posts were, in turn, met with anger and mockery. In this increasingly toxic environment, reducing false polarisation and affective polarisation are major challenges. It is often suggested, for example, that if people were only to expose themselves to perspectives from the other side, it would breed greater understanding and cooperation. Yet this intuition turns out to be flawed. Sociologist Christopher Bail and his colleagues offered sets of Democrats and Republicans money to follow a bot that would retweet messages from politicians, media companies and pundits every day for a month. Importantly, the messages always came from the other side of the political spectrum. Far from promoting harmony, it backfired. After a month of being exposed to conservative talking points, Democrats’ attitudes had become, if anything, marginally more liberal. And Republicans became more conservative following their diet of liberal views. When what you see from the other side strikes you as biased or obnoxious, it doesn’t endear you to their perspectives. In this regard, the behaviour of elites matters. Political scientist Rasmus Skytte showed people messages from politicians that were either civil or rude. Interestingly, aggressive and unkind messages didn’t reduce trust in politicians or increase affective polarisation. It seems that incivility is what people have come to expect. But when they saw polite and respectful messages, they subsequently felt more trust towards politicians and became less affectively polarised. These results suggest that we should expect better from our leaders and those with large platforms. Don’t reward divisive rhetoric with “likes”. Instead, follow politicians and pundits who embody norms of respect and civility, even when they disagree on policy matters. In fact, many of us might be better off if we took a break from social media altogether. Economists found that when people were encouraged to disconnect from Facebook for a month they spent less time online and were less politically polarised. They also experienced improved psychological wellbeing. No one these days is worried that our societies are insufficiently polarised. But because so much of the polarisation is about emotions and identities rather than issues, it is still not clear that citizens are presented with good choices or that important issues are being deeply debated. Here again, we must expect better. Demand that politicians and pundits get into policy specifics. Let’s focus more on actual ideas for solving actual problems, where we, as citizens, may well turn out to agree on more than we realise. • Dominic Packer and Jay Van Bavel are psychologists and the authors of The Power of Us. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Further reading Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became Our Identity by Lilliana Mason (Chicago, £19) Breaking the Social Media Prism: How to Make Our Platforms Less Polarizing by Chris Bail (Princeton, £20) The Wealth Paradox: Economic Prosperity and the Hardening of Attitudes by Frank Mols and Jolanda Jetten (Cambridge, £19.99)Of all the distressing stories to emerge from the racism scandal at Yorkshire County Cricket Club, one of the most shocking was an independent panel found the repeated use of the P-word against Azeem Rafiq was delivered “in the spirit of friendly banter”. Perhaps we shouldn’t be surprised. “It’s just banter,” has long been a get-out-of-jail-free card to excuse laddism, sexism and much else besides. Yet speak to anyone in sport, and they stress that it is also vital for bonding and team-building. The question is: when does banter cross the line into bullying? On the surface, it doesn’t sound that complicated. When Gary Ballance admitted he had used racist language towards Rafiq during their time as teammates, but said it was a feature of their “friendly” two-way verbals, few supported him. On the other end of the spectrum, few would take offence at a mild joke about, say, missing a full toss while batting. However two recent academic studies into banter in British sport suggest the terrain in the middle can be more complex to navigate than many think. In the first study, 12 players from a diverse club in the south-east were asked where the line should be drawn between acceptable and unacceptable banter. For them, “calling another guy on the team by a woman’s name because his surname rhymes with it” and “putting pots of mustard in a teammate’s bag, because he hates mustard in his sandwiches” to “[teammate’s name] pretending to ‘bum’ us with his cricket bat during a break in play” were all fine. You may raise your eyebrows at this. However the academics found that such banter “was described by the vast majority of players as having a largely positive effect on the team – and further indicative of the team relationship”. However, it was agreed that a person’s sexuality or ethnic background was off limits. As one British Asian on the team put it: “Things like that should never be involved. I’ve been called things like ‘Paki’ [on the field by opposing players] – that’s not banter, it’s just harassment.” The study’s authors, William Lawless and Rory Magrath, argue a distinction can be made between “inclusionary” forms of banter – which centre on close friendships and is light-hearted and inoffensive – and exclusionary forms, which are beyond the pale. However they also stress that context, and the dynamics of a relationship, are also key. After all, what is said in the confines of a dressing room might sound very different in a courtroom. As they point out, banter can also serve a double function – outwardly appearing aggressive, and yet also relying on an intimate and personal understanding of the recipient. “We also recognise that banter is complex and often contradictory,” they add. “Accordingly, these concepts should be treated as fluid, rather than binary – particularly when one considers the complicated nature of language and its interpretation.” Is it so easy to separate banter into two neat categories? New research into the attitudes of five coaches at leading football academies suggests not. The study – “When it is no longer a bit of banter: Coaches’ perspectives of bullying in professional soccer” – found that coaches largely agreed on the components of bullying, including someone being frequently being targeted and an imbalance of power. However some also felt players needed to “put up” with banter as a demonstration of their mental strength and masculine worth. As one put it: “You’ve got 20 highly testosterone-fuelled lads, it’s not going to be hunky-dory, chummy-chummy, is it?” The academics noted something else too: there was also a feeling within the coaches’ accounts that bullying in football is dependent on the “weaknesses” in personality or mood of the victims. In other words, the coaches felt that those who didn’t get the banter were at least partly to blame. “It suggests that these values are ingrained from the top down in professional soccer, with the result that academy coaches may suppress bullying under the guise of banter,” the academics note. “Therefore, in professional soccer, these terms may not be as separate as first imagined.” Part of the solution, the academics suggest, is the need for better coach education programmes to raise awareness around bullying and the potential severity of banter, and to encourage coaches to be more self-reflective. But, they suggest, it is broader than that, with sport as a whole needing to consider its workplace culture. On Tuesday we should learn more about what went on at Headingley when Rafiq appears before the Commons’ digital, culture, media and sport select committee along with others involved in the scandal, including the club’s former chair, Roger Hutton. All will be free to answer MPs’ questions freely under parliamentary privilege without fear of legal reprisal. But so far only a summary of the club’s 12-month investigation has been made public, which found Rafiq was a victim of “racial harassment and bullying”. Meanwhile Prof James Newman of Sheffield Hallam University, who led the study into football coaches, believes sport as a whole is still too willing to accept behaviour that would be unacceptable in other professions. “It’s hard-wired into sport that there is tolerance of banter, and that individuals are expected to put up with things that wouldn’t be allowed elsewhere,” he told me. “And, as we are increasingly finding out, it is very hard for a player to say ‘you’ve actually offended me’ when their power base perception is so low.”There’s an old showbiz anecdote that sums up the differences between two distinct acting techniques, which I will call simply “method” and “not method”. In 1976, on the set of the spy thriller Marathon Man, Laurence Olivier and Dustin Hoffman, the film’s two stars, are apparently not getting along. Hoffman hasn’t slept for 72 hours in order to bring verisimilitude to his portrayal of a man being interrogated under sleep deprivation. Seeing his colleague turn up ragged before the cameras roll, Olivier drily remarks: “My dear boy, why don’t you just try acting?” There was an ocean between these method and not-method actors. Olivier, steeped in the worlds of the theatre and Shakespeare and classical poise; and Hoffman, no less a craftsman, but with his training grounded in realism and the “method”, as propounded by his teachers at the Actors Studio in New York. Lady Gaga, whose new film House of Gucci opens in the UK next week, appears to be from the Hoffman school. She recently revealed that playing Patrizia Reggiani, the Italian socialite convicted of hiring a hitman to assassinate her ex-husband, Maurizio Gucci, was a process of “becoming” rather than an “imitation”. She told Vogue that she stayed in character for 18 months, speaking with an accent for nine months of that. “Off camera,” she said. “I never broke. I stayed with her.” Jeremy Strong, too, has talked about the extreme toll that playing Kendall Roy has had on him in Succession. He says acting is “not just an imaginary experience” but “you go through something and […] it costs you”. His co-star Brian Cox has said it is torturous to watch. “Sometimes you say: ‘Jeremy, for [expletive] sake. Stop it now.’” The difference between these two approaches – the Hoffman and the Olivier – lies in what goes into a performance to make it believable. Olivier would work from the outside in, using external influences to simulate emotion (he once supposedly said, “I just turn upstage and pull a nose hair out” when asked how to cry on stage). Method actors work from the inside out in a relentless search for the “truth” of the character, learning everything they can about them and attempting to embody that information with every fibre. The practice of “staying in character”, during rehearsals, between takes and on and off set brings, they feel, authenticity to the performance – but it can be extreme. Film and television history is filled with stories of actors taking the method to extremes: Sylvester Stallone ending up in intensive care for eight days after wanting to be knocked unconscious by a co-star in Rocky IV. Nicolas Cage spending five whole weeks with his face covered in bandages and having his teeth pulled out for Birdy. Daniel Day-Lewis – one of the modern masters of the method – catching pneumonia while walking around New York without a proper coat when preparing for his role in Gangs of New York, or spending the entire filming period for My Left Foot in a wheelchair, being fed by crew members. Halle Berry not showering for eight weeks while filming Jungle Fever. And Jamie Foxx having his eyelids glued shut to play blind musician Ray Charles. The closest I have witnessed such transformative behaviour was in working with Joaquin Phoenix on the 2018 western The Sisters Brothers. In pre-production, our relationship was cordial. The moment the cameras started rolling, however, he became brooding, taciturn even, disappearing into the role of Charlie Sisters – we spoke little except for when performing scenes together (though he was a generous and accommodating scene partner, no Hollywood diva). A year later, when we were at the Toronto international film festival to promote the film, Joaquin was already in prep for his role as Arthur Fleck in Joker, and his weight loss and haphazard behaviour was disturbing – sitting in a crowded room with headphones on, only answering questions in monosyllables. Authenticity delights audiences. But where does it end? If you’re playing Macbeth, must you commit regicide? If you’re performing Romeo do you have to fall in love with the actor playing Juliet (and do you even have to fancy her)? Well, no. Yet while all acting is a form of pretence, you should have a sense of what that person could be like “in real life”. For me, and most actors I know, doing background research is an essential part of “finding a character”. We study the character’s education and social experience, their likes, dislikes and places they have lived. How they speak, and so on. What we can’t discover, we simply invent: the imagination is as powerful a muscle as biceps, glutes or abdominals for an actor. But clearly the method works. For many who adhere to it, glory at the Oscars seems inevitable; Joaquin’s performance in Joker won him an Academy Award. Maybe that’s why it remains the most esoteric and mysterious of acting techniques: it produces such endlessly startling, award-winning results, I’m tempted to try it myself. Rebecca Root is an actor. Her recent work includes The Queen’s GambitOne publicly mourned the “moral tragedy of abortion”. Another suggested that same-sex marriage “imperils civic peace”. A third tweeted negatively about Hillary Clinton using the hashtags #CrookedHillary, #basketofdeplorables and #Scandalabra. James Ho, Stuart Kyle Duncan and Cory Wilson are among six judges appointed by former president Donald Trump to the US court of appeals for the fifth circuit, skewing one of the most conservative – and influential – courts in America even further to the right. The consequences of Trump’s reshaping of the federal judiciary are being felt acutely at the fifth circuit on issues ranging from abortion to immigration to the coronavirus pandemic. The court’s willingness to entertain Republican extremism has effectively made it their principal legal bulwark against Joe Biden. “The Supreme Court is, no doubt, the nation’s most powerful court. But the 5th Circuit, the federal appeals court that covers Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas, is staking out a claim to be the most dangerous,” Ruth Marcus, deputy editorial page editor of the Washington Post, wrote in August. The supreme court does indeed have the last word on the constitutionality of contentious laws and bears Trump’s stamp with his three appointees. But the great majority of cases never make it that far. Instead 13 appellate courts, each covering a different region, get to rule on most legal appeals around the country. Edward Fallone, an associate professor at Marquette University Law School, said: “They’re really error-correcting courts. Their function is primarily to correct the trial judge if they made a mistake. They don’t have the power to overturn settled precedent from the supreme court but, if there are cases where there is no precedent and they’re writing on a clean slate, then they get the first crack at defining what the law is.” Among the 13 appellate courts, which typically put cases before three-judge panels, the US court of appeals for the District of Columbia circuit in Washington is widely regarded as the biggest hitter. On Thursday, for example, it temporarily blocked the release of Trump’s White House records relating to the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. But the fifth circuit, based in New Orleans, Louisiana, has long shown an ability to punch above its weight. Half a century ago it was seen as a trailblazer as it handled most civil rights cases. In 1964 Time magazine quoted a leading lawyer as saying: “Without the Fifth Circuit, we would be on the verge of actual warfare in the South.” The court’s transformation mirrored the politics of the deep south, recruiting from increasingly conservative ranks of judges and legal scholars. Of its 17 active judges today, 12 were named by Republican presidents. When two vacancies arose during Barack Obama’s presidency, Republicans managed to derail the nomination process and keep the seats open. (In 2015, notably, the court upheld a decision blocking Obama executive orders protecting undocumented immigrants whose children are US citizens.) Then came Trump, who named six judges to the court, more than a third of its total composition. All are relatively young: they include Andrew Oldham, a former legal adviser to Texas’s governor, Greg Abbott, who is in his early 40s. Federal judges have lifetime tenure and typically serve long after the presidents who nominated them have left office. Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said of the fifth circuit’s judges: “The vast majority have been appointed by Republican presidents going back to Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush. Of course, the Bushes knew all of these people personally, I think, but Trump has really amped it up because he has chosen even more conservative people than the Bushes did.” This affects which cases the court is likely to hear. Appeals in the ruby red states of Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas naturally go before the fifth circuit. But its hard-right reputation is also an invitation to outsiders for “forum shopping”, in which a plaintiff or their backers choose a court that will treat their claims most favourably. Christopher Kang, co-founder and chief counsel of the progressive pressure group Demand Justice, said: “What we’ve seen over the last several years is that conservatives have stacked the fifth circuit with very ultra-conservative ideological judges and so, when particularly controversial issues come up, lawyers from across the country find a way to file in the fifth circuit, which then allows it to hear these cases and have an outsized impact on the development of the law.” He added: “This has been a very intentional decision by conservative legal activists to file their cases in the fifth circuit so that they can get the most extreme ruling possible as early as possible in the process.” In October the fifth circuit temporarily reinstated Texas’s abortion law, the most extreme in the country, which bars the procedure as early as six weeks into pregnancy and outsources enforcement of the ban to ordinary citizens. Earlier this month it issued a stay freezing the Biden administration’s efforts to require workers at companies with at least 100 employees be vaccinated against Covid-19 or be tested weekly. Kang remarked: “Time and time again, the fifth circuit is the place for the most extreme rulings to come forward and then the question is whether or not the supreme court will step in or how the supreme court will react.” So far the fifth circuit has frequently proven too extreme even for a supreme court that has a solid conservative majority. The higher court reversed six of seven decisions by the fifth circuit in the 2019-2020 term and five of seven decisions in the 2020-2021 term. Among them were fifth circuit rulings upholding a Louisiana abortion law and striking down the Affordable Care Act. Trump appointed more than 200 judges to the federal bench, including almost as many federal appeals court judges in four years (54) as Obama did in eight (55) – partly because Mitch McConnell, the Republican majority leader in the Senate, thwarted many Obama appointees. Trump “flipped” the balance of several appeals courts to a majority of Republican appointees. Biden, however, has set about reversing the trend with impressive speed. Kang commented: “There definitely is grounds for optimism in that President Biden and Senate Democrats are prioritizing judges like never before on the Democratic side. I do think they are on pace for President Biden to appoint more appellate judges than Trump did in his first year.” Biden’s emphasis on professional diversity is also encouraging, Kang continued. “Public defenders and civil rights lawyers and union-side labour lawyers – the kinds of lawyers who have been traditionally excluded from the bench are being elevated now and that is tremendously important. “The question is, how many vacancies will President Biden be able to fill? Because these are lifetime judgeships, you’re only able to fill vacancies when a judge retires or passes away. President Biden is filling these vacancies very quickly but at some point there may not be any more vacancies to fill.” Conservatives, however, reject the premise that Trump warped the lower courts so they no longer represent the will of the people on reproductive rights and other issues. Curt Levey, president of the advocacy group the Committee for Justice, said: “Polling indicates that something like 70, 75% basically think that there should be some protection of abortion but that it shouldn’t be abortion on demand – a moderate position which hasn’t been able to be enacted because of Roe v Wade. “Depending on what the supreme court rules, it and the fifth circuit might very well be right in the middle of American public opinion. I could name a bunch of issues like that so I don’t know that I buy that the fifth circuit is any more out of step with the American people than some of the more liberal circuits. The circuits tend to reflect America because it’s a number of presidents, going back to Reagan, who have appointed the judges.”When she was growing up, Eugenia Kargbo could have a leisurely stroll, jog or cycle around the streets of Freetown. But that easy life no longer exists in Sierra Leone’s capital for her two children. The city is so swelteringly hot that children run the constant risk of sunburn or heat rashes if they are outdoors for very long. “Over the past 10 years, there has been a dramatic change,” says Kargbo, 34, who has been appointed as Freetown’s chief heat officer – the first such post in Africa and only the third globally, after Athens and Miami. Kargbo remembers when Freetown was a pleasantly cool city. “You [could] do cycling in the afternoon. I remember I used to walk from my school to my house,” she told the Guardian. “But that has changed – the temperatures keep rising. It’s very difficult to walk around the streets of Freetown in the afternoon hours, you feel very stressed.” Kargbo’s appointment by Freetown’s mayor, Yvonne Aki-Sawyerr, comes as the coastal city is experiencing rising sea levels, shorter rainy and longer dry seasons, and extreme temperatures. The west African country has faced increasingly severe flooding and landslides in a country where two-thirds of people depend on farming. “People are talking about heat and it’s happening,” she says. “It’s killing a lot of people around the world and even in Sierra Leone. “Extreme heat has led to low crop productivity, and the impact of extreme heat, backed by the 10-year-long civil war that we’ve had, has led to an increase in rural-urban migration.” As a result, Freetown now has a population of about 1.2 million, 35% of whom live in 74 informal settlements in disaster-prone areas on hillsides and along the coast, in houses made mainly of metal sheets. “They do not have the resources to build houses made from the appropriate material that would resist the heat, and they do not have the finances to purchase cooling systems,” she says. “These are the most vulnerable people.” Kargbo’s role is part of an initiative led by the Atlantic Council’s Adrienne Arsht-Rockefeller Foundation Resilience Center to raise awareness of extreme heat risk, improve planning for heatwaves, and implement projects to protect people from heat. Kathy Baughman McLeod, director of the Resilience Center, says: “Extreme heat is a silent killer responsible for more deaths across the globe than any other climate-related threat.” Drought has been particularly severe in east Africa, while flooding has been a bigger problem in the west of the continent. “The built environment of Freetown absorbs and later radiates heat, generating an urban heat-island effect that increases the likelihood of heat-related illness and mortality,” according to the Climate and Development Knowledge Network. Heat exacerbates drought during the dry season in Sierra Leone, while vector-borne diseases such as malaria peak in the rainy season. A huge flood and mudslides in Freetown in 2017 killed an estimated 1,000 people. “Whenever it rains, my heart is in my mouth: I’m wondering, ‘how heavy is it going to be, how long will it go on for, are we going to have flooding?’” Aki-Sawyerr has said. The World Meteorological Organization has warned that African countries’ economies will be hit hard by temperature rises. “For scenarios ranging from a 1C [1.8F] to a 4C [7.2F] increase relative to pre-industrial levels, the continent’s overall GDP is expected to decrease by 2.25% to 12.12%,” it reported. “West, central and east Africa exhibit a higher adverse impact than southern and north Africa.” Kargbo is working on a comprehensive heat strategy for Freetown, while also trying to raise awareness of the issue. “We need people to understand that extreme heat is a climate hazard and it’s happening because of [this] reason.” Her department is studying how to provide a disaster insurance scheme for people living in the shantytowns and plans to create more green areas in the city. “These are open spaces in Freetown where people used to dump waste illegally,” she says. “We are clearing the dump site and we are transforming those areas into green spaces.” Kargbo first worked in banking before joining Freetown city council, where she has been involved in environmental projects such as the #FreetowntheTreeTown initiative to encourage tree-planting and reduce the deforestation that contributes to flooding and landslides. Kargbo is clear on her role: “We need to stop talking, and we need to start acting.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:When it comes to climate policy, it’s never prudent to say we’ve hit peak preposterous, because this is Australia. There are always new depths to plumb. But we were certainly peak preposterous adjacent on Monday when Scott Morrison and Angus Taylor attempted to explain why Australia had just signed a commitment to look at its 2030 emissions reduction target – but our target wouldn’t be changing because it was both immutable and completely redundant. Barnaby Joyce then compounded the disorientation later in the day by suggesting “the Nationals” (a core part of the Morrison government last time I looked) had not signed up to anything at Glasgow. Given Morrison and co have now flicked the switch to election campaign mode – and, when it comes to climate, the pressing objective seems to be (borrowing from Steve Bannon) to flood the zone with shit – let’s step through the relevant facts. Before we get to Monday’s word salad, we need to understand some recent history. In the run up to Cop26 in Glasgow, Morrison attempted to increase Australia’s 2030 target. Joyce said no, so Morrison went to the summit with nothing formal to say on 2030. Australia was the only major developed country that refused to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets. The Glasgow summit was focused on 2030, so Morrison attempted to step around his problem by talking up a projected over-achievement on the Abbott-era commitment of a cut of between 26% and 28%. He hoped that would suffice. But despite Australia’s heroic whoosh whoosh offensive, Glasgow remained resolutely focused on 2030. The final communique of the summit had countries agreeing to re-examine and strengthen their existing 2030 goals when they return to the negotiating table at Cop27 in Egypt. The communique contained the caveats generally required to get communiques over the line. Countries (being sovereign states) were requested to revisit and strengthen their 2030 targets, and naturally these commitments should “take into account different national circumstances”. But the spirit and intent was clear. The planet is on the clock. Let’s all come back at the next gathering and do a bit better. Given the 2030 target remains a lightning rod inside the Coalition, Australia wasn’t exactly thrilled with a commitment to revisit the same problem at the next United Nations-led summit. But we signed up. Voluntarily. Then very shortly afterwards, Australia said the complete opposite. Two portfolio ministers issued a statement in the hours immediately afterwards declaring Australia’s 2030 target was “fixed”. Before anyone had time to scratch their heads about the duelling realities – one domestic and another international – Monday dawned. Morrison was asked to explain Australia’s position, given Australia’s position is now officially inexplicable. Morrison played down what we’d agreed in the final communique. That was just a “request”. He said he’d been clear about “what our target is” – just for clarity, this would be the target the prime minister had tried and failed to change. We would be sticking with the target (that the prime minister had tried to change only a few weeks ago) because consistency was important. But even more important than sticking with this immutable target was the fact Australia’s immutable target was now completely redundant. “See, we are going to achieve a 35% reduction in emissions by 2030,” the prime minister said. “That’s what we’re going to achieve and that’s what actually matters.” The prime minister was then asked the obvious question. “Why don’t you make that your target then, if you’re going to get to 35% anyway?” Morrison replied: “Because our policy is to meet and beat – that’s what we do.” So here is the logic we are being asked to accept: Australia won’t make our current 2030 target more ambitious (even though we held out that prospect at the end of the Glasgow summit) because the prime minister tried to do that a few weeks ago and Barnaby said no; and, in any case, we will overshoot that stupid target anyway even though Barnaby says that target can’t possibly increase (because the Nationals want to win seats in the Hunter valley.) This logic is the equivalent of an ad-hoc home renovation where everything is so unwieldy you end up with a bidet in the living room, and everyone just tiptoes around trying not to notice the inexplicable bidet – because if anybody acknowledges you have a bidet in your living room then nothing makes sense any more, and then you comprehend the only thing that can fix your botched renovation is a detonation so large it could wipe out a whole neighbourhood. Just in case the fundamentals aren’t clear, let’s be clear. If Australia signs a communique saying we will have another look at our 2030 target, we should either have another look at our 2030 target, or not sign the communique. Seriously. You can’t lie to all the people all of the time without significantly devaluing your currency either with peers and allies abroad – or with voters at home. Also: One. Targets are an integral part of the process of successful emissions reduction, as are policy mechanisms driving the necessary abatement. At the moment we have a fungible medium-term target, and instead of a policy, we have a pamphlet. Two. When it comes to 2030, Australia has not achieved anything at this point. We haven’t achieved a 35% cut, the government has forecast Australia might achieve a 35% cut, while our actual 2030 target (which can’t change and is also completely redundant) remains a cut of 26 to 28%. You’d laugh if this was actually funny. But it really isn’t funny.Norwich City have confirmed the appointment of Dean Smith as their new manager. The Premier League’s bottom club reached an agreement with Smith after a weekend of negotiations and he has set his sights on avoiding relegation. Norwich sacked Daniel Farke on 6 November and a day later Smith was dismissed by Aston Villa. Norwich have struggled since winning promotion last season and have given Smith, who has been joined by his assistant Craig Shakespeare, a two-and-a-half-year contract. “It has been a whirlwind seven days but I’m really pleased to be back and working for Norwich City in the Premier League,” Smith said. “Clearly, there has been some wonderful work that has gone into this football club over the last four and a half years. It is now the job of myself and Craig to continue and improve on that work with the ultimate aim of surviving in the Premier League. “Norwich City is a big club, with a massive hardcore of supporters who are fully understanding in what it means to be part of the club and its community. I was brought up in an era when Norwich were competing in Europe – I remember those times well and whenever I’ve visited Carrow Road and Norwich you can really sense the connection between the fans, staff and players. Together, we all have to make Carrow Road a really tough place for visiting teams. “From the age of 16 I’ve been working in football. I think in that time I’ve had four months out and didn’t enjoy it. It’s great to get straight back in with a club that are determined to be progressive.” Smith starts with a game at home to Southampton on Saturday. He has an impressive CV and convinced Norwich with his vision for the club during negotiations. The 50-year-old had spells at Brentford and Walsall before being appointed by Villa in October 2018. He made an instant impact at Villa Park, lifting his boyhood club back into the Premier League at the end of his first season. Villa won promotion by beating Derby in the 2019 play-off final and Smith led his side to safety in their first season back in the top flight. He lifted them to 11th place last season but lost his job after making a disappointing start to the current campaign. Villa struggled after selling Jack Grealish to Manchester City and Smith was fired after five successive defeats. However, his coaching credentials are not in doubt and Norwich, five points below 17th-placed Watford, need someone to rouse them after an awful run of form. They have won only once in the league this season, beating Brentford. Farke was sacked after that win. Norwich, who also held talks with Frank Lampard, will need Smith to stiffen their defence and give them more ideas in attack. They will hope that he brings more out of Billy Gilmour – the Scotland midfielder has made little impact since joining Norwich from Chelsea on loan. Todd Cantwell will also be hoping that Smith brings him back into the fold. The highly rated 23-year-old forward has made only five appearances this season.The Carolina Panthers’ reunion with Cam Newton could easily have been a gimmick. The last time we heard from the quarterback formerly known as Superman, the New England Patriots had released him after he lost the starting battle with Mac Jones. The fact that it took until Week 10 for a team to take a chance on him felt ominous. Turns out the only ones who needed to be worried were the Arizona Cardinals. Before Sunday afternoon’s game, the team announced that Newton would be active but wouldn’t start. This turned out to be technically true, as PJ Walker took most of the snaps during the Panthers’ 34-10 win. But it didn’t matter: this was Newton’s show from the very start. Showing off the two-way versatility that characterized his run to NFL MVP (and the Super Bowl) in the 2015 season, Newton scored the team’s first two touchdowns: one on the ground and the other through the air. Against a Cardinals team playing without their brilliant quarterback Kyler Murray and others, the Panthers’ 14-0 early lead effectively ended the game in the first quarter. With the win, the Panthers improved their record to 5-5 while Arizona fell to 8-2. Despite the early offensive fireworks, the most memorable play of the game was an unsportsmanlike penalty. After that first touchdown, Newton showed the competitive fire that earned him his fair share of enemies back in his prime by removing his helmet and shouting “I’m baaack!” to the home crowd in Arizona. The Panthers received a 15-yard penalty for Newton’s actions, but only his most vehement haters would hold his exuberance against him. After all, it’s been a long road for the 32-year-old. Carolina drafted Newton a decade ago, even though it seems like both ages and moments ago, and he almost immediately paid dividends. He won Offensive Rookie of the Year in 2011 and improved from there. In 2015, he led the Panthers to a 15-1 record, took them to the Super Bowl and was named league MVP. In retrospect, the Panthers’ loss to the Denver Broncos in that Super Bowl was the end of the Killa Cam era. Injuries sapped Newton of his effectiveness and the team eventually released him in 2019 after failing to find a trade partner. It was a quick fall from grace and his time with the Patriots is doomed to be remembered as a forgettable bridge year for both team and player. Newton lost the quarterback battle with Jones this year after missing preseason games due to a “misunderstanding” of the Covid-19 protocols. Instead of naming him a backup, the Patriots cut him altogether. At the time, it felt like it could be an ignoble end to an often-thrilling NFL career. Then a fully-vaccinated Newton announced he was looking for a job. His former team – in desperate need after a potentially season-ending shoulder injury to starter Sam Darnold—took a flier on their one-time franchise icon. With an extra week’s preparation, Carolina is expected to give him a look as the starter, at least for the short term. It’s hard to say what comes after this. Two impressive cameos in a lopsided win against an injury-depleted team aren’t enough to tell us if Newton has improved from the clearly limited player he was in New England. Worst-case scenario, we might have witnessed his last dance: not a professional rebirth but a punctuation mark on his career highlight reel. Even if that’s the case, it was still a feel-good game for both Panthers and Newton fans. Given the injuries, controversies and the near-inevitability of failure in a league where 31 of 32 teams end their season in some degree of disappointment, fans should learn to embrace moments of unexpected joy whenever they occur. MVP of the week Mac Jones, QB, New England Patriots. When the Patriots selected Jones 15th in this year’s draft, there was some concern that they were using their first-round pick on a system quarterback. In fact, here’s how this writer reacted live to the pick: “He’s not what you would call a mobile quarterback, and he doesn’t have an eye-popping arm.” As of Week 10, it’s very difficult to quibble with the Patriots’ choice. During the 45-7 shellacking of the Cleveland Browns, Jones played the best football of his young NFL career. Looking nothing like the game-manager he was during his first few weeks on the job, Jones threw for 198 yards and three touchdowns. Video of the week Even without context, this is a phenomenal catch by Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver DeVonta Smith during his team’s win over the Broncos. It’s even more impressive when you realize that it was the second TD pass thrown to him by QB Jalen Hurts on Sunday. To top it off, it just so happened to be on Smith’s birthday. Stat of the week 36 points. That’s how many points the Dallas Cowboys put up on the Atlanta Falcons defense before halftime on Sunday. It was the first time the franchise had scored at least 36 points in a first-half since their 38 points against the San Francisco 49ers back in 1980. In case you’re wondering, Dallas have had some pretty decent teams since then. The Cowboys won by a final score of 43-3, improving their record to 7-2. Meanwhile, the Falcons social media team effectively gave up before the end of the game, which is how you know you’ve truly demoralized an opponent. Oh well, they could have had a worse weekend: just ask Jake Gyllenhaal. Quote of the week “Not a loss!” – Anonymous Detroit Lions fan, speaking for the entire fanbase. The Detroit Lions have never been happier not to win a football game. Potentially facing the first 0-17 season in NFL history – in Year 1 of the expansion of the regular season – the Detroit managed a 16-16 tie against the Pittsburgh Steelers. Detroit have played better than their record suggests this season and didn’t deserve to go down as the Literal Worst Of All Time. Many US sports fans will never fully embrace the tie, but Detroit diehards will make an exception this time around. Elsewhere around the league -- What crisis? Normal service is resumed in the AFC West. Patrick Mahomes was back to his best, throwing five touchdowns as the Kansas City Chiefs beat the Las Vegas Raiders 41-14 on Sunday Night Football. But perhaps most encouraging for the Chiefs was that their previously risible defense held up pretty well. Kansas City have now won three in a row and are top of the division after looking lost for large parts of the season. -- The Mike White Era in New York didn’t last long. After four interceptions and zero touchdowns against the Buffalo Bills, it seems likely that his impressive performance last month against the Bengals in his first career start was just a blip. Expect Zach Wilson to return to duty for the struggling Jets when healthy. Meanwhile, the 6-3 Bills stayed on top of the AFC East with a stress-free 45-17 victory. -- The Tennessee Titans may well be the best team in football at the moment. They are now on a six-game winning streak after a 23-21 victory over the New Orleans Saints, improving their record to an AFC-best 8-2. The last two wins have been the most impressive as they’ve occurred without dominant running back Derrick Henry, who still remains the NFL rushing leader. The 5-4 Saints, meanwhile, are still a game behind the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the NFC East standings. -- The reverse of the Cowboys’ impressive first-half beatdown of the Falcons? Well, that would be the 3-0 lead the Green Bay Packers held over the Seattle Seahawks at halftime on Sunday. While it’s reductive to say offensive production is entirely a byproduct of quarterback health, the fact that Seattle’s Russell Wilson was returning from a serious hand injury and Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers was returning from Covid-19 (you may have heard about that) probably had a lot to do with that score. It didn’t get much better. Green Bay’s AJ Dillon finally broke the game open, rushing for two touchdowns in the fourth. The two scores cemented a 17-0 victory, shutting out Wilson’s Seahawks for the first time in his career. Hopefully for his team, the hand will be better next week. -- Terrible news for Washington as DE Chase Young was taken out of their game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers with what the team fear could be a torn ACL. It cast a pall over their 29-19 win. If you have been keeping track, this makes Tom Brady the only one of the last three Patriots quarterbacks who didn’t lead his team to a win on Sunday. As a result, Tampa Bay dropped to 6-3 while Washington improved to 3-6. -- They may reside in Los Angeles now and Philip Rivers is retired, but there’s still something reliable about Chargers football. Yes, they still have an inconsistent but often inspiring quarterback capable of ridiculous plays – in this case, it’s Justin Herbert who did this against the Minnesota Vikings on Sunday – and when they lose, it always seems to be by a single score. This time around, the Vikings beat them 27-20, meaning their record has gone from 4-1 to 5-4 over the last few weeks. The Curse is not entirely over.And with that, we are going to put this blog to bed. It’s been a big day, filled with wild weather, good-ole pre-election sledging and a lockdown. Lets re-cap the big yarns from today: Thousands prepare to evacuate as Lachlan River threatens Forbes. Victoria reported 860 new Covid cases and five deaths; NSW had 165 new cases and one death, the ACT recorded 10 new cases. NSW police announced they have new evidence in William Tyrrell search Scott Morrison labelled himself “the underdog” and said the ABC was not beyond ‘the scrutiny of the Senate’. Border passes became available to anyone (who meets a strict criteria) to get into Queensland. South Australia announced border restrictions easing from next week The first day of a five-week inquest into Australia’s deadliest aged care Covid outbreak has begun in Melbourne. New Zealand announced Covid booster shots will become available to residents from end of November. The “state of the art” Adani coal train broke down during testing Deputy prime minster Barnaby Joyce said the Nationals did not support signing Cop26 pact. And the NT recorded two new Covid cases, one of which was in a remote community. This sparked a lockdown of the Greater Katherine area and Robinson River. I don’t know about you, but I am going to lie down. I will be back tomorrow to do it all again. As always, a total pleasure spending the day with you. Go well, from team Guardian Australia. That is it for the NT press conference. To recap the territory has recorded two new cases, one in a remote Aboriginal community, Robinson River. This is the first time a case has been positive in a remote community and authorities are concerned. Greater Katherine and Robinson River will go back into lockdown for 72 hours. There are only five reason to leave your house and residents must wear a mask outside. Everyone in Robinson River will be tested, Payne said. We’ll certainly be wanting to test almost everyone in those communities. We need very high rates of testing. That is part of our plan, when there is an outbreak in a remote community, you see high rates of testing. The teams will be taking large quantities of swabs, but they’ll be testing with PCR at this stage. Payne said everyone in Australia is likely to get Covid, and only the vaccine will keep us safe. You have now in Australia, perhaps in 12 months, 100% chance of getting this disease. It’s coming, it’s coming for us. We know a great deal now about the virus and how lethal it is, a proportion of people will die from it. But also, a proportion of people will get seriously ill. It’s much, much worse than seasonal flu. It’s an order of magnitude worse than the seasonal flu. The vaccines have now been tested on vast numbers of people but have been tested in real-life, on hundreds of millions of people. We know a great deal now about these vaccinations and the risk associated with them ... the risks are small. Payne said health authorities were concerned younger First Nations peoples with underlying health conditions would be more prone to severe illness. Because of the prevalence of underlying conditions in younger Aboriginal people, they are more prone. So we are gravely concerned about the impact on the Aboriginal communities. So we want people to come forward and get vaccinated. Some rates are extraordinary, they’re fantastic. They’re leading the NT. But others are not. There’s still some hesitancy. Payne says it is concerning because there are areas in the NT that are not vaccinated enough to keep an outbreak under control. We know there are areas in the territory where vaccination rates are not adequate to hold back this kind of outbreak. So we are in a very challenging time. There is no question about that. I wouldn’t want anyone in the territory to be under any illusions that we are now in a fight to get on top of this. NT deputy chief health officer Charles Payne said they are now “in a fight” to help the community. We hope and believe that we have caught this early, certainly in Borroloola. In Katherine, we know we have had an outbreak there and there’s been a period of about a week in between. So there could have been some significant transmission during that time. Gunner said the NT government had dispatched a rapid response team of eight people tonight and will fly more in. They’re also sending vaccines to nearby community of Borroloola. We have got staff on the ground. This is additional people on the ground. We’ll got into a swift testing and vaccine program. We know that Delta can spread quickly so it is a concern. We are hopeful we have caught this case early. She presented to the clinic because she was symptomatic so I thank her for that. Gunner said the population of Robinson River is 350 people. The full vaccine rate is 77% and 88% first dose. “So a good vaccination rate,” he said. Robinson River is the community of concern, Gunner said. We have always been concerned for our remote communities because of their mobility and vulnerability. They are at great risk from the impact of Covid, especially as Delta has emerged. If you are not vaccinated, please get the jab. This thing is real, don’t wait until it’s too late. Protect yourself and the community. Schools will remain open but unvaccinated parents will only be able to drop children at the gate. A mask mandate is already in place but residents must wear a mask when they leave home. The greater Katherine region will go into lockdown from 6pm local time tonight, Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner said. We are declaring a 72-hour lockdown for greater Katherine. This means you are only allowed to leave home for one of the five reasons; you have done this before, you have smashed it before, I know you will smash it again. The five reasons are: medical treatment, including getting a Covid test and getting vaccinated; for essential goods and services like groceries and medicines; for work that is considered essential and can’t be done at home; for one hour of exercise a day with one person you live with and no further than five kilometres from your home; and to provide care to a family member, including separated families. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner is speaking now in Darwin. The first case I can confirm today ... is a 43-year-old Aboriginal male fully vaccinated. November 13 he was tested and the result was positive today. We are treating him as if he’s been infectious since November 10. Today we received a positive Covid-19 test in a 30-year-old Aboriginal female, a household contact of the man I’ve told you about. She flew into the river, the Aboriginal community, and is a resident there. She returned an initial positive result. We are treating her as having been infectious in the community since November 11. Two new Covid-19 cases have been recorded in the NT. One of the new cases is in a remote community. The Victorian government will water down its controversial pandemic legislation after 11th-hour negotiations with key crossbenchers. But sweeping powers, giving the premier the responsibility of declaring a pandemic, which can be extended for three months at a time for as long as considered necessary, will remain despite ongoing protests and death threats against MPs supporting the controversial legislation. The premier’s office has confirmed the laws will now go before the upper house on Tuesday. Former Dept PM and current Nationals MP Michael McCormack shared this video of the Lachlan river from the air this morning. This from AAP: A Gold Coast man brutally attacked the woman he called the “love of his life”, bashing her with a hammer and strangling her to death. Almost four years to the day after Gaylene Cobby – known as Kym – died outside her Gold Coast hinterland home, a jury has found Andrew John Cobby guilty of her murder. The 51-year-old woman was repeatedly struck on the head with the hammer then strangled while taking out rubbish at her Worongary home on 12 November, 2017. Cobby now 59, admitted being present during the attack on the woman he had married more than three decades earlier – although they mostly lived apart from 2003 – but denied being responsible. Cobby told police an unknown assailant was behind the killing, ambushing his wife as he was about to get into a red Chrysler he had borrowed, the Brisbane supreme court trial heard. But a jury rejected his version, handing down a guilty verdict on Monday after deliberating for less than a day. Gold Coast getting a special shoutout on the premier’s Twitter feed this afternoon. Health authorities are very concerned the area is lagging. New research has shown one-punch deaths declined by 50% between 2013 and 2018 but there was an increase number of domestic assaults. The researchers have not gone into how the pandemic impacted these deaths but know there were 172 one-punch deaths in Australia in 2020. Previously the medium age of 33 but that has shifted to 44 years old, the research shows. Researchers said alcohol was still involved in 60% of the deaths. This from AAP: A medically unqualified extreme body modifier performed a dangerous, unhygienic and unlawful “tummy tuck” on a young mother, a Sydney judge has found. Brendan Leigh Russell, 40, was on Monday found guilty of intentionally causing grievous bodily harm when slicing open the woman’s abdomen in his shopping centre parlour in November 2016. “The accused undertook what was clearly a dangerous procedure, in circumstances that were very clearly unhygienic, and convinced the recipient that it was safe,” District Court Judge Helen Syme said. The Central Coast body modifier was also found guilty of female genital mutilation after excising most of a woman’s labia with a branding iron in Newcastle in January 2015. A verdict on his third and most serious charge - the 2017 manslaughter of a regular client - is due on Tuesday. Following Monday’s verdicts, Russell was remanded in custody, leaving his heavily pregnant wife in tears. The findings could draw a line under complex body modification in Australia after Judge Syme dismissed defence arguments that the mother had provided appropriate consent to the abdominal procedure. The exposure sites in Tasmania have been revised. There’s been a lot of chatter this afternoon about the government signing on to the Cop26 agreement “request” for countries to strengthen their targets before turning around and saying it won’t. My colleague Sarah Martin has the full run-down here for those catching up: While we are talking weather - if you are near the Lachlan please remember to keep an eye out on warnings. You can check them here. And it is also very cold! We’ve got a Canberra about to hit a record-breaking cold snap with three straight days under 14 degrees in November, Melbourne felt a maximum of 13.5C today and it is snowing in Tasmania. It has been a very strange afternoon for Aus politics. And lastly, PK asks Chalmers if the PM is the “underdog” politically – which keen blog followers will remember is how he self-described this morning. “It’s a fake prime minister and we are in a fake election campaign and he will say all kinds of things to spin the position he is in politically, we don’t underestimate him.” PK asked Chalmers if Cop26 will make things harder for the fossil fuel industry. “Not necessarily on its own, clearly. The long-term future of the market has been set out, it would be irresponsible for anyone anywhere, to pretend, that 30 or 40 or 50 years down the track, that our energy market will be dominated by cleaner sources of energy, that is self-evident.” Chalmers is asked when Labor will announce its 2030 target and how ambitious it will be. “In the coming weeks.” Chalmers said the government is just pretending it cares about climate change. “It is extraordinary in the extreme that we have a government that signs an international agreement and within hours, says that has no intention of keeping to it. “We have a prime minister who signed an agreement and a deputy prime minister and the cabinet says it has nothing to do with them. “This is symbolic, of eight years of shambolic and economically damaging inaction from the government, 22 or 23 different energy policies, after eight years in government they give us a pamphlet, not a plan, they sign up to an international agreement, they have no intention of keeping to.” Jim Chalmers, the shadow treasurer is now on Afternoon Briefing. He is asked if Labor will go to the next election with a more ambitious target. “Of course, Labor will be more ambitious when it comes to cleaner and cheaper energy. “We understand as to the state governments and the big employers and the global community, that there are more jobs and more opportunities and more investment which flows from doing the right thing, getting our emissions down but most importantly getting that additional, cleaner and cheaper energy into the system.” QLD MP Ali King has again had her office defaced – this time with swastikas. From Agence France-Presse: A group of women subjected to invasive gynaecological searches at Doha airport will sue Qatari authorities, seeking redress for an ordeal that sparked global condemnation, their lawyer said on Monday. Women on 10 Qatar Airways flights from Doha, including 13 Australians, were subjected to the examinations late last year as authorities searched for the mother of a newborn found abandoned in an airport bathroom. One of Adani’s brand new “state of the art” coal trains has broken down during testing in north Queensland. The Indian conglomerate has said it expects to export the first coal from the Carmichael mine by the end of the year. After difficulty finding an Australian freight rail company to haul its coal, Adani established the Bowen Rail Company. In September Adani hailed the arrival of new locomotives at a media event attended by the federal resources minister, Keith Pitt. Guardian Australia was sent footage of Bowen Rail Company locomotives and wagons stalled at Birrallee, south of Collinsville, earlier today. The area is en route from the Carmichael mine to Adani’s Abbot Point coal terminal. In the footage, the wagons appear fully laden with coal. “One of our testing and commissioning trains is currently stopped in a siding away from main line traffic as a safety precaution while some work is carried out,” an Adani spokeswoman said. “Since our new locomotives arrived in Australia in September we have transported them to the railway and have since been testing and commissioning them and our coal wagons to ensure they are ready to operate safely and efficiently. “As is the usual process for new pieces of equipment and infrastructure, this is expected to take a period of time as the new machines are tested, both while hauling loads and with empty wagons.” That interview was wild. Give me a second, and we are going to jump over to Ben Smee who has an update on one of Adani’s new coal trains - very on brand topic for this afternoon. And with this choice quote, the interview with Joyce comes to a close. “PK, everyone is entertained, they won’t like me, but they will be entertained.” PK has asked Joyce if he is concerned about misinformation in relation to the vaccine, especially if it comes from people like George Christensen. “If the information is wrong I am concerned about it. You shouldn’t give wrong information, which, for instance, could put someone out of a job or cause someone healthy -- cause them to become unhealthy, you shouldn’t tie a car to a rail line or to scaffolding. Misinformation is bad as well.” PK has asked Joyce if it is appropriate for the Senate to be looking at the ABC. “[If] they want to have those Senate inquiries they can have one. “You can turn up and defend the ABC if you wish, one thing you guys are good at is arguing your case, you can go there and argue your case and you will. “You are making a big thing of it to be quite frank and making it worse, better to deal with it and send someone along, give your evidence.” Joyce is arguing he cannot answer for Liberal moderates who want higher climate change targets. “They are the Liberal party, that is for him [Scott Morrison] to look after and the Liberal party, I look after the National party.” Joyce says he is happy with the government’s target and he thinks Australia did a great job. Joyce is asked if the government should not have signed up to returning next year and revising the target. “If they want to talk about something and have another talkfest, knock yourself out, have it somewhere else, have the movie stars come back and all the billionaires and all the core projects, and have people bleeding all over the place and terribly upset. “We honour every agreement when we signed it. That is why we are cautious about what we sign. A lot of these other countries, yes, they will sign the agreement and hooray for the photo. But as they walk back on the corporate jet, they go, ‘Bye’.” PK says Sharma was emotional because he felt it was a great achievement. “Give me a break! These people aren’t worried about the environment, they just want to end up on television.” Joyce is now mocking the Cop26 president for becoming emotional at the end of the final sitting. “I think we have done a great job. I think we have done a great job. “It annoys me that, what is that guy’s name? The chairman Sharma with his gavel, ‘I am crying, I can’t do it,’ – he wants to talk about shutting down the coal industry but he never talks about shutting down the oil fields in the North Sea, he doesn’t want to shut that down. “He wants to shut down industries and other people’s countries, not in his country.” Joyce says the nationals didn’t sign the Cop26 final agreement including a request to strengthen 2030 emission targets – which the government did before issuing a statement within hours the target is fixed. “I didn’t sign it. “The Nationals didn’t sign it. I did not sign it.” Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce is on Afternoon Briefing with Patricia Karvelas. He says protestors who are currently blocking coal trains in the Hunter region are not exercising “their democratic right”. “When they hang themselves off scaffolding, stopping trains, $60m worth of exports, but about $6m worth of royalties that could have gone to hospitals, schools, could have gone to things that support our standard of living.” This from AAP: The Victorian government is in talks with crossbenchers to amend its controversial pandemic legislation ahead of the debate in state parliament’s upper house. The government is relying on the support of Animal Justice MP Andy Meddick, Reason Party MP Fiona Patten and Greens leader Samantha Ratnam to pass the Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021 this week. If passed, the bill will replace the state of emergency powers due to expire on December 15 and will give the premier the responsibility of declaring a pandemic, which can be extended for three months at a time for as long as considered necessary. Once a pandemic is declared, the health minister will be given “broad powers” to make public health orders. Such powers currently reside with the chief health officer, who is not an elected official. However, both the premier and the health minister must continue to consult with the chief health officer and the advice behind the orders must be made public within a fortnight. The bill has become a lightning rod for anti-lockdown and anti-vaccination groups, with thousands gathering in Melbourne’s CBD on Saturday to rally against it, including a man seen carrying a homemade gallows with three nooses in an apparent reference to the three crossbenchers. Greens politicians are concerned about a catch in South Australia’s plan to open its border. Fully vaccinated travellers from other states will be allowed to enter SA from 23 November. But if they are coming from a local government area where there is community transmission and less than 80% of the population are fully vaccinated they still have to quarantine. Jenny Leong (member for Newtown), Ellen Sandall (member for Melbourne) and Tammy Franks (SA) are concerned residents from the City of Melbourne and the City of Sydney will be impacted because statistical anomalies show a low vaccine rate in both central LGAs. They have written to Greg Hunt flagging their concern. “As it stands, these statistical anomalies will prevent many people living in the City of Sydney and the City of Melbourne from travelling and being reunited with family in South Australia,” the letter reads. “It will also prevent interstate travel by South Australian residents to these cities. “It is critical that vaccination rates are set and we are very supportive of ensuring the community is kept safe through a strong public health vaccination program. “That said, it is problematic to be preventing interstate travel based on outdated population predictions which seem to skew the actual vaccination rates in these areas.” A “root cause” of the tragedy that led to 50 resident deaths at St Basil’s aged care home was an eight-day delay between the reporting of its first Covid case to Victoria’s health department and the testing of all residents, a coronial inquest has heard. New evidence of failures at the home was obtained in recent months, counsel assisting Peter Rozen QC said in his opening address to the inquest, which began on Monday with the names of those who died being read as the court stood in silence. Senator Jacqui Lambie has turned to a Facebook poll to help her decide how to vote on the Coalition’s proposed voter ID bill. Lambie’s vote could be important - given One Nation already supports the law, the government is close to having the numbers. On Friday Lambie posted: “Should we need an ID to vote? I want you to give me your advice. The government’s proposed Voter ID laws will stop people from stealing someone elses’ vote, but could also disadvantage vulnerable people. The Voter ID laws could come up in the last two weeks of parliament. Don’t wait to tell me how you think I should vote. Click the link below - it’s the easiest way to tally up all the advice. I’ll let you know when I’ve made my decision and why.” This isn’t the first time Lambie has engaged her constituents directly in this fashion, she also conducted a poll before voting against the proposed ban on mobile phones in immigration detention. The cynic in me thinks it’s a good way to build a bigger contact list, capturing details of people engaged in a controversial topic. First name, last name, email, mobile and street address are required to participate - less proof than you’ll be asked on voting day if the bill gets up, but still, handy to have. And of course – there’s no commitment she’ll do what the majority say, only to explain what she decided on and why. Eligible New Zealanders will be able to receive a Pfizer booster vaccination from the end of the month, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has announced. Speaking at a post-cabinet briefing, Ardern said booster doses will be free from 29 November, for anyone in New Zealand aged 18 or older who has completed their two dose course, more than six months ago. Health workers, border workers, Māori and Pacific peoples and older people are especially encouraged to get the booster, Ardern said. “While most other countries are rationing boosters to segments of their population, we’ve made the decision to make boosters available to everyone, six months after the primary vaccine course - most of which will naturally happen in 2022. That ensures simplicity and it ensures equity.” There are 144,000 people in New Zealand who have been vaccinated for six months and 455,847 who will be, by the end of the year. Ardern also announced a lockdown level change for the Waikato region, south of Auckland. The area has been under level three lockdown restrictions for six weeks, after Covid-19 cases emerged in the community. Ardern said that due to its high vaccination rates and low spread beyond household contacts, the area will move to alert level two from midnight Tuesday. There was also a strong warning for year 12’s celebrating finishing in Dunsborough later this month. WA Commissioner of Police Chris Dawson said: “I’d caution anyone that is contemplating to try and game the system ... It’s a criminal offence. If you want to attempt to enter by way of fraud or forgery, you are liable, and look, why would you waste all your education up to year 12, you want to go to university or get a job, and run the risk of actually getting a criminal conviction?” Mark McGowan has hit back at Greg Hunt after Hunt appeared yesterday on the ABC’s Insiders saying he heard Western Australia was considering opening its borders earlier than planned to coincide with the cricket. “I’ve never met Greg Hunt, I’ve never spoken to Greg Hunt, I wouldn’t know him if I met him. He’s got a very vivid imagination. He hasn’t spoken to the [WA] health minister. I would urge the commonwealth government to stop making things up. “The commonwealth has been difficult the whole way along the last two years, always staying to be very adventurous and unsafe whereas we have been very cautious and very safe.” The plan for Western Australia at the moment is to set a date for reopening its borders once 80% of people 12 and over have been fully vaccinated on that date is set to be sometime in late January or early February. That’s it from the BOM but I’ll follow the updates and bring you those through the afternoon. You can check the NSW weather warnings on the BOM’s website and on Twitter. Swindles is asked to give an update on operations in the Blue Mountains. “The strong winds we saw over the weekend kept the BlueMountains unit very busy - over 60 calls for assistance for trees being down. “Some leaking roofs as well as some of the rain that we got, extending down to the Hills area. Once again, our Blue Mountains crew are certainly active today in finishing those jobs. “Warnings for wind, when we get them, we asked for people to secure loose items around the yard, and also with leaking roofs, we just had that we are expecting more rain, and when it comes into the season when you get the opportunity get onto your rooms, clean your gutters and cut down any low-lying trees over your rooms, that will certainly assist us.” He said evictions warnings had been given out and residents were ready to leave if and when needed. “We are working closely with the Bureau with regard to predictions. And may escalate to an evacuation order. “When that does happen, those residents will be given clear instructions as to what they should do. “As we referred to, in 2016, the community of Forbes are resilient, they are aware as to what could occur and I’m sure they have plans in place to look after themselves and we will be there to guide and assist.” Swindles said they had 30 teams out in the area yesterday helping. “I believe we had 30 teams out in the field day yesterday, doorknocking at risk properties, those 800 properties to give them forewarning, and upwards of over 100 SES volunteers who really just end up at times like these to help their community members. “They are outstanding in the work they do.” NSW SES chief superintendent Greg Swindells said they have significant resources out at Forbes. “Since this event did commence, we have seen approximately 1500 request for assistance around the Forbes area. 100 calls for assistance mainly related to sandbagging. “What I can say is that the community at Forbes is quite resilient, they have been preparing for this with us and other local council since June, and they are quite prepared.” He said the peak could be on Wednesday. “To the community, listen to the warnings, respond to the advice to look after yourselves and do what is asked of you to stay safe. Concern, as always is, since this event has occurred and it is statewide, we have seen 29 flood rescues. “We stand here each time we have floods and our advice is for people to not walk, drive or ride through floodwaters. Unfortunately, people still take that risk.” The BOM said the communities of Cowra, Nanami, Forbes need to keep up to date with any warnings on the site. They are expected to peak in the next 24 hours at Nanami. The BOM is concerned Forbes flood waters could rise higher than 2016 levels. “It is particularly important for communities with this evolving flood situation that will be updating warnings for of those communities - Cowra, Nanami, Forbes, and downstream - every two or three times each day, especially as we get more information and the forecast changes. We’ll be updating those impacted communities as possible.” “Our key area of concern at the moment is Forbes, so even though the rainfall has stopped, the flood is still in motion, and during the past few days, we have seen moderate flooding upstream at Cowra. “The river levels are higher than they were in 2016. Now we are concerned about how this will impact the community of Forbes. The flood forecasting team this morning updated the latest forecast for Forbes,” BOM spokesperson said. We’re going to hold that for a second because the BOM is giving an update on NSW. Cait Kelly here, rejoining you after possibly the best fish curry of my life. I am about to bring you an update on the housing affordability inquiry from Paul Karp. The chief of the Australian defence force, General Angus Campbell, says it is an “open question” whether Afghanistan will re-emerge as a base for international terrorism. At a Senate inquiry into Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan, the Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie noted the gains Australia had secured had come at a great cost. She asked Campbell what he saw as the most important gain achieved in Afghanistan over the 20 years since Australia joined the US-led military engagement in 2001. Campbell said it was to work with coalition nations to deny Afghanistan as a base or safe haven for international terrorism. Asked about what hopes there now were of preserving that gain now that the Taliban was back in control of Afghanistan, Campbell said: I think this is a matter that is unclear. The efforts of the international community are focused on seeking to encourage, persuade, to see the Taliban meet their responsibilities now as an organisation that is in control of Afghanistan, not to see international terrorism to re-emerge from Afghanistan. But it is an open question, senator. Pressed on Australia’s initial initial strategic objectives in Afghanistan in 2001-02, Campbell said: It was to deny Afghanistan as a safe haven for international terrorism, to attack areas or Al Qaeda and other international terrorist facilities and organisations, as a member of a coalition to seek to capture Osama bin Laden as the leader of Al-Qaeda and to see Afghanistan able to be a base for international terrorism. Daniel Sloper, the Australian government’s special representative on Afghanistan, told the same hearing: We need to hold the Taliban accountable for its actions going forward. Sloper said the Australian government was focused a number of priorities, including ensuring safe passage for people who want to leave Afghanistan, protection of human rights, and avoiding a safe haven for terrorism. He said these goals would not be easy or quick to resolve (adding that the Taliban were seeking international recognition and release of funds). Sloper said the Australia was working with other countries - including those in the region - on these issues, noting: “It is in no one’s interests for Afghanistan or its neighbourhood to become unstable.” The hearing continues. The parliamentary inquiry into housing affordability has concluded for the day, after the usual clashes between chair Liberal MP Jason Falinski and regulators over housing supply and planning laws. In the morning, Australian Prudential and Regulation authority executive director, Renee Roberts, was in the firing line for saying APRA doesn’t “target house prices or matters of affordability”. Rather, it is concerned with financial stability and ensuring households are able to make mortgage repayments. Falinski asked Roberts repeatedly if this meant APRA “doesn’t care” about affordability - prompting the reply that it is not in APRA’s mandate. APRA has recently tightened lending standards by requiring that lenders check households can pay the interest rate plus a buffer of 3%, up from 2.5%. But Roberts said the aggregate impact of this on prices will be “fairly modest” as many don’t borrow at their full capacity. In the afternoon, Falinski asked the Reserve Bank assistant governor, Luci Ellis, if the RBA was responsible for high house prices. Ellis replied that she accepts that low interest rates have contributed to house prices and “at some level that is our doing”. But, the alternative is the Australian economy suffering higher inflation and having greater difficulty attracting capital. Asked about the impact of housing prices on inequality, Ellis conceded it is a “legitimate concern” and there is an “intergenerational issue” because people whose parents rent have much greater difficulty owning their own home. But people whose parents own their own home benefit because “the house doesn’t disappear - there’s a mechanism by which children can relatively easily end up being home owners”, she said. Meaning: using the bank of mum and dad by getting them to guarantee your loan, or inheritance. Falinski and Ellis went a few rounds with comparisons between housing markets in Santiago (Chile), Tokyo (Japan), Auckland (New Zealand) and Texas (US) - Falinski’s general thrust being looser planning laws = more construction = lower prices. Ellis countered that it’s the supply of well-located land, near jobs and amenities that is constrained and raises prices. The hearing ended with another disagreement about whether planning laws have gotten more or less difficult to navigate, with Ellis pointing to liberalisation in Brisbane and Sydney, and Falinski countering that developers and builders had told the committee it’s still getting harder to build. Tory Shepherd here, back in Blogtown for a bit. Did you see this? While some are celebrating Cop26 ending without actually sounding the death knell for coal, NSW treasurer Matt Kean says life won’t get easier for the fossil fuel industry. He said: Glasgow just accelerated where the market was already going. The fossil fuel industry is going to find it harder to get insurance, raise capital or refinance their options. The Coalition really is a broad church! Read more about Kean’s comments in Peter Hannam’s story here: I’m going to hand you back to my colleague Tory Shepherd while I take a quick break for lunch. I’ll be back very soon to go through the afternoon with you. There are currently protestors on the steps of parliament house in Victoria saying they will camp out to protest the pandemic bill. We reported earlier that the PM had been asked about the snap Senate inquiry into the ABC, after chair Ita Buttrose accused the government of trying to intimidate the ABC. My colleague Paul Karp has the full story here and now: And we have a better breakdown of Victoria’s Covid cases today. Five people have died with the virus in the latest reporting period. There are 860 new infections, which is down from yesterday’s total. 378 people are in hospital and of those 78 are in intensive care. 87% of eligible people are fully vaccinated and 92% have now had their first dose. Guardian Australia’s medical editor, Melissa Davey, is live-tweeting the Victorian inquiry. Former Transport for NSW secretary Rodd Staples was “very uncomfortable” with a potential increased risk to long-term rail safety in the state that had not been resolved when he left his role in February, a NSW parliamentary inquiry has heard. Appearing at an inquiry into the Transport Asset Holding Entity (TAHE) on Monday, Staples said that when he was overseeing Transport for NSW as the NSW government was setting up TAHE as commercial state owned corporation, it became “apparent that the top criteria” was to achieve a “fiscal objective” for the state’s budget. Staples’s employment was terminated without reason in November 2020 amid an alleged disagreement with Treasury officials over the establishment of TAHE – a model for transport asset ownership that has allowed the NSW government to reclassify billions of dollars of spending on public transit assets as equity injections that do not have a negative impact on the budget outlook. Staples also told the inquiry that before his contract was terminated, he raised with department of treasury and cabinet secretary Tim Reardon, that he was concerned about whether he could continue to be effective in his role as TAHE was established. He said he was starting to “wrestle with” the idea of being able to “stand up to the workforce” and say “that this [TAHE] is a good thing”. TAHE is now the subject of a parliamentary inquiry. Last week, the inquiry heard that Treasury officials pressured a KPMG partner to change his negative assessment of the financial benefit of TAHE and safety implications. Days after the KPMG report was delivered, Staples was dismissed. On Monday, Staples said that “my observation was that the key driver for TAHE was to make sure that they could present the budget in a fiscally different way to if it wasn’t there”. Staples said TAHE’s establishment seemed “at odds” with the NSW government’s broader policy over the past decade to integrate different transport bodies and dismantle commercial entities within the system. He said he held concerns for the long term safety of moving transport asset ownership into a commercial entity with an objective to deliver a profit. “You’ll be faced with the conflict of ‘well how much do I invest in the rail asset and maybe a new signalling system versus invest in a property development that would generate a higher return’.” Here’s an explainer on everything you need to know about TAHE – the entity that has been labelled a “financial mirage” by a former NSW auditor general. One of the first witnesses to address the inquiry was Christine Golding, whose 84-year-old mother, Efraxia, died after contracting Covid. She said she got a call from a staff member after they were furloughed and was told doctors were crying, staff were protesting and they were predicting people would die from neglect. She said her family were still angry and disappointed at how the outbreak had been mishandled and that no minister had called to offer their apologies or condolences yet. The inquiry will run over the next few weeks and we will hear from loved ones and staff management. Victorian Chief Health Officer, Brett Sutton, will address the inquiry next Wednesday. I’ll bring you any other key moments today on the blog. The first day of a five-week inquest into Australia’s deadliest aged care Covid outbreak has begun in Melbourne. Fifty residents of St Basil’s Aged Care died in August last year, 45 of them with Covid-19. In his opening statement, Peter Rozen QC said staff were furloughed on July 22 after potentially being exposed to the virus, but the federal health department was unable to find sufficient staff to replace them. He said public servants in Canberra who had never been to St Basil’s were making decisions about staffing “in the teeth of very clear warning from doctors who are caring for those same residents”. One doctor involved in the response, Rabin Sinnappu, warned that replacing all of the regular St Basil’s staff would result in disaster, while another described it as a “shocking” idea. Rozen said there were too few replacement staff to look after 100 elderly and frail people during the outbreak, and although a number of the new workers went “above and beyond”, the circumstances were impossible. He also said the the delay between the notification of the first Covid case at the home on July 9 and test results becoming available on July 17 was a root cause of the failure to contain the outbreak. -With AAP Tishiko King went to COP26 to represent First Nations people, but what she found was a bunch of fossil fuel lobbyists and empty words. You can read her piece about why First Nations need a seat at the table, and why she is not without hope, here: More groundbreaking stuff from the Senate committee ... Here’s a little guide from South Australia about the changes. Part of the changes will also include shortages to isolation requirements, Marshall said. Fully-vaxxed close contacts will be required to quarantine for just seven days. But if you’ve got Covid (or you haven’t had the vaccine), you have to do the full 14. Earlier today, South Australian premier Steven Marshall outlined changes to quarantine and border restrictions from next week. In good news for separated families and state residents stuck outside, fully vaccinated people from New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT will be able to cross into the state from November 23. And state residents will be able to leave the state without having to quarantine on the way back. We know this is going to be a huge relief for families, for businesses,” Marshall said. “Those state borders have been extraordinarily punishing.” New Zealand has reported 173 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, across four regions of the North Island. In a statement, the ministry of health said 163 cases were in Auckland, seven in Waikato, two in Northland and one in the Lakes District. Another case has been discovered in Wairarapa, but was not reported early enough for today’s official tally. “Local public health officials believe this case was found early in the course of their infection. They are carrying out interviews with the person today to identify any close contacts and exposure events,” the ministry said. The death of a woman in her 90s in North Shore Hospital, reported on Sunday, has also been officially added to today’s numbers. There are 90 people in hospital with the virus, and seven are in intensive care. Public health staff are now supporting 4,071 people to isolate at home around Auckland - this includes 1,893 cases. As of Monday, 90% of eligible New Zealanders over 12 years old have had their first dose and 81% are fully vaccinated. The ACT has recorded 10 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19. There are major flood warnings in place for the NSW central west. We have the full story here: D’Ath said border passes would be issued instantly and those outside the state (some of which are residents desperate to return) can start getting the ball rolling. “Today is the day that you can start putting in place your travel arrangements,” Queensland’s health minister said. “So start booking your flights, if you’re fully vaccinated, go get your [Covid-19] test. As soon as it’s negative and your flight’s booked, your border pass will be instant.” Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and health minister Yvette D’Ath addressed media earlier, to talk through the coming changes to border restrictions now the state has hit 70% double vaccination. Fully vaccinated travellers from interstate Covid-19 hotspots can apply for border passes from 5PM today. If you’re coming from a hotspot, don’t pack your holiday bags just yet - there are a number of hoops you need to jump through to get into the state. These include: being double vaxxed, with the second shot at least two weeks before entry, arrival by plane not car, proof of a negative Covid test 72 hours before arrival, a border pass, and the ability to quarantine at home in a place within two hours of the airport. Palaszczuk said if the state kept up the momentum it would smash the 80% target earlier than predicted. “If these rates continue, that is good news because it may even see our [reopening] date in December come a little bit forward as well,” Palaszczuk said. Let me bring you this update from the Senate committee today where they are just releasing the news that water is wet. This morning NSW police said they were searching three new areas for the remains of William Tyrrell. We have the full details here: Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein has announced there are no new Covid-19 cases after one was announced yesterday, but says 250 people have been identified as contacts. Click here for a list of exposure sites. There are currently about 170 Australian citizens and Australian permanent residents in Afghanistan, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade says. The total figure of people in these categories was 286 as of the start of October – but officials this morning gave an update to the Senate inquiry into Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan. Simon Newnham, of Dfat, said there were 87 Australian citizens and 82 Australian permanent residents registered with Dfat as being in Afghanistan as of late last week. He said the department did not hold the number of Australian visa holders currently in Afghanistan, but it continued to assist “a great number” of individuals with respect to consular cases, including to expedite visa applications. Newnham noted such figures were “highly fluid”. He said there were in excess of 4,100 evacuees in the Australian backed evacuation flights in August – but since then the total number of people who had departed Afghanistan since the Taliban takeover had risen to 5,150 - in increase of about 1,000. He said Dfat was focused on flights out of Hamid Karzai International Airport in Kabul, and as that became a more commercially viable option the department expected to see an increase in the number of people departing on flights. He said there had been three flights chartered by the Qatari government with coordination from Dfat, with Australian officials able to secure a number of seats for people on those flights. There had also been individuals presenting at the border, particularly with Pakistan. Newnham reaffirmed the travel advice about the dangers over overland travel in Afghanistan, and the propensity for border crossings to open and close at short notice, but it “is the case that we’re working very much through our embassies in the region, particularly out of Islamabad, to assist those that do present at the border”. There have been just under 900 individuals who’ve been able to cross the border and be able to be assisted by our high commission. The inquiry was told about 80 people with Australian citizenship, permanent residency or visas had arrived in European capital cities. NSW Health is changing the way it reports daily cases because the origins of where each case was acquired can no longer be determined immediately. In NSW 94.2% of people aged 16+ have had one dose of a Covid vaccine and 91.1% of the state (aged 16+) is fully vaccinated. We’ve got a breakdown of the Covid numbers from NSW – the state has recorded 165 new cases of #COVID19 in the 24 hours to 8pm last night and one person has died. There are currently 216 people in hospital and of those, 32 people are in ICU. The total number of cases in NSW since the beginning of the pandemic to 78,367. We’re going to Queensland now, where the border rules will be relaxed from tonight. Border passes will be available to anyone who meets the criteria from 5pm this afternoon. I’ll get you a full rundown of what changes in a minute. The PM is now arguing that manufacturing is central to rebuilding Australia’s economy. That the Liberals have a better track record on ... you guessed it ... jobs. I am just full of optimism about where Australia is and where we are heading, but I have to tell you, manufacturing, which is why we’re here today will play a huge role in Australia’s future. We have a million Australians back working in manufacturing. Under Labor, one in eight manufacturing jobs went. We have restored that and you can see it here in western Sydney, you can see people are back on the tools, in manufacturing jobs occurring right across the country. What’s driving it is lower taxes, we are keeping the pressure down on electricity and energy prices, what’s driving it is getting money into skills, so apprentices can learn what they need, (so) businesses like this can go for another 75 years. Asked about criticisms from ABC chair Ita Buttrose over a senate plan for an inquiry into the broadcaster’s complaints handling process, the PM said: “That’s for the senate.” There is no government agency that is beyond the scrutiny of the Senate. It is a government agency, they have their independence and nobody is questioning that, but they are not above the scrutiny of how they conduct themselves, using taxpayers money from any other government agency. That is business as usual for the Australian Parliament. I don’t know why they would consider themselves an exception to business as usual. And now we are on strong borders ... the PM is asked about the number of illegal fishing boats off the west coast of Australia increasing. In response, Scott Morrison is defending the government’s history of strict border policies. We are not double-minded about that. We do not squirm about this. Australians understand that if they want their borders ... secured, only a Coalition government can give them that confidence. We have the runs on the board. We have the best border protection agencies of anywhere in the world. The PM is saying technologies (that have not been invented yet) are key for their climate policies. What we want to do is ensure that we achieve our emissions reductions by growing our economy and seeing low emissions technologies be more and more cost effective and scalable, not just here in Australia, but around the world. When that is achieved, emissions will reduce. So we’re to see emissions reduced. I am not happy to tell Australians what to do through climate policies. I am not happy to tax Australians on those things. And Australians can have confidence about that. ... those last lines feels a bit like we’ve jumped back to 2013 ... The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is talking about how businesses will lead the Coalition’s climate policy. Our approach going forward to secure our economic recovery is to not tell businesses what to do, not tell customers what to do. Our plan is to ensure they can take the lead. The Labor Party lost telling people what to do and the only thing they love more than that is taxing them. Good morning team Guardian. This is Cait, I will be taking you through the rest of today’s news. Prime minister Scott Morrison is up now. NSW police have new evidence in the case of missing boy William Tyrrell. A new search will begin on Tuesday around Benaroon Drive, Kendall, where William vanished in 2014. Detective chief superintendent Darren Bennett said: This activity is in response to evidence we have obtained in the course of the investigation, not speculative in any way ... We are very hopeful we can bring this matter to some sort of conclusion. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has just outlined changes to home quarantine. In a press conference she said the state is ahead of its vaccination targets so it might open up earlier: We’ve got some new guidelines and rules coming in now, with having reached that first great milestone of 70% double vaccinated. So now we will be welcoming people ... who are fully vaccinated to come into Queensland and home quarantine for 14 days if they produce that negative test. More details to come! There will be no more statewide Covid lockdowns in South Australia, premier Steven Marshall has promised, as the state plans to open its borders. He said: In the past, we’ve had to take a pretty heavy-handed approach, quite frankly, because a single case could set off a cluster which would lock down our state. As of next Tuesday, we will no longer have the threat of a whole-of-state lockdown. Flashback! Remember when Labor senator Penny Wong wept with joy after she heard the results of the same-sex marriage vote? Katharine Murphy wrote at the time that it was “agony” for Wong to be so publicly vulnerable. It was four years ago today. Enjoy! A broken dream: outer Melbourne has affordable houses but no train or school. In the first of a short series on Australian housing, Elias Visontay examines how Victoria’s planning system is failing residents and the environment: Today’s statistics are in for Victoria – 860 new Covid cases and five more deaths. The vaccination rate for those aged 12 and over is at 87%. NSW, meanwhile, reports 165 new cases and one death. And a cracking 91.1% of those over 16 are double dosed. In case you missed it, health minister Greg Hunt confirmed at the weekend that under-12s will have to wait until next year to get the jab: Here’s some more information on those floods threatening to hit central west NSW – look out for an evacuation text from the SES if you’re in the danger zone: Cop26 failed in a bid to phase out coal, news that had its president Alok Sharma close to tears. But not everyone’s disappointed – nationals senator Matt Canavan has declared it a great win for Australia’s mining industry. He told the Nine Network: Given the fact that the agreement did not say that coal needs to be phased down or taken out, it is a big green light for us to build more coalmines. South Australia is set to welcome the world - and Covid - in ... There’s a push on for governments to set a date to ban cigarettes sales through retailers (look out for freedom protesters adding this to their grab bag of complaints). Experts say the public health initiatives are not enough and that “cigarettes do not meet modern consumer product safety standards”, medical editor Melissa Davey writes: More here from ABC chair Ita Buttrose on Liberal senator Andrew Bragg’s plan for a senate inquiry into the ABC... Taxpayers are paying at least $59m for major government advertising campaigns to run in the lead-up to the 2022 election. The campaigns span the topics of cybercrime and online safety, the jobtrainer program, domestic violence, recruiting a carer workforce and, most controversially, climate change, as the government seeks to explain its road to Damascus conversion on the net zero by 2050 target. Paul Karp has broken it all down for you here: More on the ABC saga – the Greens have called it an “abuse of process”. Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said the Greens would “move to stop it” when the Senate sits next week: The Morrison government has attacked the ABC relentlessly for eight years now, this is just another one of their witch hunts. ABC chair Ita Buttrose has doubled down on her attacks on a Senate inquiry into the broadcaster’s complaints handling process. She has told ABC’s Radio National the relationship with the federal government is “strained”. Liberal senator Andrew Bragg announced the inquiry despite an independent review already under way. At the weekend Buttrose accused the federal government of “political interference”. She said she spoke to communications minister Paul Fletcher on Friday and says because the Senate is a “law unto itself” not even the relevant minister can intervene. She wants the inquiry terminated or at least paused until the existing inquiry is finished, saying: We are not the enemy. Read the original story here: Energy minister Angus Taylor says the federal government will make its “best efforts” to keep global warming to 1.5C. He told ABC’s Radio National this morning that the government is “confident” it will meet its emissions targets ... ... without phasing out coal. A change in Cop26 phrasing that was meant to ring the “death knell” for coal was downgraded from phasing it “out” to phasing it “down”. Under questioning from Fran Kelly, Taylor said Australia’s coal exports “will be driven by customer demand”, not government policy. Good morning, everyone. Hope you all had a “do nothing” weekend and are looking forward to a “can do” Monday. It’s Tory Shepherd here, with one eye on the news and one eye on the doggo who is in the Bucket O Shame thanks to a grass seed in the paw. Cop26 is over but there are plenty of lingering questions for the federal government. Adam Morton has put “Will Australia increase its 2030 emissions target?” at the top of his list. (At the weekend Australia was named the conference’s “colossal fossil” for its contributions.) And the community of Forbes in central west New South Wales is on high alert after heavy rain. Authorities are set to decide whether to evacuate residents today and are forecasting major flooding. More on that to come ... On Covid, 70% of Queenslanders 16 and older are now double dosed, so some restrictions will ease in the sunshine state. The deadline for Victorian aged care staff to be fully vaccinated is today, and the NSW government says elective surgery will return to full capacity today. Grab another coffee and stick with us as the day unfolds.For a while back there, the Chippendales were inescapable. Buffed and sheened to a high polish, strutting around in nothing but bowties and cuffs like the oblivious victims of the world’s smartest tuxedo thieves, the male stripping troupe seemed unstoppable. Formed in 1979, in just a few short years they went from weekday filler act in a failing bar to globe-straddling success story. But then it all went wrong. While they are still technically a going concern – the website for their sole remaining Las Vegas act promises a “mantastic, sex-god, abs party”, while their online store offers everything from Santa hats to dildos – public interest has long since waned. What began as a genuinely electrifying form of entertainment, offering women the same thrills that men had taken for granted for centuries, has now become kitschy and quaint; a remnant of a world that has long since ceased to be. However, that doesn’t mean the Chippendales aren’t big business. At the start of the year, Gimlet Media released a podcast series entitled Welcome to Your Fantasy, which put their success into a genuinely berserk context. If you listened, you’ll know that the group eventually descended into chaos as its founder got caught up in an orgy of racketeering, arson and murder. Soon after, a Hulu TV series, Immigrant, was announced, with Kumail Nanjiani set to play its founder, Somen “Steve” Banerjee. While that series is still in development, we now have Curse of the Chippendales, a Discovery+ series available to watch in the UK on Amazon Prime. Suddenly anybody with a passing interest in the rise and fall of one specific male stripper troupe finds themselves spoilt for choice. And little wonder, because the story of the Chippendales is jaw-dropping. Across four episodes, Curse of the Chippendales unfolds like a pacy airport paperback. There is sex. There are drugs. There are mullets. There are men in tiny pants thrusting their genitals into bowler hats. There is success that comes so quickly that nobody involved quite knows how to cope with it. And then, at the end, there is tragedy piled on tragedy. It’s like watching The Godfather, if the cast of The Godfather had just painted themselves orange and developed a crippling addiction to Veet. The series captures the sheer giddy hysteria of early Chippendale shows, where buffed-up men with WWE haircuts would bask in the adulation of women who, just a few years before, were in thrall to Beatlemania. At the outset, the enterprise is presented to viewers as fun and frothy. Then we cut to the interviewees, who sit starkly before harsh lights, their voices ruined by decades of chain-smoking. These people, you quickly figure out, have seen things. They chased the euphoria of the early days a little too hard, and their bodies have been struggling to catch up ever since. It’s a bittersweet hint of what is to come. Because, halfway through the season’s four episodes, you can see the success of the Chippendales start to gallop out of control. The bigger they get, the more opposition they encounter. Religious groups start to stage protests. Clubs are firebombed. Lawsuits pile up, accusations of racism are flung around. And, internally, the two men in charge lock themselves into a battle for total control of the group. Before long, one of them is dead. At this point, Curse of the Chippendales becomes a full-on true crime documentary. I’ll refrain from too many spoilers, even though they are all widely available to anyone with an internet connection, but the final episode takes the form of a crushing, relentless police procedural as the authorities figure out what has been going on behind the scenes. You can see why Immigrant was rushed to series so quickly with source material like this. It will almost certainly be a combination of GLOW and American Crime Story, and it has the potential to be very good indeed. More than anything, though, Curse of the Chippendales is a neat reminder that the act wasn’t quite as kitsch as you remember. Look anywhere in 2021 – Love Island, Instagram, the Marvel Cinematic Universe – and you’ll see that society has adopted the group’s aesthetic wholesale. The haircuts might have changed, but the bodies – all tanned and muscular and hairless – have become mainstream. Three decades ago the only way to experience this sort of obsessively honed male body was to rock up to a hen party where a Magnum PI lookalike would jackhammer his crotch at you. Now even Ant-Man looks like a Chippendale. There’s a legacy if ever you saw one. Curse of the Chippendales is on Amazon Prime now; Welcome to Your Fantasy is available on all podcast platforms • This article was amended on 16 November 2021. An earlier version incorrectly linked the podcast Welcome to Your Fantasy to the Hulu series Immigrant.In the pitch dark, Jason Bullard adroitly shoulders his rifle and levels it at the object. “That looks like one!” he mutters. It turns out to be a fuse box. Another candidate, again aimed at with the gun, reveals itself as a rock. In this town besieged by armadillos, anything with a passing similarity to the armored nemesis is under suspicion. Bullard, an affable man in a camouflaged shirt, with a sonorous voice and prodigious beard, has rapidly gone from never seeing an armadillo in his bucolic corner of western North Carolina to killing 15 of them last year. In just the last two weeks, he has dispatched eight of the animals. Homeowners, perturbed at their lawns being torn up by the newly arrived mammals, initially deputized Bullard as a sort of armadillo bounty hunter, handing him $100 for every dead carcass he produced. But armadillos have wreaked such horticultural havoc that dozens of people in and around Sapphire, North Carolina, now have Bullard on a retainer, allowing him to prowl around their properties at night, armed, in the hope of shooting the culprits. The task has been learned hastily on the job. The standard .22 rifles Bullard used on the first armadillos didn’t seem to kill them outright. One of the creatures bounded away in a freakish, kangaroo-like hop, leaving an astonished Bullard flailing. The armadillos give off a sort of loamy grey color at night, a shone light absorbed by their bodies, rather than reflected in their eyes. “It’s like hunting aliens,” said Bullard, who is more used to hunting feral pigs. “We know nothing about them. We can’t seem to kill them easily. They show up unexpectedly. And their numbers have just exploded.” ••• To spot armadillos in North Carolina was, at first, incongruous. The creature has been Texas’s state mammal for more than two decades, used to the baking heat of the dry, flat state. There, they’re regularly seen as roadkill or in small-scale racing events where they are made to scurry down a 40ft track. Armadillo meat is consumed in Central America, and to a lesser extent in the US, where it was called “poor man’s pork” in Depression-era Texas and has been tainted by the species’ connection to leprosy. Sapphire, meanwhile, is nestled 800 miles and worlds away in the soaring Blue Ridge Mountains. It is part of a scenic plateau that gets so much precipitation that it has developed a temperate rainforest, with the ground and rocks draped in lush mosses amid towering fir and spruce. In autumn, the area is a gorgeous riot of red and orange fall hues. The area even has a small ski resort. When the first armadillo was sighted here in 2019, Bullard got a call. “I just didn’t believe it,” he said. “I thought the woman had a possum and a drinking problem.” But within a year, Bullard was spending his nights at the local golf course, speeding from hole to hole on a golf cart, killing armadillos on the greens like a sort of cross between Tiger Woods and Davy Crockett. The Sapphire valley is the latest place to witness the seemingly relentless northward march of a species that originated in South America, but is now pushing toward the north-east of the US. “It’s only a matter of time before we see range expansions into other states,” said Colleen Olfenbuttel, furbearer biologist at the North Carolina wildlife resources commission. The agency confirmed the first armadillo in North Carolina in 2007 but numbers have rocketed in the western half of the state since 2019. “It’s challenging to deal with armadillo damage. They are hard to trap and I don’t know if there’s a repellent for them,” said Olfenbuttel. “I’m as curious as anyone as to where they will pop up next.” ••• The nine-banded armadillo – there are 20 different species, only the three-banded variety can roll itself into a ball – made its way north from Mexico to the US through human intervention and its own ingenuity by the late 19th century. The animals, known for their keratin armored shells, travel unhindered by potential predators. A booming reproduction rate that sees females give birth to quadruplets multiple times also helps their population’s growth. An emerging theory for this advance of armadillos is the climate crisis. The animals dislike freezing conditions and global heating is making winters milder, turning northern parts of the US more armadillo-friendly. Around Sapphire, the armadillos happily root around in the dirt with their snouts and claws, feasting on insects at elevations above 4,000ft. “We just don’t have those really cold winters any more and I’m sure that’s helped them,” said Olfenbuttel. The armadillos have made it into Missouri, Iowa and even the southern reaches of Nebraska. Barriers such as rivers aren’t a problem – the animals can hold their breath for up to six minutes and walk on the riverbed, or even inflate their intestines to float across to the other side. “As it warms up it is helping them”, said Lynn Robbins, a veteran biologist at Missouri State University, who was one of the first people to study armadillos in that state. “As long they have water and places to dig up, they can move in. But people are still astounded to see them.” Robbins said he has had “a lot of fun” trying to catch the armadillos for research, due to their surprising speed. The odd hopping seen by Bullard comes from an armadillo reflex to jump around 3ft in the air when under threat – useful when in the clutches of a bear, less so when a car is approaching. “If you’re quiet, you can get close and grab them by the tail,” said Robbins. “They are very strong. Sometimes they will helpfully just jump up into your arms, and then you can put them straight into a bag.” In March 2019, just as North Carolina’s armadillo sightings were starting to climb, officials in Virginia got a call from a baffled resident from Buchanan county, in the western part of the state. After noticing cone-shaped holes in her garden, the woman took photos of the first live armadillo documented in Virginia. “It was a complete shock,” said Nancy Moncrief, curator of mammalogy at Virginia Museum of Natural History. “My colleague said it had probably come from eastern Kentucky and I said ‘what are they doing in Kentucky?’ My next question was ‘can we get a dead one and put it in my museum collection?’” Within a few months Moncrief had her wish, when a dog fatally attacked an armadillo close to the initial sighting. The dead animal was brought into the museum and its stored shell and skeleton form what is the first official specimen of the species in Virginia. “We put it on Facebook and people were like ‘holy cow!’” said Moncrief. She suspects the animals are following food-rich river valleys along the Appalachians and will spread across Virginia in time. Armadillos may soon be marching on the White House, to New York, and beyond. “They are just going to keep snuffling northward,” Moncrief said. ••• Back in Sapphire, Bullard undertakes his nightly patrols of clients’ properties, circling large converted farmhouses and barns with an air rifle. Armadillos have poor eyesight but a keen sense of hearing, so Bullard stealthily sweeps the area with a heat-sensing scope to pick up patches of body heat he can sneak up on. “Look at this damage, the yard has been hammered,” he whispers, looking at turf that looks like it has been torn up by dozens of tent pegs. Bullard has a dog that helps track down armadillos, but the canine has been left at home this time and in his absence, Bullard is drawing a blank. “They can roam a range of 25 acres and they are the size of a football, and you have to find that in the dark,” he said. “I have to manage expectations with homeowners.” Bullard dislikes what he considers unethical leg-hold traps, but on a confirmed armadillo burrow – they dig a hole a few feet in depth in the ground to hide in – he does put box traps that capture the animals alive before he kills them. People in the region also employ Bullard to kill feral pigs, beavers, skunks and even otters – they eat the fish that have been added to lakes for recreational fishing – as well as the armadillos. Wild animals live alongside us until we ruthlessly decide to unilaterally change the rules once they unknowingly cross some sort of line, such as altering the aesthetics of our gardens or simply getting in the way of our fun. The armadillos’ epic story of survival may lead it to merely being added to the list of annoying pests. “There’s no malice on my part and there’s no malice on the animal’s part,” Bullard said. “They aren’t doing anything wrong, they are just trying to eat and survive. But they are causing damage, so we have to remove them.”For many in the west, Fyodor Dostoevsky is the most “Russian” of Russian authors. His work teems with holy fools, holy prostitutes, nihilists and revolutionaries. Crime and Punishment, his best-known novel, radiates a dark chaos and apocalyptic sensibility. Its murderous antihero, Raskolnikov (from the Russian raskolnik, “dissenter”), embodies a violent ideology of redemption through suffering that Vladimir Nabokov, for one, found distasteful. (“Dostoevsky is a third-rate writer and his fame is incomprehensible,” he judged.) For all that, Dostoevsky remains a quasi-divine figure in Russia. His Slavophile bias and Orthodox-heavy chauvinism endeared him to Stalin’s propagandists, who tailored his image to fit Soviet ideology. He is a difficult quarry for biographers, though. With his appetite for affliction and self-torturing asceticism, he was a casebook of neuroses. Joseph Frank’s celebrated five-volume biography, published between 1976 and 2002, devoted more than 2,500 pages to the life of a man who was dead at the age of 59 from untreated epilepsy and a gambling addiction (also untreated). Rowan Williams’s scholarly Dostoevsky: Language, Faith and Fiction concentrated instead on the novelist’s tormented Christian messianism. The radical politics and anti-tsarist personalities that fed into Crime and Punishment are the subject of Kevin Birmingham’s excellent biographical study, The Sinner and the Saint. As Birmingham shows, Dostoevsky was exposed at an early age to tragedy when, in 1839, his landowning father was murdered by his own serfs. Unsurprisingly, Dostoevsky was left with a bewildered awareness of human cruelty. Later, inspired by a reading of the gospels, he espoused a proto-Soviet socialism that sought to abolish serfdom and return Russia to a state of original Slav holiness. In St Petersburg in the 1840s, he fell in with a circle of intellectuals who preached French utopian politics and the redemptive possibilities (as they saw it) inherent in the Russian peasant soul. Tsar Nicholas I’s secret police were watching: opposing serfdom was a “clear threat to the throne”, Birmingham writes. In 1849 Dostoevsky and his co-conspirators were arrested and interrogated by General Nabokov, the great-great-uncle of the novelist. Subjected to a gruesome mock execution, the 28-year-old graduate engineer was afterwards deported to Siberia. His four years of hard labour in the “Asian side” of the Ural mountains convinced Dostoevsky more than ever that Christ was alive in Russian lands. Even the most degraded of convicts showed a readiness for penance and redemption, Birmingham suggests. The book that emerged from Dostoevsky’s Siberian ordeal, The House of the Dead, pretty well created the gulag genre in Russia and remains a work of unsparing lucidity and documentary realism. (“I don’t know a better book in all modern literature,” Tolstoy enthused.) Released from Siberia, Dostoevsky seemed to court disaster and illness. Epilepsy was associated in the popular mind with demonic possession and visitations from the beyond. It left Dostoevsky in permanent dread of the next convulsive onset. His growing discontent with the west stemmed in part from its betrayal (as he saw it) of Russia’s Christian cause in the 1854-6 Crimean war. France and Britain had sided with the Ottomans against Russia to defend their imperial interests and thus ensured the “crucifixion of the Russian Christ”. Dostoevsky’s anxiety about national character – what does it mean to be Russian? Are Russians even European? – contained a streak of xenophobia and antisemitism that surfaced during the trips he took abroad in the 1860s to avoid gambling debts back home. Mid-Victorian London represented the “soullessness” and “hard-nosed mercantilism” of capitalist western life; Crystal Palace appalled Dostoevsky with its thousands of tonnes of glass and iron – “like something out of Babylon”. Crime and Punishment, published in instalments in St Petersburg in 1866, was partly inspired by the sensationalist story of Pierre François Lacenaire, a Parisian murderer-poet whose trial Dostoevsky followed avidly. Lacenaire’s influence on the creation of Raskolnikov had been explored by Frank, but Birmingham goes further and braids Lacenaire’s story with that of Dostoevsky. A dandified fop, Lacenaire set French society ablaze with his catalogue of gratuitous, unmotivated crimes. He appeared to kill simply in order to act (or perhaps to alleviate boredom). His motiveless murders would be mirrored in Raskolnikov’s axing to death of an old moneylender and her sister. Nothing – no inkling of anger, or rage, or hatred – apparently has the power to shake Dostoevsky’s existentially disaffected creation. The notion that Raskolnikov is moved to repent and find God is, Birmingham writes, one of the aspects that “nearly everyone gets wrong about Crime and Punishment”. Raskolnikov does eventually confess to his crimes, but without obvious remorse. Killing for the nihilist sake of killing is the theme that runs like the black line in a lobster through Crime and Punishment and behind it all lay the bizarre figure of Lacenaire. In pungent, well-researched pages, Birmingham reveals the “secret” background behind Dostoevsky’s great murder novel – the gambling debts, the epileptic seizures, the Tsarist police surveillance. Crime and Punishment might have been accused of promoting nihilism and even tsaricide (an attempt was made on Tsar Alexander II’s life just as a chapter went to press). Fortunately for us, it was not successful. A model of luminous exposition and literary detection, The Sinner and the Saint can be recommended to anyone interested in the dark twisted genius of “Dusty”, as Nabokov (with a touch of mockery) nicknamed the ill-fated Russian maestro. The Sinner and the Saint: Dostoevsky, a Crime and Its Punishment by Kevin Birmingham is published by Allen Lane (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply“It’s one of the great tropes of British drama: the manor house, on a dark and stormy night.” Moira Buffini has a naturally urgent, magnetic storytelling style. She has taken a break from rehearsals to talk about Manor, her new play opening at London’s National Theatre this week. “Who have you got in the manor house?” she continues. “The lady of the manor, the family. It starts with the family. There’s always a vicar. There’s always some kind of doctor. Then there are the uninvited guests, the strangers. So it’s playful. There has to be something playful about a play.” It is 9am in a faceless London hotel, but atmospherically, we are in her manor house, the ebbing power of her feckless elite imperilled by encroaching fascists, all of them squabbling for a prize that may or may not survive the climate crisis. And yes: there’s also a vicar. It is a play for our time, weaving together the disparate threads of divided politics, creeping authoritarianism and fear of the future into something intricately crafted and extraordinarily rich. “These were the anxieties that were keeping me awake at night,” she says. “You write plays because you can’t sleep at night; it’s the act of writing the play that enables you to sleep. It gives somewhere for all of this churning anger, rage, incomprehension and worry to go.” Buffini, 56, first broke through with Gabriel, in 1997. That play was a very similar sort of storytelling to Manor and, at that time, unconventional. Playwrights were assuming rock star status in the 90s – think Mark Ravenhill and the late Sarah Kane – and the expectation was that new work would be contemporary, radical and genre-smashing. Buffini arrived with this traditional, tightly crafted, second world war Guernsey-set play about a Nazi. It is an idea she returns to often: “What well-made plays do is put every single character through a grinder,” she says. “The structure does that. And you won’t get a good ending unless the characters go through a grinder.” Even while she was educated at Goldsmiths in south London – which had just spawned a new movement of Young British Artists, as well as Britpop’s prime movers Blur – she “never felt in with the racy crowd”, Buffini says. She wasn’t the kind of person the Royal Court was interested in, she recalls, situating herself as an outsider to the prevailing experimental mood, “although Ravenhill, Anthony Neilson, all these people, I’m really fond of. And here we all are, now, the shaggy lions of the business. Old, falling apart at the seams; I don’t even know if you can call us mid-career any more.” Buffini wrote Dinner, an absolute soaraway hit, also for the National, when she was heavily pregnant with her daughter in 2002, and – incredibly – by the time she was starting rehearsals, had a six-week old son (her kids are 14 months apart). It wasn’t the pregnancy, though, that made her creativity explode. It is quite typical of her process: when the structure is perfect, the play, she insists, more or less writes itself. She describes her characters as “just arriving on the page”, and herself as the writer, “struggling to keep up with what the character’s saying, struggling to write the scene down fast enough”. Dinner was “a table, surrounded by darkness. There was nothing but this table in the world.” Six guests, two in a desperately unhappy marriage, a waiter, a starter, a main course, a dessert; very simple, extraordinarily successful. “They had to put on an extra show because the cast couldn’t get their friends in,” she says. “I remember standing outside with my tiny newborn and my big, just walking, one-year-old, watching all Harriet Walter’s friends – Kenneth Branagh! – go in, it was like an out-of‑body experience. I couldn’t go in because I had the double buggy.” She didn’t feel thwarted by the timing of her family planning; she thinks of it as a boon: “There’s nothing more tragically comical than the narcissist playwright. It’s a thing I’ve always dreaded. I’d die with shame. But you can’t become that when you’ve got a one-year-old whose nappy needs changing and a newborn who’s just puked. Real life is real life.” Manor, too, starts with a couple who absolutely loathe one another, having an extremely credible argument. “Yes, it’s funny, isn’t it? I centre on these hideous marriages, and my husband is the loveliest man in the world. I sometimes wonder why there’s such an extremity to my work, when in my life, I’m constantly seeking calm waters. I’m not a thrill seeker at all.” Her sister, Fiona Buffini, directed Dinner and is also directing Manor. “I love watching her in a rehearsal room. There’s so much conversation we don’t need to have.” If not saccharine, Buffini can seem like an extremely idealised human being. When she was four, her father died, leaving her mother to bring up three daughters (even closer in age than her own children). She seems to possess that distinctive reverence for harmony that is common to people who have been bereaved young. There are, of course, those too young to remember what a massive deal it would have been to see Branagh walking into a play in broad daylight. Those audiences are more likely to know of Buffini from Harlots, a big-budget TV period drama about brothel workers, of which she was showrunner from 2017 to 2020. “I thought: let’s have a world where men wear yellow suits and shoes with bows. Let’s see what that world shows us about our own,” she says. “There’s something about sex work which has changed very little. Men pay women for sex, so let’s have a look at that. The world we chose allowed us to do it in such a way that made it palatable, that made it richly dramatic, and that allowed those women an agency that I think, with all the cacophony of the present, it would have been harder to see.” Her screenwriting career, for both film and TV, has been prolific, particularly in the past decade – Tamara Drewe, the BBC’s Jane Eyre, Netflix’s Sutton Hoo excavation drama The Dig – and she says “I’ve got friends who work in telly, who go: ‘Why do you do theatre? It’s so elitist.’ And yet, when I was young, plays meant such a lot. The fact that you could have a worldview: I didn’t get that from philosophy or politics, I got that from plays, in a real and visceral way. They are a communal experience, both the act of making and the act of watching them.” I wonder whether she would have been surprised, if someone had told her at the beginning of her career, that by 2021 the anxieties she was writing out of her system in plays such a Manor would be the creep of fascism and the end of the world. “Well, at the beginning of the 90s I had a job as a drama teacher in Holloway prison, and what kept me awake at night was the criminal justice system, all this powerful injustice that fed into it. So no, I don’t think I would have been surprised that things turned out quite badly.” Manor is at the National Theatre: Lyttelton, London, Tue to 1 January.Australia’s deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has mocked the British chair of the UN climate summit for becoming emotional about the watering down of language on coal, and for attempting to “shut down industries in other people’s countries”. With the Australian government under pressure for first agreeing to a communique that flagged reviewing the current 2030 target before the Cop27 in Egypt – only to rule that same prospect out a few hours later – Barnaby Joyce on Monday went on the political offensive. Joyce, the leader of the junior party in Australia’s Coalition government, ridiculed Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister who chaired Cop26 in Glasgow, for telling vulnerable nations on Saturday he was “deeply sorry” for the way the process had unfolded. One of the biggest disagreements in the final hours of Cop26 was over the wording of an intention to abandon coal, which was watered down from a “phase-out” to a “phase-down” at the urging of India and China. Joyce told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation on Monday the Australian government had done a “great job” to protect coalminers’ jobs before proceeding to mock Sharma. “You know, it annoys me … what’s the guy’s name? Was it the chairman Sharma in Glasgow,” Joyce said to the ABC. “He was with his gavel and oh, I’m almost crying, I can’t do this.” The Australian political leader also contended Sharma had displayed a double standard. “He wants to shut down our coal industry but he never talked about shutting down the oilfields in the North Sea, Brent oil, you know he doesn’t want to shut that down.” “He wants to shut down industries in other people’s countries, not in his country.” Boris Johnson’s conservative government announced earlier this year it would legislate a pledge to cut emissions by 78% by 2035 compared to 1990 levels. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Sharma attracted a round of applause on Saturday in the closing stages of Cop26. His voice breaking with emotion after hearing from vulnerable nations which expressed their anger over the changes to the text, Sharma said: “May I just say to all delegates: I apologise for the way this process has unfolded and I am deeply sorry. I also understand the deep disappointment, but I think as you have noted, it’s also vital that we protect this package.” But with a national election looming in Australia early next year, Joyce attempted to associate Sharma with “all the corporate billionaires and all the movie stars” who want to “shut down our industries”. When the interviewer, Patricia Karvelas, suggested that Joyce was mocking the Cop26 chairman, he rejected that interpretation. “No, I’m cynical, cynical, cynical,” Joyce said. Australia was the only major developed country that refused to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets at the Cop26 in Glasgow. The Morrison government has faced sustained pressure from allies, including the UK, to increase the current commitment. Ahead of the Glasgow summit, Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison had sounded out internal agreement for an increase in the current 2030 target, but the sortie was vetoed by Joyce. Morrison instead used his national statement at the Cop26 to emphasise that Australia will probably overachieve on its 2030 emissions reduction target in an effort to blunt international criticism about his government’s lack of climate ambition. While Australia supported language in the Glasgow communique pointing to a review of the 2030 target, in a statement issued in Australia shortly after the summit finished, ministers Marise Payne and Angus Taylor suggested the Coalition had no plans to ratchet up ambition. The statement said Australia’s 2030 target was “fixed”. The British Labour shadow climate change minister, Matthew Pennybrook, said on Twitter it was “deplorable” that the Australian government had declared its “feeble target” fixed so soon after approving a request that parties return next year with stronger 2030 climate targets. Joyce – who campaigned against the former Labor government’s now abolished carbon price by claiming it may cause lamb roasts to rise to $100, and is already campaigning in coal seats ahead of next year’s election – also rejected claims that coal-fired power was on the way out as a consequence of the Glasgow summit. “I’ve heard so many of these predictions over so many years,” Joyce said. He also distanced his party from Australia’s support for the final communique. Joyce said he and the Nationals didn’t “sign” it even though the Liberals govern in coalition with the Nationals. Joyce played down the idea of Australia revisiting its targets at next year’s Cop, saying that would be another “talkfest”. “They can go back and if they want to talk about something and have another talk fest, knock yourself out, another talkfest somewhere else, have all the movie stars come back and all the billionaires and all the corporate jets.”The outsourcing company Serco said has profits will be higher than expected in 2021 owing to greater demand from the UK government for its Covid-19 services, including test and trace. Serco raised its full-year revenue guidance from £4.3bn to £4.4bn on Monday, helping underlying profits rise to at least £225m, up from previous forecasts of £200m. The Hampshire-based company said the uplift could be explained by the fact the volume of its Covid-related work in the UK and Australia “has been higher and continued for longer than we anticipated”. Serco runs large parts of the UK’s largely privatised test-and-trace service, which is labelled NHS test and trace. The firm runs a fifth of Covid-19 testing sites and half the tier 3 contact tracers, who are mostly required to phone the contacts of people who have tested positive. That work was extended in June, when the company won a £322m contract to keep Covid-19 test centres running in England and Northern Ireland for another 12 months, with an option to add another six more. In an update on Monday, Serco said immigration-related contracts, particularly in the UK and Australia, had performed better than expected, as had healthcare insurance services in the US after Joe Biden’s administration extended the enrolment period for registering for subsidised health insurance coverage until mid-August. Serco provides border control and immigration services in the UK, which includes running the controversial Yarl’s Wood immigration removal centre in Bedfordshire. However, Serco warned that the driving forces behind its stronger-than-expected performance were unlikely to last. “We expect 2022 to see much lower demand for Covid-19 related services, partially offset by the impact of new work secured in 2021 and growth in our core non-Covid-19 related business,” the company said. The outsourcing firm announced it would be spending £10m on additional payments for its 52,000 staff – worth £100 each – in response to their work during the pandemic, and would make a one-off contribution worth £4.8m to its people fund to help struggling employees. Serco’s shares rose more than 2% on Monday to about 134p.“I feel I’m too sensitive for this world,” says Lena, who can’t cope with crowds or bright lights. Melissa gets her husband to watch films before her to see if she will be able to handle any violence, gore or scariness. When their grownup children bring the grandchildren round, she has to retreat to another room because their “loud laughter, the talking over each other, their swearing and their smells overwhelm me”. Lucia says she can feel “each and every fibre of her clothes” and it feels very ticklish or uncomfortable at times. Sometimes, she has to stop during sex with her partner because it becomes “too ticklish”. Lena, Melissa and Lucia would all describe themselves as highly sensitive, a label that could be applied to up to 20% of us, according to the US-based psychologist Elaine Aron, who started studying high sensitivity in the early 90s, and published her influential book The Highly Sensitive Person in 1996. “When these people have information coming in, they process it much more deeply and more elaborately,” explains Genevieve von Lob, a clinical psychologist who works with many highly sensitive people, especially children. “They tend to take in much more information from lots of different kinds of stimuli. And then they’re processing it more deeply than a non-sensitive person – and because they’re taking in so much at once they can get much more overstimulated, overaroused and overwhelmed.” When the Guardian asked readers to share their experiences of high sensitivity, more than 300 people responded. Over some 40,000 words, they wrote about feeling drained by their ability to tune into other people’s emotions, or exhausted from working in open-plan offices or a visit to the supermarket. It was common to report crying at emotional adverts, but also to be dismayed and deeply affected by political events. “I found austerity horrifying,” writes one. “I work in a school that has been directly impacted by cuts. I teach children who are experiencing the effects of neglected public services and parents who are financially unstable. If poverty continues to rise in this country, I know I will be spending a lot more time crying in my classroom.” Several people reported wearing headphones “to block out the world”, and avoiding social media lest a cross word ruin their day, or week. Criticism at work can stay with them for years, other people’s perfume feels like an assault and relationships can be tricky. “It is difficult to explain to someone why the noise and light of the television in the morning feels like being punched in the face, or why the texture of their favourite scratchy blanket makes me want to cry, without sounding like an insane person,” wrote one woman. “I wish I were not a highly sensitive person – it has made my life much more difficult.” Others remembered being told to “toughen up” as a child, or had lived for decades with the feeling there was something wrong with them. As a result, a lot of highly sensitive people have low self-esteem, von Lob says. “Often they might have been bullied at school. Society tends to view it as a weakness, and they can get these labels like ‘fragile’ or ‘overemotional’. I think people who are highly sensitive can often feel lonely and misunderstood, and not normal. The world feels too harsh, too loud for them. It’s not surprising that they struggle to accept themselves and they struggle to value their gifts because of the messages they have received.” But while our noisy, frenetic, always-on world can be an unforgiving place, there is some hope. Our understanding of what it means to be highly sensitive and how to cope with the unpleasant side-effects is increasing. Self-acceptance is key, says von Lob. High sensitivity is innate, and not something to be diagnosed or “treated”, though people can learn coping mechanisms for when life becomes overwhelming. “I can’t emphasise enough how much you need unstructured downtime – plenty of sleep and rest,” says von Lob. The highly sensitive “need to pace themselves. Because they take in so much more and they have more intense emotions, they need time to process the emotions in their body, so movement can be really helpful – walks, or kickboxing or dance or yoga, whatever type of movement they enjoy. Because they’re people who are deep thinkers, they’ve got very rich inner worlds, and it’s really important for them to have those sort of meaningful, deeper connections in relationships.” Time spent in nature can be helpful, she adds. “And simplifying life, so having less clutter around, less of a busy schedule. That’s why they work well with self-employment or being able to structure their own work day.” It is important, she says, not to compare yourself with other people, “because if you’re comparing yourself with the mainstream world of the non-sensitive, you’re never going to be able to do what they do, but you’ve got your unique strengths”. Because being highly sensitive is a strength – or a “superpower”, as more than one respondent put it. “The advantages are that it makes me a really good listener, good at conversation,” says Samira. “I’m able to find underlying meanings easily, I’m very intuitive and I have a rich inner life with a strong emotional vocabulary.” Others report hearing nuances in music that the average person might miss, or being deeply empathetic with friends. Highly sensitive people tend to notice things in the environment that may pass others by, and get more from the arts. Louise, a researcher, grew up believing it was “wrong” to be so sensitive. It was only in her 30s, when she was unhappy in her job, that she went on a sculpture holiday and reconnected with her love of art. “That holiday completely changed me – I met similarly sensitive people and for the first time realised that being sensitive was OK. The people I met there didn’t think being ‘soft’ was bad, and were comfortable discussing their own sensitivity, their ability to find joy in beautiful things, to feel deeply about the world around them,” she says. “Meeting people who embraced their quiet, joyful natures was transforming and I came back embracing my own sensitivity. I started reading and creating again and thought carefully about my career and how it failed to nurture me. I gave myself permission to be the sensitive person I really was.” She started a PhD, and: “Several years later, my life is transformed. My sensitivity has become my strength and it is the reason for the success of my research, which involves working with vulnerable people. My work is reliant on deep thinking and deep human connection. I am open about my need for a quiet office and my employers have been brilliant, understanding the impact of overstimulation in larger offices. I wish I had realised earlier in my life that being highly sensitive could be a strength, rather than a weakness.” There has been a question over whether high sensitivity is a sign of autism, but Michael Pluess, professor of developmental psychology and sensitivity researcher at Queen Mary University of London, says that, although both feature a more responsive sensory system, “sensitivity and autism are probably two fairly separate things” (highly sensitive children may originally be diagnosed as having autism spectrum disorder). Similarly, it’s not about being an introvert, as there are extroverts who are also highly sensitive. Aron’s work is around the idea that sensitivity is a personality trait, although other researchers come at it from a biological or physiological perspective. Pluess doesn’t like the term “highly sensitive personality”; he prefers to think of sensitivity as a continuum. “Everyone is sensitive – we would not be able to survive without being sensitive to the environment – but some people are more sensitive than others, and having a higher sensitivity has benefits and also challenges.” It’s about knowing that being highly sensitive is not a weakness, says von Lob. In fact, it might be exactly what we need, if only society could recognise and nurture people with these traits. There are thought to be as many men as women who have high sensitivity, but for cultural reasons to do with ideas of “masculinity” these traits are not seen as desirable – to the detriment of all of us. “Some of the strengths are that they are very self-aware, they have this great capacity for empathy,” says von Lob. “So that’s really good in leadership roles. They often are creative people, so they could be the visionaries of our world – they come up with different ways of thinking from the mainstream. They have a very strong sense of justice and fairness. They’re very good listeners, and question rules that don’t make sense. They’re very conscientious, because they look at details. We need these kind of skills and awareness in the world at the moment.” The ongoing response to the pandemic and the climate emergency are both vital areas that could benefit from the abilities of highly sensitive people, says von Lob. “They can use their passion, their intuitive knowledge and their self-awareness to be part of the solution.” Isadora often wears earplugs while out and about to dull some of the “jarring” noise, can’t bear the odour of cleaning products or cooking smells, and finds loud music in restaurants unbearable. Still, she says, “despite the challenges, I’m glad to be highly sensitive because I feel that the world could benefit from more sensitive individuals. There is an overabundance of insensitivity.” Some names have been changed.Dalibor Baric is a Croatian artist and film-maker, who after many experimental gallery shorts is making a feature debut with this deeply weird quasi-noir animated reverie, which he writes, directs, animates, edits and for which he composes the music (really the sound design is the only substantial component that he hasn’t personally authored). Baric brings together found objects – or rather found images, clips of old movies and TV – which are collaged together in various digitally transformed shapes over which a murmuring series of voiceovers which narrate (that is, surround with further ambient anxiety) this general situation: an oppressive state is being resisted, or at least resented, or possibly just noticed, by various sentient beings. That’s about as far as my summary can go. In many ways, this is a deadpan futurist manifesto: a jumble of sounds and images shown against droll maxims. “The future is an abandoned construction site, cancelled due to lack of funds …”; “Dreams always start from the middle and are incomplete …” and my favourite: “People used to believe that the Earth was a gramophone, now it’s only the third song on the record.” There are references to Ursula K Le Guin (a book cover, out of the blue) and Ray Bradbury, and also Cronenberg (some stylings borrowed from Crash) and Tarkovsky. Simply absorbing and unpacking this dense collage of images and moods is a challenge, but there is something impressive in the film’s indifference to narrative meaning or ordinary legibility. It doesn’t have to mean anything, and if that sounds insufferable, it really isn’t: it is distinctly disturbing and even absorbing. • Accidental Luxuriance of the Translucent Watery Rebus is available on 17 November on Mubi.In the summer of 2020, Boris Johnson’s understanding of probity and public ethics was highlighted by his government’s nomination of 36 new members of the House of Lords. It remains one of the defining acts of his premiership: there were peerages for such Brexit supporters as the former cricketer Ian Botham, the Johnson friend and former Telegraph editor Charles Moore and the erstwhile Revolutionary Communist Claire Fox, as well as the prime minister’s brother Jo, and the Evening Standard proprietor and social gadabout Evgeny Lebedev. Eighteen months later, one name from that list has renewed significance. Johnson’s first tranche of new peers included Michael Spencer, also known as Baron Spencer of Alresford (it’s in Hampshire), who finally made it to the Lords after David Cameron’s past efforts to make him a peer had been repeatedly frustrated. Spencer made his fortune through electronic trading on the financial markets, spent three years as the treasurer of the Conservative party, and has donated an estimated £6m to Tory funds. Thanks to work by the Sunday Times and Open Democracy, we now know that he is at the centre of a very vivid political story: the fact that 15 of the last 16 Tory treasurers have been appointed to the Lords, all of whom have donated at least £3m to their party. Over the last week or so, this revelation has been rather overshadowed by the huge tangle of jobs, interests and questionable financial arrangements woven into the professional lives of Conservative MPs, and stories focused on the tireless former attorney general Geoffrey Cox, transport minister Grant Shapps, Jacob Rees-Mogg, and more besides (over the weekend, all this reached a new peak of awfulness with fresh news about Johnson’s involvement in the business interests of his former lover Jennifer Arcuri). But the Lords is as central as the Commons to the latest outbreak of “sleaze” headlines, something also highlighted by a prime ministerial spokesperson’s initial refusal to rule out smoothing the exit from the Commons of the disgraced MP Owen Paterson by making him a peer. The Lords element of the story, moreover, has an even clearer underlying plotline: the survival of a part of the British state that has long been absurd and corrupt – and the sense that, as our established institutions are constantly disrupted and disgraced, the public might at last be persuaded to support the idea of doing something about it. Viewed from any reasonable perspective, the Lords resembles one of those Hogarthian pictures conjured up by the online satirist Cold War Steve. There are 92 “hereditaries” still sitting in the chamber, and all of them are men. Since Johnson became prime minister, about 100 new life peers have been appointed, taking the total membership of the upper house to about 800 – which makes it bigger than the European parliament. If the prime minister really wants to give someone a peerage, his or her patronage powers seem to be basically unfettered: in late 2020, the House of Lords appointments commission objected to the nomination of the Tory donor and former party treasurer Peter Cruddas, who had offered access to Cameron and other ministers in exchange for party donations; but with echoes of his waving away of advice about his involvement in Arcuri’s business affairs when he was London mayor, Johnson ignored the usual protocol and did it anyway (three days after he took his seat, Cruddas gave the Conservative party another £500,000, taking his total donations to well over £3m). Involvement in reviewing, amending and delaying legislation thereby extends to tweed-wearing squires, former advisers, MPs and ministers, and a mind-boggling array of bit-part players who take the Lords into the realms of the surreal. Botham and Lebedev are obvious examples, but there are plenty of others. Six years ago, for example, the peers who voted in favour of George Osborne’s cuts to tax credits included such experts on the welfare state as Andrew Lloyd Webber, the JCB diggers tycoon Anthony Bamford, the former athlete Sebastian Coe and the lingerie businesswoman Michelle Mone. After whole centuries of calls for its abolition, plans for change that have gone nowhere, and very occasional spurts of reform, why is such a ridiculous anachronism still here? Prime ministers of both main parties have used the Lords as a convenient human dumping ground and a means of repaying favours, and even a relatively recent splurge of controversy did not end such habits. In 2008, I interviewed Tony Blair’s fundraiser Michael Levy onstage at the Hay festival, about a year after the so-called cash for honours scandal had ended with the Crown Prosecution Service deciding not to bring any charges. When a member of the audience asked whether rich people could improve their chances of getting a peerage by making political donations, he did not demur: “Look at the facts,” he said. “They will tell you what’s going on. Of course it’s true. That’s self-evident.” MPs’ reluctance to radically change the upper house is often traced to a wish to keep the Lords illegitimate and compromised, so that the primacy of the Commons is never questioned. Politicians who could lead calls for the Lords’ abolition cite the lack of public interest in supposed “constitutional issues”. But does that really add up? Brexit and Scottish independence are constitutional issues, and they do not exactly leave people cold. The passions those causes have aroused, moreover, have been partly about people’s distance from power and their mistrust of cliques and coteries at the top – both things the Lords embodies. Thanks partly to what the internet has done to politics, ours is an age of irreverence and mistrust, and the upper house will surely face similar scandals in the future. And therein lies an opportunity. Ideas for an alternative have been rattling around for so long that they have become cliches. We could create the kind of “senate of the nations and regions” the Labour party put in its manifesto in 2015, with members either appointed by the devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, the new mayoral regions of England and the city and local government, or elected along comparable lines. As the musician and activist Billy Bragg suggested in 2001, seats could be apportioned on the basis of a secondary mandate, whereby votes in elections to the Commons would have two functions: electing an MP to the Commons using the current first-past-the-post system, and being used to proportionally divide seats between parties in the upper house using regional party lists. Or we could just take the simplest option and have a single legislative chamber. The main point, for the time being, is to start talking about abolition, and what it might entail. As if to prove that such ideas are hardly confined to the political fringes, the last few days have seen loud calls for abolition from such well-known revolutionaries as the Spectator publisher and TV host Andrew Neil, and the ex-Newsnight anchor Jeremy Paxman, who thinks the upper house is “like a bad smell that has been left by history”. But in Westminster, the signs are not exactly positive. For obvious reasons, the Conservatives seem perfectly happy with things as they are. During his campaign for the Labour leadership, Keir Starmer seemed to commit himself to abolishing the Lords and replacing it with “an elected chamber of regions and nations”. But earlier this month, he merely said that the Lords “needs change”. The state of this swollen, rotten assembly demands a lot more than that. And if not now, with everything in play, then when? • This article was changed on 15 November 2021 after an earlier version was launched in error John Harris is a Guardian columnistMontale’s Lemons My first snow, I open the pages of Montale, the scent of iron and light coming out of heads of lemon trees in the middle of an orchard where raucous boys play, not hearing the eel-quiet laureate who roams under a sky dappled with rust. He comes through the gate, plucks acanthus, unburdening himself of the city and the classics left in his study. Standing still, his shadow moves to branches brushing earth, freckling it with flame. Montale stoops in flecked leaves, to a flickering secret, and what could be translated as winter fixes a spire in my chest and my eyes go low down with that crouching tower; I cling to a still revolving truth: the world is a golden calyx, but home is a burst lemon, a child weeping at the cane root. This week’s poem is from Ishion Hutchinson’s first collection, Far District, originally published in the UK in 2010 by Peepal Tree Press and now issued by Faber, which also publishes Hutchinson’s acclaimed second collection, House of Lords and Commons. Born in Port Antonio, Jamaica, and later studying in the US, Hutchinson explores in Far District the landscapes of both his early life and his literary future. “Nothing gives off the air of stillness and silence like books,” he says in this illuminating interview but the poems in which he thinks about books and writers settle them in real, earthily textured places. It’s easy to understand why such a poet would feel an affinity with the richly grounded imagination of Eugenio Montale (1896-1981). In Montale’s Lemons, Hutchinson creates a myth of presence rather than direct encounter. The encounter is with the poems, particularly the poem I Limoni, from Montale’s first, 1925, collection, Ossi di Seppia (Cuttlefish Bones). The English translation by Jonathan Galassi, The Lemons, can be read here, while the original, and another English translation, are here. The discovery of those wonderful poems of Italian light, lemons and sunflowers is fused by Hutchinson with the experience of “my first snow”, picking up Montale’s own concern, gradually unfolded in I Limoni, with “winter’s tedium” and “the chill in the heart”. His next sense impression is “the scent of iron / and light coming out of heads // of lemon trees” – an image that gives the lemon trees an erupting, volcanic force. The noisy boys playing in the orchard don’t hear Montale as he enters. He is a kind of revenant, whose shadow, later in the poem, will separate from his body, moving while he stands still. This Montale is perhaps not to be wholly identified with the young iconoclast of Ossi di Seppia. He chooses, unlike the “poets laureate” challenged in I Limoni, to pluck the acanthus, as if a greater spirit of generosity to poetic tradition, and to nature, were extended from Hutchinson’s own encompassing vision. Montale is “eel-quiet” – that deft description being itself a quiet reference both to the boys who are catching “a few starved eels” in I Limoni, and to Montale’s great love poem, L’Anguilla (The Eel). The sky “dappled with rust” seems reflected in the “branches brushing earth, // freckling it with flame” but the tactile autumnal delicacy of “flecked leaves” and “flickering secret” is hardened and sharpened by “what could be translated // as winter”. The landscape becomes more inward, more unsettled. Montale’s shadow retreats. There are highs and lows: the “spire” that’s cruelly fixed in the chest by the cold, the speaker’s downcast eyes, and “that crouching tower”. A lemon tree brought down by its own fruitfulness seems one possible interpretation of “that tower”. Wintry desolation finds the speaker unprotected, as if about to be betrayed by the world’s “golden calyx”. Finally, although extremes are balanced in “a still revolving truth”, two unforgettable images declare the bitter immediacy of past oppression: “but home is a burst lemon, // a child weeping in the cane root.”Film As a cure for burnout – the bone-deep exhaustion and broken spirit – it would be hard to find a movie less suitable than Seconds, director John Frankenheimer’s brilliant but sobering morality tale from 1966. As a film about those same symptoms though, nothing has done it better since. Throughout the first act, a weary New York banker is a study in alienation, lost in a listless commute and a fug of ennui, voice reduced to a mumble. In 1966, between The Twilight Zone and the counterculture, the answer was to become a whole new person, surgically transformed, the old self subject to a staged death. From there, to California and a second chance at life. If all that sounds like a plan to you, do check out the film first. Danny Leigh *** Art This video captures, in real time, the Dutch artist and ultra-marathon buff Guido van der Werve (above) running around a house for 12 hours straight. By its final minutes he is exhausted, and anyone game enough to endure the entire work probably will be as well. It seems to show a hamster-wheel existence of pointlessness, one easily relatable to working life’s burnout. Worse yet, this is a holiday home and running is a leisure activity whose punishments are readily embraced. For all the absurdity, the artist’s circular mega-sprint remains an awesome feat, at once confronting and escaping everyday life’s relentlessness. Skye Sherwin *** Book Gustav von Aschenbach starts Thomas Mann’s Death in Venice worrying that his strength as a writer has been exhausted. But that isn’t the half of it. We start to feel his burnout most searingly when he makes the mistake of going on holiday to the Venetian Lido. He tells himself he needs to relax, to get a change of air and “to bring freshness to his blood”. Instead, he encounters a cholera epidemic, unbearable sexual tension and the anguish of obsessive and unrequited love. He feels the exhaustion and ravages of age with new and horrifying clarity and ends up so wasted that there’s only one way out. It becomes all too clear that the novel’s title is a bleak prophecy. Sam Jordison *** Music The five string quartets that Beethoven composed in the last three years of his life rank among the greatest works of art in the western world. They span a huge range of human emotion, from despair to joyous abandon, but the fourth of them, the A minor Quartet Op 132, deals specifically in reconciliation and recovery, and is sometimes claimed as the inspiration behind TS Eliot’s Four Quartets. At its heart is a 20 minute slow movement that Beethoven called “Holy song of thanksgiving of a convalescent to the deity”, a hymn of transcendent beauty. Andrew Clements *** Games When you are exhausted by life, even playing video games can feel like a chore; most adults have found themselves staring at a library of unplayed sale purchases, despairing at the idea of starting any of them. There is, for me, one perfect game for this state: Stardew Valley, which is about running away from a city job to live a slower life on a rundown farm, growing crops, tending animals and embedding yourself in the local community. Unlike others in this genre, there is no pressure to constantly optimise, make money and upgrade. You can just subsume yourself in it and enjoy the chill vibes. Keza MacDonaldLabour is to force a Commons vote later this week on whether MPs should be barred from holding paid directorships or business consultancies, as Keir Starmer argued there should be a wider ban on almost all second jobs for MPs. Labour sources say they believe the vote, to happen as part of an opposition day debate on Wednesday, would have legal force. Even if it did not, holding it focuses attention on an issue that primarily affects Conservative MPs, and could be embarrassing for ministers. Starmer first announced the plan during his regular phone-in appearance on LBC radio, saying he wanted to find a way forward from “a terrible two weeks” prompted by the government’s decision, soon U-turned, to block punishment for Owen Paterson after he lobbied on behalf of companies who were paying him. MPs will on Monday vote to overturn the previous Commons decision, instigated by the government, to protect Paterson, who has since resigned as an MP, and introduce a new standards committee with an in-built Conservative majority. The vote would be on whether MPs should no longer hold paid directorships or commercial consultancies, Starmer said. “We’re putting that down,” he said. “It’s for every MP to decide how they want to vote on that. But that will perhaps be a measure of where people are on how we actually move this forwards. “I strongly believe that paid consultancies and directorships should just be outlawed. There’s pretty obviously a potential for a conflict of interest, and we’ve seen that in the past few weeks.” More widely, Starmer said, there was a strong case for outlawing all second jobs for MPs, aside from a handful of exceptions with a “public service element”, such as MPs who do shifts as doctors, or who are in the army or police reserves. “We can have a debate about where that line is drawn,” he said. “But beyond that, I think, the time has come, really, to say that second jobs must go.” On Wednesday, Labour will table two separate motions. One will be on ending paid directorships and commercial consultancies. The other will demand the publication of any official papers relating to lobbying done by Paterson for Randox, the healthcare firm that paid him as a consultant, and which won £500m in government contracts connected to Covid, and on the contracts Randox received. Speaking earlier on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the Conservative party co-chair Oliver Dowden rejected the warning from Lord Evans, the chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, that the Paterson case showed that the UK could “slip into being a corrupt country”. Dowden said: “I think we are an exceptionally long way from that. Of course we have to learn lessons and of course we have to uphold the high standards in public life. “But the fact that you are subjecting me at a little after 8 o’clock in the morning to a forensic going over in terms of what the government has done – in a corrupt country you don’t find this kind of level of free press scrutiny and accountability.” Dowden also defended the decision, taken when he was culture secretary, to re-run the application process for the new chair of the media and broadcasting regulator, Ofcom, after the candidate widely assumed to be the government’s pick, former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre, was turned down. The job description was then rewritten to favour a candidate more like Dacre, while the new interview panel will include a former Tory adviser who is married to a Conservative MP. Dowden defended the government’s actions, saying: “There were various issues with that process which led me to re-running it.” He added: “If this had been this corrupt process you would be looking at an individual, who you allege was preferred by the government, currently in that role.”The home secretary, Priti Patel, has apologised to a Muslim man after the government falsely described him as an extremist hate preacher. Dr Salman Butt, the chief editor of the Islam21c website, was named in a 2015 press release entitled: PM’s Extremism Taskforce: tackling extremism in universities and colleges top of the agenda, as someone who legitimises terrorism. When he took legal action against the government, it initially attempted to defend the libel claim by using a defence of “honest opinion”. But it has now agreed to delete his name from the press release and pay him compensation and his legal costs. In a statement read in open court on Monday, Aidan Eardley, legal counsel for the home secretary, said: “The government accepts that it was wholly false to allege that Dr Butt is an extremist hate preacher who legitimises terrorism and therefore someone from whose influence students should be protected. “It is sorry for the harm caused to him and in particular for the fact that the allegation was made and maintained for so long.” The press release marked the introduction of “specific policies to stop extremists radicalising students on campuses”. Before it was published, Butt had had no contact with the police, the security services or any other government agency about his political and religious views, he said. Responding to the settlement, Butt said: “One of the clearest lessons of this case in particular is just how baseless the notion of ‘extremism’ – and therefore ‘counter-extremism’ – actually is.” “I believe the discourse of extremism is dead. More and more people are realising that it is a nebulous term used by the powerful to silence any thoughts, ideas or speech they do not like or cannot challenge without coercion. It is the ‘heresy’ of today.” Following the legal action, the names of universities and other named Muslim public speakers have also been removed from the press release. Butt’s solicitor, Tamsin Allen of Bindman’s LLP, said: “The most shocking thing about this claim is that the home secretary defended it over five years, even though it was accepted that the very serious allegations were not true. It was only after documents revealed that it was a mistake to include Dr Butt’s name in the publication that she was forced to conclude the proceedings and pay a very substantial sum in compensation to Dr Butt. We are delighted that Dr Butt’s reputation has now been entirely vindicated.” A challenge by Butt to the government’s monitoring and collation of his online activities by the Home Office’s Extremism Analysis Unit, pursuant to the Prevent duty, is pending before the European court of human rights. The duty, in the controversial Prevent deradicalisation scheme, requires specified authorities, in the exercise of their functions, to have due regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism. Muhammad Rabbani, the director of the advocacy organisation Cage, said the case should sound the death knell for the Prevent programme, which has been dogged by claims of being a cover to spy on Muslim communities. Muslims were Prevent’s main focus when it was created, although its also covers rightwing extremism and those with an uncertain or unclear ideology. Rabbani said the case “has the potential to undermine the Shawcross review of Prevent, which is due imminently. The apology unravels not only the entire politicised basis of ‘extremism’ labels but critically cripples the failing Prevent strategy which is dependent on that rationale.”China’s president, Xi Jinping, is expected to warn his US counterpart, Joe Biden, to “step back” on the Taiwan issue in their first virtual meeting on Monday evening Washington time, according to Chinese state media. State media outlets such as China Daily are briefed by authorities on important issues such as China-US relations and have been accurate in reflecting the priorities of Chinese leaders. “The Taiwan question is the ultimate red line of China,” said a Monday editorial in the Global Times, a tabloid published by the ruling Communist party’s People’s Daily. “In order to reduce the risk of a strategic collision between China and the US, the latter must take a step back from the Taiwan question and show its restraint,” it added. The two leaders have talked twice by phone since Biden took office in January, but this video conference will be their most substantial discussion so far. It comes days after the two countries surprised analysts by agreeing at Cop26 in Glasgow to boost climate cooperation. But it also comes at a time of increasing friction over Taiwan – the most dangerous potential flashpoint between the two countries. On Tuesday, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) conducted the latest in a series of combat readiness exercises off the Taiwanese coast, while in a phone call on Saturday the nations’ top diplomats traded warnings about the island. Ahead of the meeting, China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, told the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, that any show of support for Taiwan’s independence would “boomerang” on the US. Blinken in turn raised concerns over China’s growing “military, diplomatic, and economic pressure” on the island. US allegations of repeated cyber-attacks from China, deep divisions over human rights in the Xinjiang region, Hong Kong and Tibet, as well as lingering trade disputes have also contributed towards the steady souring of relations. The US is frustrated by Chinese obstruction of multilateral investigations of the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic, and has been angered by Chinese government pressure on US companies to lobby Congress to drop legislation Beijing does not like, as Reuters reported on Friday. The stakes have been raised by the rapid expansion of China’s military capabilities, including its nuclear arsenal. According to the US, Beijing has tested a new weapon, a nuclear-capable hypersonic glider launched from orbit, and China is reported to be building at least 250 new silos for long-range missiles. Expectations for the summit have been set low. There is not likely to be a joint statement, and the White House has indicated that Biden will not answer press questions after the talks are over. “Overall, in both Washington and Beijing, the expectation of convergence is pretty much dead. Instead, the relationship has become more transactional,” Scott Moore, the director of China programmes and strategic initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania, said. “For Biden, he is facing political challenges at home with the midterm elections looming [next year]. Therefore, he will likely face political constraints in terms of taking any actions that could be perceived or characterised as making significant concessions to China.” “For Xi, his biggest vulnerability is on the economic front. That’s why Beijing has been signalling its interest in making progress on trade. Recent comments from Biden administration officials suggest there is interest in engaging on these issues, but again there are likely to be significant political constraints.” Both leaders will seek to limit the dangers of the rivalry spiralling out of control. In a message to the National Committee on US-China Relations, Xi said that the bilateral relationship was at a “critical historical juncture”. “Both countries will gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation. Cooperation is the only right choice,” Xi said in his statement. In his message to the committee’s gala on 9 November, Biden also pointed to an “inflection point in history”. “From tackling the Covid-19 pandemic to addressing the existential threat of the climate crisis, the relationship between the United States and China has global significance.” The White House spokesperson, Jen Psaki, said Biden would be “clear and candid” about US concerns, but would look for ways to “responsibly manage competition” between the world’s two largest economies and also seek “to work together where our interests align”. Wang has said Monday’s summit is a potentially pivotal event in efforts to improve the trajectory in bilateral relations. “The two sides should meet each other halfway … ensuring that the meeting will be smooth and successful, and push Sino-US relations back on the track of healthy and stable development,” Wang said, according to a Chinese foreign ministry statement. Xi will be seeking to head off moves to boycott the Winter Olympics in China this year, and he is also expected to invite Biden to the games as a conciliatory gesture. But Taiwan remains on top of Xi’s talking points, particularly after a series of steps the Biden administration has taken to raise Taiwan’s status, which China sees as breaking with Washington’s long-held “one China policy”, recognising the People’s Republic as the sole sovereign Chinese government. “Beijing has noticed recent statements by senior Biden officials such as Jake Sullivan, saying that Washington no longer wants to change China’s system. It is a positive signal,” said Wang Huiyao, the president of the Centre for China and Globalisation, who also advises the Beijing government. “But if this is the case, the US should cease using Taiwan as a card to irritate China, and leave the Taiwan affairs to the peoples on both sides of the Taiwan strait.” Bonnie Glaser, the director of the Asia programme at the German Marshall Fund of the United States, said Beijing was concerned about whether the Biden administration was really sticking to its one China policy or whether there was “a lot of salami-slicing” going on. “They want to hear greater reassurance about what the US will and will not do with Taiwan,” she said. The US side will be pushing for more routine contacts between the defence and diplomatic establishments, but Xi is likely to resist any action that he sees as normalising the US role in China’s immediate neighbourhood. “It’s something that the Chinese have so far been very resistant to because they don’t want to give the US military a licence to operate anywhere near their shores,” Glaser said. As for nuclear arms control, China has so far resisted any approaches on entering bilateral negotiations, and spurned Donald Trump’s attempts to start trilateral talks with Russia. “Sadly I don’t think it’s going to be a major topic at the meeting. The United States hasn’t proposed anything that China can talk about, and China doesn’t like to negotiate outside of the UN,” said Gregory Kulacki, the China project manager at the Union of Concerned Scientists. “They could make some sort of vague statement about wanting to check the nuclear arms race, but anything concrete coming out of it seems unlikely.” Reuters news agency contributed to this reportEmployers in Portugal will now face fines if they attempt to contact remote workers after hours, thanks to a new law. The legislation was conceived by Portugal’s ruling Socialist party to improve work-life balance for the country’s remote workforce, which expanded due to Covid-19, and to make Portugal a more attractive base for international “digital nomads” – people who travel while telecommuting. Portugal isn’t the only country modernizing its labor laws; citizens of France, Spain, Belgium, Slovakia, Italy, the Philippines, Argentina, India and more, all currently enjoy “the right to disconnect” – or abstain without punishment from working and communicating with their employers during designated rest periods. In 2013, Germany’s employment ministry implemented a ban on employers contacting workers outside of contracted hours, and several of the country’s large employers, including Volkswagen and Daimler, have instituted policies intended to limit the number of emails employees receive outside of work hours, too. The provincial government of Ontario is also introducing legislation that would require employers to establish a written policy setting generous “expectations about response time for emails and encouraging employees to turn on out-of-office notifications when they aren’t working”, according to a government release. Could this ever happen in the United States? “I don’t think that we’ll see a firm requirement of employers to not at all contact employees during non-work hours,” says Orly Lobel, professor of law at the University of San Diego. While California does have laws against employers forcing employees to work overtime, and mandates that all overtime be paid, Lobel thinks that adopting and enforcing rules about work hours on a federal level would be overly complex and contradictory to the nature of globalized professional work, in which urgent tasks inevitably crop up and must be dealt with by someone. “I just don’t see it as a frontier right now,” she says, “when there are so many things that could be better.” “We have a long history in the United States of not having policies that make it easier to work and have a life, or work and have a family,” says Julie Kashen, director of women’s economic justice at the Century Institute. Despite paid family and medical leave being one of the most popular bipartisan policies, the fact that Congress is struggling to get it through 28 years after passing an unpaid version “does not bode well for the US taking additional steps in our laws to respect boundaries,” says Kashen. Historically, the US has emphasized productivity, profits and the bottom line above all else, Kashen says. It relies on a capitalist system that has never involved an equitable, inclusive vision “that really addresses all of the different realities of being a human being”. The countries that are actively protecting people’s right to a healthy work-life balance are responding appropriately to modern work culture. The mass adoption of technologies have created “always on” conditions in which off-hours and weekends can be work time as well. Today’s workers need help reinstating the parameters between work and life that social and technological change have eroded. There’s little doubt that people without sufficient worker protections are getting fed up and burned out. That’s especially true since the pandemic collapsed the distinction between work and home. It’s not surprise then that the US is also in the midst of a “great resignation”, with 4.3 million Americans quitting their jobs this August alone. Lobel and Kashen believe America’s most realistic path towards enforcing firm work-life boundaries will have to come from corporations instituting more accommodating policies themselves. There are practical reasons for corporations to apply such policies. Many studies, including 2017 research by the German Federal Institute for Occupational Health and Safety, and a 2018 report from the Pamplin College of Business, Virginia Tech, support the fact that after-hours workplace communication produces stress, negatively affects employee mental health, and can spill over into affecting employees’ families. Competitive workplaces are already becoming increasingly flexible to attract desirable candidates, and that trend can be reasonably expected to continue and incorporate more stipulations about the right to disconnect. Yet while the corporate route may be most realistic, it isn’t the only feasible way for Americans to secure protected off-time. “It is absolutely legally possible for US lawmakers to pass a law similar to the one passed in Portugal,” says Veena Dubal, professor of law at the University of California, Hastings College. “The impediment is twofold. One is rooted in the power of industry; the business lobby would never allow something like this to pass. The second is simply that US lawmakers and courts have historically been very reticent to interfere in business decisions,” she explains. In the US, the presumption has long been that the property right of capital outweighs the labor rights of workers. “But this is a presumption, not a legal restriction or boundary,” says Dubal. “We can transform this presumption through a cultural shift that might emerge through and with the labor movement.”In mid-October Walgreens announced the impending closure of five of its San Francisco stores. “Retail theft” had risen to unsustainable levels despite increased investment in security, the chain said. It was time to give up. In the months before the announcement, viral videos of brazen shoplifting attempts at Walgreens locations in the city – including one that appeared to show a man riding his bike out of a store with a trash bag filled with stolen items – had put it at the center of a heated national debate over fears of a pandemic-induced “crime wave”. To critics of San Francisco’s leaders, the closures seemed to confirm a narrative long held by people outside the city and increasingly by those within: that San Francisco is a lawless place where officials turn a blind eye to crime, to local businesses’ detriment. Political leaders, including Mayor London Breed, pointed at Walgreens. “When a place is not generating revenue and when they’re saturated – Walgreens has a lot of Walgreens locations all over the city – I do think there are other factors that come into play,” Breed told reporters. But neighborhood representatives and advocates for people caught in the legal system paint a more complex picture of Walgreens’ role in San Francisco and the city’s struggles with shoplifting in recent years. They described Walgreens stores as vital places where San Franciscans can get staple foods at a reasonable price and pick up medication and other last-minute essentials. “We have seniors, working families and longtime customers and I think it’s going to be extremely disruptive, especially for older people who are more pattern-based,” Ahsha Safai said of the closures. Safai represents the Excelsior District, just outside the historically Latino Mission District, on San Francisco’s board of supervisors. The neighborhood’s Walgreens, which closed on 11 November, sat on a bustling stretch of Mission Street, surrounded by clothing stores, banks and locally owned eateries. On a Tuesday afternoon in the weeks before it was closing, the store was lively with seniors picking up items and residents waiting to be called up to the pharmacy counter. Many shoppers hop off the nearby bus lines to get to the Walgreens, making it a convenient stop in a high-traffic area where parking can be abysmal, Safai said. The foot traffic from nearby shops feeds the Walgreens and vice versa, making the drugstore an important piece of the neighborhood’s retail ecosystem. Safai said he had been working with police and community organizations to address retail crime in his neighborhood. “For the most egregious, there has to be consequences. People have to know they can’t walk into the store with a garbage bag,” he said. “But we’re not gonna incarcerate our way out of this problem,” he cautioned. “We have to redirect people to the right path.” ‘Walgreens was essential’ Gina Mullins’ father has been working for Walgreens for more than 40 years, first in the Mission District and then in the East Bay. She recalls going to company picnics growing up and would opt to shop at a Walgreens over CVS because of her family’s long history with the company. “Walgreens is a big, big part of my life. It sounds corny but it fed my family.” Mullins now lives in the East Bay, where she sees her local Walgreens showing telltale signs of theft concerns. More and more items are locked behind Plexiglass, she said, and some shelves are consistently empty. While she’s frustrated by the wait required to get a store employee to unlock the products, she doesn’t judge those who shoplift from the store out of necessity. “I understand tough times, don’t judge anybody. Do what you gotta do to feed your family.” Before moving across the Bay Bridge, Mullins worked in public housing near the Walgreens location on Cesar Chavez Street in the Mission District. She got flu shots for her four children there and would pick up kitchen staples for lower prices than at her local chain grocery store. The location is scheduled to close on 17 November. “That Walgreens was essential, at least for my family,” Mullins said of the Mission District location. “It’s closer than Safeway, has more items than the corner store, and they have a pharmacy attached. It’s been a staple, so to see them shutting down in neighborhoods that really need them is heartbreaking.” Mullens works for San Francisco’s Pretrial Diversion Project, a non-profit that looks to divert people accused of shoplifting and other minor crimes from jail. The program helps participants stay on top of court appearances and orders and connects them to employment, addiction and other services that can prevent them from catching a new charge. Mullins supervises staffers and works with the groups that provide services to the non-profit’s clients. The organization’s CEO, David Mauroff, said there was no denying that people were stealing from drug stores, clothes shops and out of cars. Mauroff, like many San Franciscans, has a Walgreens connection. “I don’t know how many times we’ve run in to get cold medicine ’cause our kid couldn’t sleep,” he said of the chain’s Excelsior location. Mauroff has seen people shoplift at his local store. But he worries that high-profile incidents obscure the decrease in property crime the city reported in 2020. And while he hasn’t seen any increase in clients coming to the organization, he has noticed that hotspots for theft in San Francisco have changed over the course of the pandemic. “There are less tourists and people driving to work – that’s where the break-ins were in the past. But because of Covid, people had to find another target, and unfortunately it became Walgreens and other retail stores.” ‘We can’t be driven by hysteria’ Crime data is complex and often incomplete, and a comprehensive picture of what happened in the city during the pandemic is still emerging. San Francisco has long recorded higher levels of property crime than other California cities, but recent data suggests that, while some categories of crime have increased, others have fallen. Larceny, the category that shoplifting falls under, appears to have decreased from 2019 to 2020, bringing the overall property crime rate down with it, according to the San Francisco police department’s crime dashboard. Offenses including rape and robbery also decreased in 2020, a San Francisco Chronicle analysis of recent FBI data indicated. Homicides, motor vehicle thefts and burglaries all increased, according to that same FBI data. The decrease in shoplifting appears to be continuing in 2021. In 2020 there were 12,266 reported incidents and about 380 arrests for the offense, according to data from the San Francisco district attorney’s office. As of the end of October 2021, about 200 people have been arrested for larceny or theft this year and there have been 9,221 reports. By the end of September last year, there were already 9,558 reports. Regardless of any disconnects between perception, data and lived experience, people breaking into cars near tourist hubs like Fisherman’s Wharf and viral videos like the one documenting a man riding his bike out of a Walgreens forced officials to respond. In late September 2021, the mayor, along with the San Francisco police chief, unveiled the organized retail theft investigation and deterrence strategy. The initiative will expand the city’s retail crime unit from two to five officers. The new hires will coordinate with other law enforcement bodies including the California highway patrol and off-duty officers hired as private security by businesses through the city’s 10B program. The city will also triple the number of unarmed community ambassadors, from eight to 25. Mauroff, the pre-trial program’s CEO, said that while police had a role to play in deterring and addressing shoplifting, he advocated for solutions that were not solely led by police but rather took the rehabilitative needs of individuals and racial disparities in the criminal justice system into account. He noted that during pandemic lockdowns, therapeutic services like anger management classes that had previously proven helpful were only available remotely, making them largely inaccessible for most of the diversion program’s clientele, especially those who are housing insecure. “We have to not be driven by hysteria so we can find solutions,” Mauroff said. Charles Ryan, a case manager at the Pretrial Diversion Project, argued that large corporations like Walgreens, too, had a role to play. Ryan lives in a San Francisco community that has already gone through a Walgreens closure blamed on “rampant” theft. In the summer of 2019, Walgreens closed its store in Bayview Hunters Point, a historically Black, working-class neighborhood near the San Francisco Bay. Ryan said hehad seen people shoplift at the store but lamented he hadn’t witnessed any effort from management to make the drugstore a respected part of the community – for instance, training their employees on implicit bias and keeping the location clean. Black customers would be followed around the store by employees who assumed they had come to steal, he said. “You didn’t have a manager pushing the line on how they treat people coming in,” Ryan said. “No one was there to do the pressure wash and keep it clean, so people said, ‘We just go in there and take whatever we want. They don’t treat us right and never did anything for the neighborhood.’ “Closing the other locations is bad because they’re closing some in neighborhoods where people would have to go across town to get what they need,” he continued. “You’re just closing it because a few people were stealing.”Six months before the pandemic, Clare went on a holistic retreat to Spain. On her way home, she spotted someone she recognised on the flight. “I used to work in the construction industry and I’d seen him at work events,” she says. Although she didn’t speak to him, the man he was with caught her eye. “I told my friend he was fit, then forgot all about it.” When lockdown hit in March 2020, she realised that she and the “fit man” were connected through the networking service LinkedIn. “We’d never met, but had similar work circles. He sent me a message to say happy birthday just as the UK was about to shut down. I wrote back and we chatted briefly,” she says. “We both said it was a bad time to be single, but, to be honest, my love life had been in lockdown for years. I’d given up looking.” With a marketing agency to manage and two children to care for, romance was the last thing on her mind. “I was trying to home school and save my business. I started getting up at 5.30am so I could take a long walk and clear my head,” she says. At the same time, Leon was furloughed from the civil engineering firm where he worked. In early May, Clare wrote to him again on LinkedIn, to ask if he had met his lockdown wife. “We joked about being single and then started talking about fitness routines. I was going for runs, doing Hiit training and taking bike rides to keep myself busy while I wasn’t working,” says Leon. “Clare told me she’d also been doing a lot of fitness and using a smartwatch to track her progress.” They suggested having “workout competitions” to spice up their exercise routines. “I was always winning,” laughs Clare. “I would hit 600 points on the watch before he even got out of bed. I’m really competitive.” When restrictions eased later that month, they went for a walk in Ipswich, where they lived. “We’d been having such great conversations, so I was really excited to see what it was like in person. Luckily, it was exactly the same,” says Leon. Clare was also smitten straight away. “It was like being with my best friend. I didn’t have to hide any parts of me,” she says. In June 2020, they met at Felixstowe beach for a day trip. “I felt so bad for Leon, because my parents showed up. I had warned him that my mum swims there every day. She thought his name was Fernando for some reason, but he took it all in his stride.” Leon loved the day out. “Clare’s parents are mad as a box of frogs, but it was nice to meet them in a natural way,” he says. By the time Leon turned 40 in July, the couple had made their relationship official. “It was the first weekend we were allowed out and I met his friends. I bought him a new smartwatch, too; it seemed significant,” she says. Leon began to stay at Clare’s home regularly and was introduced to her children, who were 12 and 18 at the time. “For me, to let him into our lives was a big deal.” They managed a holiday to Turkey in August, before the autumn restrictions were introduced. “With the winter lockdown coming, we had to decide whether to live together permanently,” says Leon. “I moved in at the end of October.” Although they couldn’t go out, Clare says they have “had a laugh” doing everything together and he helped her with home renovations. In February, they decided to buy a place in Ipswich; they moved to their new home in June this year. Leon says his partner is a great person and an excellent mum. “She’ll do anything for anyone,” he says. “She joins in with all my friends and I’m the same with her family and friends.” Clare says they share the same values. “We’re very similar people and I trust him with anything. In the whole time we’ve been together, we haven’t even had an argument.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.“If you can remember the 90s, you weren’t really there,” writes Charlotte Raven in her memoir, Patient 1: Forgetting and Finding Myself. “I remember so little of it that I must have been more there than practically anyone, Liam Gallagher excepted.” For those of us trying to get a foot in the door of media London in the late 90s, Raven and her friends at Modern Review were its undisputed aristocracy. She wrote a provocative column for the Guardian, courting outrage long before clickbait was heard of. She had a high-profile relationship with Julie Burchill (“I chucked her out but then she married my brother, so I’ve never really got rid of her,” she says). She rubbed shoulders with taste-makers at the intersection of politics and pop culture during the heyday of print journalism, but Raven, now in her early 50s, is not reminiscing fondly about that life so much as mining it for clues to her identity, as that threatens to slip from her grasp. “If my memory is unreliable, how can I find my way back to my biography?” she asks. This is a question faced by any memoirist, but in Raven’s case it is more urgent and literal. In her mid-30s, she was found to have the gene for Huntington’s disease, an inherited degenerative illness from which her father and grandmother also suffered. There is no cure: “The day I found out how I was going to die began innocently enough,” in her memorable phrase. One of the cruellest aspects of the disease is the gradual nature of the sufferer’s decline. “Someone once described HD as an illness of mourning, which seems very apt. You lose your identity, and some of your humanity, while remaining aware enough to keep a tally of every loss.” She began keeping a tally of her illness in 2017 in the form of a blog and discovered a community glad to hear someone articulating their experience. Huntington’s is relatively rare, with only 6,000 people living with it in the UK and as a result it can be difficult to find support even among medical professionals. To turn the scattered thoughts of a series of blog posts into a coherent book she has enlisted the help of her brother Dan as editor and Dr Ed Wild, a Huntington’s specialist. But the result feels like an authentic representation of Raven’s voice through the prism of her illness. If it reads as fragmentary and disjointed at times, well, that’s because it is. There is no criticism you can make of the book that she has not already pre-empted: “I wanted this book to be an accurate record of what it is like to exist with HD and to feel your brain and personality crumble,” she writes. “If it’s exasperating to read this, imagine what it is like for me to live it.” But, in fact, the book is not exasperating in the slightest. It is insightful, frank and often moving; Raven chronicles not just the physical and cognitive aspects of her experience, but the effect of her illness on the people closest to her. She examines with unflinching honesty the disintegration of her marriage, chronicling her own failings as a partner and resisting the urge to blame them on the symptoms of Huntington’s. One distressing aspect of the disease is the way it erodes the mental flexibility required for empathy on the part of the sufferer. “People with Huntington’s disease may sometimes seem self-centred, uncaring and thoughtless,” Raven writes, but she is also clear eyed enough to acknowledge that she often displayed these traits in her younger years and especially in her relationship with her husband, Tom, long before she became symptomatic. “I just wasn’t a very nice person,” she concludes regretfully. In the introduction, she expresses a wish that this should not turn into a misery memoir. Though there is an underlying note of deep sadness, more often she writes with humour, a dose of self-mockery and no small amount of courage. “No one has triumphed over personal adversity,” she writes in the epilogue, congratulating herself on avoiding the misery memoir trap. “No one has learned a lesson. No one has learned anything at all.” The failure of a high-profile drug trial (in which she was designated the titular “patient 1”) robs her of the happy ending that would have been a commercial gift to a book like this, but that is precisely the point: life doesn’t usually provide desirably neat resolutions. And it’s not true that nothing has been learned; it’s clear to the reader that she has acquired hard-won self-knowledge, patience and, ironically, as she points out, a greater degree of empathy. • Patient 1: Forgetting and Finding Myself by Charlotte Raven is published by Jonathan Cape (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyNow that the trattoria in the corner of our building is back working almost as it should, so is the smell of cabbage and other sulphurous vegetables. Back and hanging around the courtyard. I’m so happy for this smelly sign that there is momentum again, that things are working at almost full tilt for locals, and visitors returning to Rome like colour to cheeks. Then, in our stairwell, between 10am and noon, the smell of momentum meets the smell of roast chicken from the canteen-like tavola calda below our flat. Wonderful! Also demanding, and even though they are two of my favourite things, I don’t think I’ve ever wanted to eat roast chicken and cooked cabbage after meeting them, like a difficult neighbour, on the stairs. The feeling never lasts long. Roast chicken with wedges of cabbage, boiled or steamed until just tender, its ribs fleshy, shiny with enough butter to hold specks of black pepper, is too good a thing. Just cabbage is a good thing, too, especially since rediscovering Sally Grainger’s Cooking Apicius. This slim green book, published by Prospect, is a selection of recipes adapted by her from an ancient Roman cookery book called Apicio, which makes great use of cabbage, and of which the Romans were fanatically fond as both food and medicine. A favourite of her recipes is spring cabbage with cumin, for which you pan fry shredded cabbage, sprinkle with cumin and a splash of wine, then serve with fish sauce, steamed leeks and coriander. This recipe, like all the rest, serves as an ideal introduction to the ancient Roman flavours, a combination of elements from all over the globe used in varying proportions, depending on dish: olive oil, garum (fish sauce), old wine, sweet wine and sour grape verjuice, date syrup, honey, grape syrup, cumin, coriander, savory, rue, bay, pine nuts, asafoetida … Then Sally led me back to Apicio, or rather the translation, which has seven recipes for cabbage, which Romans considered a miracle food, surpassing all other vegetables because it contains all the virtues of heat, cold, moisture, dryness, sweetness, bitterness and sourness. There are long treatises written by great minds on this, but here is the best bit, I think: “If you wish to drink deep at a banquet and to enjoy your dinner, eat as much raw cabbage as you wish, seasoned with vinegar, before dinner, and likewise after dinner eat some half a dozen leaves; it will make you feel as if you had not dined, and you can drink as much as you please.” Alternatively, you could make this salad for your Monday night banquet, inspired by an Apicio recipe and also the Roman idea of putting grapes in salad, for pops of sweetness. The recipe is also a nod to the fermenter Sandor Katz, for the squeezing advice that not only seasons deeply, but also seems to soften the mustard notes. Also, my friend Alice, who I watched shred cabbage very finely one day a few months ago – three or four times finer than I had ever cut it, and I realised where I had been going wrong with my cabbage salad. Of course, the recipe is endlessly variable. I have in my head Massimo Montanari’s reminder that that word recipe comes from the Latin recipio: I take (from here, from there, what I need) and compose. Use what you have and what you like; just don’t forget to squeeze. Cabbage, radicchio, grape and goat’s cheese salad Serves 4 1 small head cabbage (smooth green or red, or savoy) 1 small head radicchio Salt The juice of ½ orange 4 tbsp olive oil 1 handful herbs (coriander or parsley, dill, fennel fronds, thyme), chopped 200g green or red grapes, halved and seeds scooped out 200g goat’s cheese, crumbled 1 handful pine nuts Pull off and discard any tough or damaged outer leaves from the cabbage and radicchio, then quarter both heads and cut away the tough cores. Shred the cabbage and radicchio quarters very finely, and set the radicchio aside. Put the cabbage in a bowl, sprinkle with salt, squeeze over the orange juice and add the olive oil, then toss thoroughly with clean hands, squeezing and turning as you go. Add the radicchio, herbs, grapes, goat’s cheese and pine nuts, toss again gently, then serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIn early October, an oil pipeline owned by Amplify Energy spilled into the ocean in southern California. Up to 132,000 gallons of crude oil leaked into the waters off the coast of Orange county, possibly the largest oil spill in California in decades, prompting local, state, and federal criminal investigations. Complicating matters is that Amplify, the product of a merger and vulture capital restructuring of another bankrupt oil company, may not have enough cash to pay for cleanup or to decommission the pipeline. That means taxpayers could end up bearing the costs. This ecological and financial nightmare was in part funded by the retirement savings of school teachers in Pennsylvania. That’s because the largest shareholder in Amplify is a hedge fund called Avenue Capital Group. The hedge fund is led by the Milwaukee Bucks owner, Marc Lasry, the short-lived chair of the scandal-plagued media company Ozy and the father of the Wisconsin Democratic Senate candidate Alex Lasry. In 2019, Avenue bought a nearly 7% ownership stake in Amplify, making it the largest shareholder and giving the firm a seat on Amplify’s board. Avenue financed the purchase with money from public employees’ retirement funds – spotlighting how millions of dollars of workers’ savings are propping up the fossil fuel industry as the climate crisis deepens. In 2017, staff members of Pennsylvania’s scandal-plagued public school teachers pension, PSERS, committed $100m to “Avenue Energy Opportunities Fund II”, a fund that buys distressed fossil fuel assets – the same fund that invested in Amplify. It was seen as a high-yield investment by pension fund staff, who explained in a report: “Several factors have created a compelling opportunity for investing in North American energy and utility companies in financial stress or distress.” PSERS did not respond to a request for comment. Pennsylvania teachers weren’t the only ones to invest public workers’ retirement savings in the fund. The Santa Barbara County Employees’ Retirement System in California committed $15m, while the Minnesota State Board of Investment and the Illinois State Board of Investment each committed $100m, and the Teacher Retirement System of Texas committed $150m. ‘Private equity is standing in the shadows’ As pension fund investments in private equity have grown over the past decade, cases like this one – where workers’ retirement savings go into funds that are buying up fossil fuel assets and squeezing them for profit in their final breaths – are increasingly common. While Avenue’s investment in fossil fuel assets is public knowledge, that isn’t always true, since private equity firms are subject to few disclosure requirements that would shed light on their fossil fuel investments. Private equity firms have scooped up $1.1tn in fossil fuel assets since 2010, according to a recent report by the Private Equity Stakeholder Project, propping up the industry even as the divestment movement has pressured public companies and lenders to stop financing coal, oil and gas. “Private equity is standing in the shadows, buying up assets that those other entities are trying to shed,” Alyssa Giachino, author of the report, told the Daily Poster. These financial moves are increasingly being funded by US workers, since public pension funds have become the most important investors for private equity firms. In the United States, public pension funds manage $4tn – about 20% of the country’s annual GDP – and in 2020, these funds invested an average of 9% of their capital in private equity. This arrangement poses a huge risk to workers and their retirement savings. Fossil fuel assets are increasingly volatile, as political pressure encourages investors to shed them and governments commit to cutting emissions. Furthermore, the climate emergency poses an existential risk – including to the workers who may be inadvertently funding the fossil fuel industry’s environmental destruction. “While the world urgently needs to decarbonize, labor’s retirement capital is still propping up private equity’s fossil fuel industry at the expense of severe ecological devastation and marginalized communities who will be disproportionately impacted,” said Riddhi Mehta-Neugebauer, research director for the University of Washington’s Harry Bridges Center for Labor Studies. Divestment’s unintended consequences The most effective tool that governments have to limit carbon emissions is to make it more difficult to finance fossil fuel development, and instead to fund green energy projects. And while it’s happening much too slowly, the investors, regulators and climate activists behind the divestment movement are starting to notch significant victories. These efforts have been successful in making it more expensive for fossil fuel companies to finance new drilling operations or infrastructure. One fossil fuel industry trade group recently told federal regulators that the divestment movement’s victories have “negatively affected the industry’s access to capital over the last few years”. However, those wins are also driving investments to private equity firms, which aren’t required to publish standardized disclosure reports. One of the reasons pension managers aren’t doing much to stop their funds from inadvertently funding fossil fuel interests is that many of them are delegating their management duties to those who have a stake in private equity. “A lot of these pension fund trustees are teachers, government sector workers, or firefighters,” Mehta-Neugebauer said. “There’s a big learning curve to go from being a government worker or schoolteacher to go into an investment space and suddenly be expected to understand private equity returns. So they tend to defer to the industry experts.” These private equity interests have undertaken massive campaigns to sell their products to pension funds, touting high returns that looked appealing after the great recession left pension funds struggling to make up shortfalls. “If you just look at the returns, you might miss the fact that your fund is invested in a pipeline or export terminal that’s causing all sorts of community harm and environmental harm,” Mehta-Neugebauer added. Such private equity funds are also structured in a way that exposes pensioners to disproportionate risk. Private equity is already highly leveraged, meaning that when a firm buys an asset it is doing so with a large amount of debt, rather than a lot of equity. Much of the equity that is put forward comes from institutional investors, such as pension funds, rather than from the firms themselves. So if these fossil fuel assets end up losing money, the losses hit the investors with the biggest equity stakes, which in many cases are pensions. It is also often challenging for pension funds to divest from private equity once they invest in the sector, because they commit their capital to the firms on fixed timescales, usually of at least a few years. The power of pensions But if pension funds are increasingly tied to oil, gas and coal through private equity investments, that means these funds also have a chance to shape these fossil fuel investments. “Pension funds are uniquely positioned to influence the private equity industry, because they are a substantial source of capital,” said Giachino. Pension fund managers are supposed to make investment decisions based on their fiduciary duty to maximize returns and minimize risks. Increasingly, pension funds are recognizing that fulfilling this duty involves divesting from fossil fuels, both because those assets are underperforming and because fiduciaries recognize that climate change will harm the workers invested in the funds. Pension funds in Maine, New York City, New York state and Rhode Island, as well as Quebec and the Netherlands, have begun divesting from fossil fuels in the past few years. While fossil fuel interests and corporate politicians claim fossil fuel divestment will hurt workers’ savings, such assertions have been repeatedly disproven. A report by BlackRock surveying institutions that had divested from fossil fuels, including 10 public pension funds, found: “of investors measuring the impact of fossil fuel divestment (4 of 13 respondents), no investors found negative performance from divestment; rather, [they saw] neutral to slightly positive results.” According to a recent report by Mehta-Neugebauer, pension funds should be requiring the private equity funds where they are invested to disclose their fossil fuel assets. “Labor’s retirement capital has failed to adequately hold their private equity managers accountable for the damage they have already caused the planet, and they continue to enable the industry’s greenwashing by refusing to publicly disclose all portfolio company-level indirect and direct emissions, comprehensive energy transition plans, and executive lobbying,” Mehta-Neugebauer told The Daily Poster. Such disclosures could be useful, since private equity firms are increasingly “rebranding [themselves] as the next big thing in green and socially minded money management”, according to a recent story by Bloomberg Businessweek. Requiring private equity firms to disclose their fossil fuel investments could help combat such greenwashing. Gary Gensler, chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the federal agency that regulates public and private companies, has signaled that the agency will move to require more disclosure from private equity. “Every pension fund investing in private funds would benefit if there were greater transparency and competition,” he told the Financial Times in October. In the meantime, some pension managers are already taking steps to require such disclosures. Brad Lander, the newly elected comptroller of New York City, has suggested that he won’t follow in the footsteps of his predecessor, Scott Stringer, who massively increased private equity investments while simultaneously divesting from fossil fuel stocks. Instead, Lander has pledged to pursue divestment from the fossil fuel investments of private equity and hedge funds. Editor’s note: This article is being co-published with The Daily Poster, a reader-supported investigative news outlet. Click here to read and subscribe.Good morning. A nine-year-old boy from Dallas has become the youngest person to die from injuries sustained during a crowd surge at the Astroworld music festival in Houston. He is the 10th person who attended the festival to die. Ezra Blount died on Sunday at Texas children’s hospital in Houston, family attorney Ben Crump said. The boy had been placed in a medically induced coma after suffering serious injuries in the crush of fans during a performance by the festival’s headliner, rapper Travis Scott, on 5 November. Treston Blount, Ezra’s father, described what happened in a post on a GoFundMe page he set up to help defray Ezra’s medical expenses. He said Ezra was sitting on his shoulders when a crowd surge crushed them. The father lost consciousness and when he came to, Ezra was missing, Blount said. A frantic search ensued until Ezra was eventually found at the hospital, severely injured. The others who died ranged in age from 14 to 27. About 300 people were treated at the festival site and 13 were hospitalised. A number of lawsuits have been filed including by the Blount family, who are seeking at least $1m in damages. Police are also still investigating what went wrong. Jeffrey Epstein’s shadow looms over start of Ghislaine Maxwell’s US trial When jury selection starts in earnest on Tuesday for British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex trafficking trial in Manhattan federal court, many observers might think that they will finally learn the full truth about the crimes of her consort, disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein – and any subsequent cover-ups. On the surface, this conjecture makes sense: Epstein killed himself in jail more than two years ago, while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial, leaving many to wonder whether there would ever be justice for victims. But, as Maxwell’s trial looms, there is a strong chance such hopes might be dashed by the upcoming proceedings. Judge Alison Nathan, who is presiding over the case, has made clear that she wants Maxwell’s sex trafficking trial to be about Maxwell’s alleged sex trafficking. Full stop. While the trial will not answer all questions about Epstein, it would be a mistake to think that he won’t feature prominently. Maxwell was arrested on 2 July 2020 at a secluded, luxurious estate in the small town of Bradford, New Hampshire, for alleged sex crimes, conspiracy and perjury related to Epstein. Maxwell “played a critical role in helping Epstein to identify, befriend and groom minor victims” and that “in some cases, Maxwell participated in the abuse”, according to Audrey Strauss, then the acting Manhattan US attorney. Trump ally Michael Flynn condemned over call for ‘one religion’ in US Michael Flynn, Donald Trump’s first national security adviser, was widely condemned after calling for the establishment of “one religion” in the US. Religious freedom is enshrined in the first amendment to the US constitution, which says: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” Regardless, at a rally staged in San Antonio on Saturday by the Christian “nonprofit news media network” American Faith, Flynn said: “If we are going to have one nation under God, which we must, we have to have one religion. One nation under God and one religion under God.” In response, the Minnesota Democrat Ilhan Omar, one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress, said: “These people hate the US constitution.” What have other people said? Mark Hertling, a retired general and media commentator, called Flynn, himself a retired general, “an embarrassment to the US army” and said: “His words are disgusting.” Meanwhile, the veteran reporter Carl Bernstein told CNN: “It should be no surprise to know that Michael Flynn is saying the kind of things that he is saying.” He also suggested many Republicans share the same view. Adele opens up to Oprah about divorce and being a single parent The thundering juggernaut that is Adele’s marketing campaign for her new album, 30, pulled in at the Oprah Winfrey Show on Monday, where the record-breaking artist opened up to the Queen of America about the struggles of divorce, becoming a single parent and juggling her career. Under the arches of Oprah’s rose garden in the same spot she interviewed the Duke and Duchess of Sussex in March, the talkshow host quizzed Adele over some of her “dark” lyrics on her eagerly awaited album in a two-hour special that featured a performance from the London-born singer. In excerpts released before the broadcast on Sunday evening in the US, she explains that many of the songs touch upon the aftermath of her divorce from the charity chief Simon Konecki. What did Adele say about her divorce? “It’s a process: the process of a divorce, the process of being a single parent, the process of not seeing your child every single day wasn’t really a plan that I had when I became a mom,” Adele said. What did she say about being a single mom? She said she was disappointed. “I’ve been obsessed with a nuclear family my whole life because I never came from one. I from a very young age promised myself that when I had kids, that we’d stay together.” In other news … Japanese former princess Mako Komuro has arrived in the US with her husband, Kei Komuro, swapping ancient imperial rites for the bright lights of New York after leaving the royal family and relinquishing her royal title. A Chinese businesswoman convicted of trespassing at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago club has been deported, federal authorities said, more than two years after serving her sentence. Yujing Zhang was turned over to immigration officials in December 2019 but her deportation was delayed mainly due to the pandemic. Elon Musk waded into yet another Twitter controversy on Sunday, the Tesla owner and world’s richest person responding to a tweet about tax from Senator Bernie Sanders by writing: “I keep forgetting that you’re still alive.” In alarming news for the White House, only 41% of voters approve of Biden. Aides to the president took to the political talkshows on Sunday in a bid to talk up the US economic recovery despite confidence in the president continuing to plunge amid a crisis over inflation and supply chain problems. Don’t miss this: is Trump planning for a 2024 coup? On 6 January 2020, the top Republican in the US Senate, Mitch McConnell delivered a dire warning that if the election results were not accepted, it would lead to “a scramble for power at any cost” every four years. With the former president hinting strongly that he may stand again, his followers are busily manoeuvring themselves into critical positions of control across the US – from which they could launch a far more sophisticated attempt at an electoral coup than Trump’s effort to hang on to power in 2020. … Or this: do ‘overemotional’ people hold the key to happiness? When the Guardian asked readers to share their experiences of high sensitivity, more than 300 people responded. Over about 40,000 words, they wrote about feeling drained by their ability to tune into other people’s emotions, or exhausted from working in open-plan offices. It was common to report crying at emotional adverts, but also to be deeply affected by political events. But while our noisy, frenetic, always-on world can be an unforgiving place, there is some hope. Our understanding of what it means to be highly sensitive and how to cope with the unpleasant side-effects is increasing. Climate check: how Cop26 played out Prior to the Glasgow climate talks, most countries submitted plans on how they would cut global carbon output, but they were not strong enough. What was crucial in Glasgow was to find a roadmap to reach the 1.5c warming goal, which involved forcing some highly reluctant countries to agree a timetable of swift revisions. Finally, after two weeks of wrangling, a “ratchet” had been settled, with countries agreeing to return next year, and the year after, with amendments. But there was a last-minute hitch and what followed reduced the Cop president, Alok Sharma, almost to tears. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: the first Harry Potter film turns 20. Where are the stars now? As fans prepare to mark the 20th anniversary on Tuesday of Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone, the first film adaptation of JK Rowling’s hit series, rumours abound of a potential reunion, with reports that members of the main cast have been issued with invitations for a one-off show. As Potterheads fantasize about the gang getting together one last time, my colleague Nadia Khomami takes a look at where the cast members are now and the paths their careers have taken in the years since. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comA growing movement including Chinese feminist groups and international tennis stars is raising concern over the whereabouts of the former Chinese doubles pro Peng Shuai after she accused a senior government figure of sexual assault. Peng, one of China’s biggest sporting stars, has not been publicly heard from since a Weibo post on 2 November, in which she alleged the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli coerced her into sex and that they had an intermittent affair. The post was taken down by China’s censors but still went viral. Subsequent posts and reactions, even keywords such as “tennis”, also appeared to be blocked, and numerous references to Peng were scrubbed from China’s internet. The Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) chair and chief executive, Steve Simon, has called for a “full, fair and transparent” investigation by the Chinese government. “Peng Shuai, and all women, deserve to be heard, not censored,” he said. Simon told the New York Times the WTA had received confirmation from several sources including the Chinese Tennis Association (CTA) that Peng was “safe and not under any physical threat”. However, he said no one involved with the WTA tour had been able to reach her; his understanding was that she was in Beijing but he had not been able to confirm it. He said the WTA had little influence over China’s authorities, “but we’re not going to back off this position”. Referencing an ongoing balancing act by sporting leagues between appeasing the Chinese market and athletes criticising China, Simon said the potential sexual assault of a WTA member was “something that simply can’t be compromised”. The Guardian has contacted the CTA with questions. Peng’s Weibo account is active, but has no mention of Zhang and comments appear to have been disabled. An attempt by the Guardian prompted an error message that the content contained information that violates relevant laws and regulations. Amid growing concern over her whereabouts, Chinese activists projected text on to undisclosed sites, saying “where is Peng Shuai?” and “we demand Peng Shuai’s safe return”. International tennis players also spoke out online. The former world singles No 1 Chris Evert said the accusations made by Peng were “disturbing”. “I’ve known Peng since she was 14; we should all be concerned,” Evert wrote on Twitter. “This is serious; where is she? Is she safe? Any information would be appreciated.” “The fact that Peng Shuai is missing is not only the WTA’s problem,” said the French former doubles No 1 Nicolas Mahut. “We are all concerned.” Billie Jean King reposted the WTA statement, adding: “Hoping that Peng Shuai is found safe and that her accusations are fully investigated.” Martina Navratilova said the WTA’s statement was a strong stance “and the correct stance”. The French player Alizé Cornet and the former Olympian Maryse Éwanjé-Épée also voiced their concern. Peng was the first Chinese player to achieve a top ranking after winning the doubles titles at Wimbledon in 2013 and the French Open in 2014. Peng’s accusation is the highest profile case in China’s troubled #MeToo movement, which has struggled to gain traction or justice in the face of online censorship and an opaque justice system. In her post, the 35-year-old said she and Zhang, 75, had an on-off extramarital “relationship” over several years, which she said he tried to keep secret. Peng said Zhang had stopped contacting her after he rose in the ranks of the Communist party. About three years ago, she wrote, Zhang invited her to play tennis with him and his wife and then sexually assaulted her in his house. “I never consented that afternoon, crying all the time,” she wrote. Peng conceded she had no evidence to back her claims but was nonetheless determined to voice them. “Like an egg hitting a rock, or a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you,” she said.It was not the final we wanted, but it was the final we deserved. There was some drama, certainly some skill, and then the team that batted second won, all watched by a crowd that fell some way short of a full house. The T20 World Cup has been a deeply flawed tournament but it nevertheless proved one basic fact: Twenty20 cricket is enormous fun. It also showed that assembling the world’s best practitioners in a single place to play loads of games in a short space of time is a very good idea. Which is just as well, as it is happening again next year, and then every two years after that. It will be remembered for the match-winning batting power of Matthew Wade, Jimmy Neesham, Asif Ali and David Miller, for David Warner showing his critics where they can stick their scepticism, for hard lengths, hard graft and the thrill of seeing the magnificent Shaheen Shah Afridi standing at the end of his run-up, new ball in hand. For England there was glorious failure, the awesome steamrollerings of West Indies and Australia and the combined excuses of injuries, a lost toss and a successful chase of 57 runs from 24 balls by Neesham and Daryl Mitchell to beat them. It has been a tournament of match-ups and mess-ups, of inspiring catches and dispiriting drops, one that while not being won by one of the favourites also featured only one genuine, 21-carat shock – and that on its very first afternoon when Scotland beat Bangladesh, an upset that sagged in significance with the dawning realisation that Mohammad Mahmudullah’s side were actually completely rubbish. The uneven bounce and unpredictable pace has made this a better tournament for bowlers than for batters, and despite the rising power, skill and aggression of short-form batting it has been the slowest-scoring T20 World Cup ever. However, given that there were less than 48 hours between the last game of the IPL and the start of the World Cup, and the same venues were used for both competitions, they held up admirably. Between them the three World Cup venues have hosted 70 competitive T20 matches in the last two months, an almost unbearable workload. On the subject of workloads, New Zealand played the final on Sunday night and start a T20 series against India on Wednesday, surely some mistake. Thankfully it is not a competition that will be remembered for the impact of Covid-19, with not one case leaking into the players’ rigidly-enforced bio-bubbles – the only positive test among players, officials, staff and assorted match-going professionals involved an English journalist. The one significant impact of the pandemic was to force its relocation from India, at which point there were not many alternative hosts to the UAE, headquarters of the ICC and established now as cricket’s equivalent of the mate you used to call when you needed somewhere to crash for a few nights. Unlike next year’s football World Cup in Qatar, little has been made of these hosts’ use of forced labour and history of human rights abuses – Dubai’s reputation having long since been painstakingly fivestarbeachholidaywashed – but moving the competition threw up practical as well as moral issues. The weather changed markedly during the tournament, from intense heat at the start to verging occasionally on the mild towards its conclusion. But to avoid the worst of the heat and to maximise viewing figures in key Asian markets as many matches as possible were pushed into the evening, at which point the dreaded dew descended. The advantages already built in to chasing really did not need to be further amplified, and the effect has been to massively disadvantage the team batting first, to the extent that it seriously detracted from the sport. In effect, diverting as many have been, every evening match has seen 22 highly skilled sportspeople spend several hours straining to see if they can have a greater impact on the result than the momentary flight of a small metal disc before the action began, and in general they have failed. There are more reasons than just the toss that this became a chasers’ championship, but it is not a good look. For all that every one of the knockout matches followed this script, the two semi-finals were thrillingly tense. A similarly gripping final, ideally won by the side batting first, and the tournament would have been redefined as a sporting success. But Australia took a sledgehammer to that idea, and then used it to set about New Zealand’s bowlers. The result was a sense that this had generally been a tournament of high skill and low drama, and that the next will have much to live up to but a great deal to improve on. Same time next year?Three people remain in custody as counter-terrorism police and MI5 continued to investigate a car explosion at a hospital in Liverpool that killed one person and injured another. A taxi exploded in flames outside the Liverpool Women’s hospital at 10.59am on Remembrance Sunday. Police later confirmed that a male passenger was declared dead at the scene. The cab driver, who has been widely named in reports as David Perry, from Kirkdale, managed to escape, and is in hospital in a stable condition. The mayor of Liverpool, Joanne Anderson, has praised the driver, telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “The taxi driver, in his heroic efforts, has managed to divert what could have been an absolutely awful disaster at the hospital. She added: “Well, we knew that the taxi driver had stood out and locked the doors, we knew that early on.” However, she added it was important not to get drawn into speculation about the incident. Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party chair, told Sky News: “Clearly we’ll have to see exactly what happened but if that is the case it is another example of true bravery and courage.” Carl Bessant was inside the hospital, where his partner had just had a baby, at the time of the blast. He told the BBC: “We were so close and she was feeding the baby when it happened. We heard a loud bang and looked out of the window. We saw the car on fire and someone jump out … screaming, and there was someone inside the car.” The police counter terrorism unit for the north-west said three men aged 29, 26, and 21 were detained in the Kensington area of Liverpool and arrested under the Terrorism Act in connection with the incident and continued to be questioned on Monday. The security service MI5 is also assisting. The three arrests took place in Sutcliffe Street, where witnesses reported seeing armed officers swoop on a terraced house on Sunday afternoon. Keith Ford, 47, a production operative, who lives in Sutcliffe Street with his partner and 13-year-old daughter, witnessed the dramatic arrests. “I’d say about an hour and a half later, a man came out of the property that they were pointing the guns at,” Ford said. “He came to the front door, police shouted at him, saying “hands up in the air” – then he walked to the pub on the end of the corner.” Ford described the man as having dark hair, dark trousers and a blue T-shirt. He continued: “A couple of hours later, another man came to the door, the police were shouting at him, saying ‘hands up in the air, hands up in the air.’” He understood that the occupants of the property changed around two months ago and had not seen anyone since they moved in. Ford was told to leave his home and spent the night at his parents’ house before returning on Monday morning. Jan Temple, 61, who lives with her two sons in Sutcliffe Street, was evacuated at 9.30pm on Sunday night. Of the people living in the property, she said: “We very rarely saw anybody coming or going.” Sections of Sutcliffe Street and Boaler Street remained cordoned off, with a heavy police presence at the scene as inquiries continued. There was a similar scene at Rutland Avenue in Sefton Park, with counter-terrorism officers sighted in the neighbourhood. Greater Manchester police, providing updates from the north-west counter-terrorism unit, said: “A large cordon is in place on Rutland Avenue in Liverpool and a small number of addresses have been evacuated as a precaution.” Officers wearing vests marked “Negotiator” entered the cordon earlier on Sunday afternoon. Locals said police arrived from about 1pm. Officers were guarding a terraced property as the immediate surrounding area was cordoned off. A number of residents in Rutland Avenue were evacuated from their homes. A police operation continued past midnight with armed officers within the cordon. Earlier, images of a vehicle on fire, and later burnt-out, outside the hospital were shared online. A spokesperson for Merseyside police said: “So far we understand that the car involved was a taxi which pulled up at the hospital shortly before the explosion occurred.” Boris Johnson said on Twitter: “My thoughts are with all those affected by the awful incident in Liverpool today. I want to thank the emergency services for their quick response and professionalism, and the police for their ongoing work on the investigation.” The chief constable of Merseyside police, Serena Kennedy, offered her reassurance over the incident. “While I understand that today’s incident may cause concern in our communities, it should be pointed out that events of this nature are very rare,” she said. “Merseyside police will continue to liaise with community groups, community leaders, partner agencies and individuals in the coming days and weeks to make sure any concerns are addressed and ensuring that we provide the best possible service to local people. “There will also be an increased and visible police presence on the streets of Merseyside and I would encourage people to engage with my officers and raise any concerns they may have. Liverpool Women’s hospital said visiting access had been restricted until further notice. Patients were diverted to other hospitals where possible during most of Sunday. In a statement, the hospital said: “Anyone with appointments at the hospital will notice an increased security and police presence on site.” Phil Garrigan, the chief fire officer of Merseyside fire and rescue Service, said the car fire at Liverpool Women’s hospital was “fully developed” when two appliances arrived shortly after 11am. He told reporters at the scene: “The operational crews extinguished the fire rapidly but as has been reiterated by the police chief constable, there was one fatality. “Another individual had left the vehicle prior to the fire developing to the extent that it did.”A senior official at China’s ministry of public security is seeking election to Interpol’s executive committee, prompting concerns from human rights activists and international politicians that China could misuse the global criminal police organisation’s capabilities to track down overseas dissidents. Hu Binchen, the deputy director-general of the ministry’s international cooperation department, is one of three candidates vying for two seats as Asia delegates on the committee. The 13-member executive committee oversees the work of Interpol’s general secretariat and helps set future policy. Interpol controls a number of databases containing identifying details of people and property, which assist in global policing. It also operates the system of red notices, which are requests “to locate and provisionally arrest an individual pending extradition”. However, there are long-running concerns over governments or authorities misusing the system to track down dissidents. While there are clear rules against the use of red notices on refugees, high-profile cases have shown countries are repeatedly able to obtain red notices, against Interpol policy. Activists and advocacy groups, as well as 50 members of an international cross-party group of legislators, the Inter-parliamentary Alliance on China, have lodged their objections at Hu’s potential election to the committee, noting alleged attempts by China to use the red notice system to target exiled Uyghur activists. “By electing Hu Binchen to the executive committee, the general assembly would be giving a green light to the PRC [People’s Republic of China] government to continue their misuse of Interpol and would place the tens of thousands of Hong Konger, Uyghur, Tibetan, Taiwanese and Chinese dissidents living abroad at even graver risk,” said the letter from the Alliance, citing the July detention of Uyghur activist Idris Hassan in Morocco. “Allowing Interpol to be used as a vehicle for the PRC government’s repressive policies does great harm to its international standing.” The human rights group Safeguard Defenders said the Chinese ministry’s international cooperation department, in which Hu is a senior official, oversaw operations named Sky Net and Fox Hunt, chasing down fugitives overseas. It alleged “teams were sent by the ministry “to intimidate and harass ethnic Chinese to force them to return to China ‘voluntarily’”. In a report also released on Monday, Safeguard Defenders said there had been a tenfold increase in the issuance of Chinese red notices between 2000 and 2020. The former chairman of Interpol Meng Hongwei was also a ministry of public security official, serving as vice-minister. However, Meng’s Interpol term ended prematurely in 2018 when he disappeared during a visit to China and was later jailed for 13 years on bribery charges, amid Xi Jinping’s anti-graft campaign targeting millions of officials.On 20 October, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, traveled to Ecuador to set out a vision for democracy in the Americas. Over the past five years, the hemisphere has suffered an assault on its democratic institutions, as political leaders from Donald Trump to Jair Bolsonaro have adopted a new authoritarian playbook: lies, violence, repression, and more lies. Two-thirds of US citizens now believe that democracy is under threat, while a majority of Brazilians fear a military dictatorship will return to the country. “We find ourselves in a moment of democratic reckoning,” announced Blinken. But the Biden administration continues to put the US on the wrong side of this reckoning. Consider Blinken’s recent trip. In Quito, he lavished praise on President Guillermo Lasso in the same week that Lasso declared a nationwide state of emergency to intimidate critics of his government and distract from an investigation into alleged tax fraud following his appearance in the Pandora Papers leak. In Bogotá hours later, Blinken applauded the democratic credentials of the Colombian president, Iván Duque – “We have no better ally on the full range of issues that our democracies face in this hemisphere,” Blinken said – while his government stands accused of targeting protesters and allowing an unprecedented number of assassinations of Indigenous, Black, and peasant leaders to take place under his watch. The US government is complicit in these attacks on democracy, not only as an “ally” but also as a leading member of the Organization of American States (OAS). Just two days after Blinken’s South America jaunt, the governments of Bolivia, Argentina, and Mexico held their own event at the Washington DC headquarters of the OAS to discuss the organization’s controversial role in the 2019 Bolivian election. The experts’ findings were clear – and damning: while the OAS found no evidence of fraud in the election of President Evo Morales, it lied to the public and manipulated its own findings to help depose him. “It was later reported that the US representative to the OAS actually pressured and steered the observation mission to reach a determination of fraud,” testified Jake Johnston of the Center for Economic and Policy Research. Bolivia is not an isolated case. In Haiti, for example, the anti-democratic interventions of the OAS stretch over decades. In 2000, the OAS observer mission concluded that the Haitian election had been a “great success” only to change its position under pressure from Washington to claim it was illegitimate. The goal was evident: “to dislodge the Aristide administration”, as Dr Paul Farmer, deputy special envoy for Haiti at the United Nations, testified to Congress. Then, 10 years later, the OAS intervened again to reverse the result of the 2010 presidential election on the basis of faulty statistical methods. It is difficult to overstate the destabilizing consequences of these interventions. Juan Gabriel Valdés, the former head of the UN in Haiti, recently described the 2010 OAS decision as “the origin of the present tragedy” in the country. The OAS, then, is no longer a credible observer of democracy in the Americas – particularly under the present leadership of Luis Almagro, which has been described as the “worst in history”. In the eyes of several member states, the institution is too beholden to US interests to provide an effective defense of democratic institutions, leading some to call for “autonomous” organizations to contest it. “The world is currently going through a very worrying moment, where attacks on democratic institutions happen with frightening frequency,” said Brazil’s former foreign minister Celso Amorim. “The creation of an international electoral observatory – popular and non-partisan – will fill an important gap in defense of democracy and human rights.” What would such an observatory do? Three capacities are critical. The first would be to organize delegations to countries where democratic institutions are clearly under threat – both by domestic actors and international observers like the OAS. Bringing together data scientists and parliamentary representatives, these delegations would provide independent analysis of the electoral process and a defense against false narratives that threaten to derail it. The goal is not only to observe how votes are cast and counted; it is also to observe the observers. The second critical capacity would be to launch investigations of unlawful interventions in the democratic process. Over the course of the last decade, the dominant mechanism of democratic undoing has been legal, namely the weaponization of the judicial system to intimidate, exclude, and even incarcerate political opponents – a tactic known across Latin America as legal warfare, or “lawfare”. Deploying a global network of legal experts, a new observatory could challenge these tactics to help ensure a free and fair democratic process. The third and final capacity of the new observatory would be communications. In the technological era, bad information often travels faster than good. Big tech platforms such as Facebook not only serve to disseminate false stories and stir civic conflict; evidence suggests that their executives intervene to favor some candidates and ban others from the platform altogether. In the context of such bias, this new observatory would need to build an autonomous communications infrastructure to ensure that the findings of its delegations and investigations are rapidly spread, widely read, and well understood. The call for a new observatory could not be more urgent. Contentious elections lie just on the horizon in 2022. In May, Colombia will head to the polls after a year of roiling protests against government violence, corruption, and a failed pandemic response. Five months later, Jair Bolsonaro will face Lula da Silva after profiting from his flagrant persecution on the road to the presidency in 2018. Bolsonaro and his allies in Congress have already pushed a legislative package to rewrite Brazil’s electoral laws, while parroting lies about potential fraud in the country’s electoral system. Meanwhile, back in Washington DC, Secretary Blinken is moving ahead with plans for a Summit for Democracy. Convening leaders from “a diverse group of the world’s democracies” in early December, the summit aims to encourage commitments to fight corruption and respect human rights – an opportunity, as the White House press release suggests, to “speak honestly about the challenges facing democracy so as to collectively strengthen the foundation for democratic renewal”. But the crisis of democracy will not be solved by summitry alone. We cannot delegate “democratic renewal” to our presidents, nor to the OAS that claims to represent them. We need an observatory to defend democracy from the bottom up – an institution with the capacity and credibility to fight authoritarian tactics and even the playing field for democracy to flourish. That fight starts now. David Adler is the general coordinator of the Progressive International. Guillaume Long is a senior policy analyst at the Center for Economic and Policy Research and former foreign minister of EcuadorFor more than 10,000 years, the Wabanaki peoples have been living in a region called the Dawnland. Captain John Smith rebranded the area “New England” in a map he made in 1614. He and the other colonial settlers renamed rivers and villages to claim the land for themselves and erase Native people from their homelands. But that wasn’t enough. Eventually colonial officials introduced a grisly incentive to hasten that erasure: bounties for dead Native Americans. Yes, the settlers whom many Americans mythologize at Thanksgiving as peace-loving pilgrims were, just a generation later, issuing official government orders putting a price on the scalps of Indigenous children, women and men. The reward: about $12,000 in today’s dollars for the scalp of a man, half that for a woman, and a bit less for a child. It was nearly as much as a soldier would earn in two years. Sometimes bounty hunters were granted the land of the people they scalped – thousands of acres, which scalpers used to found towns that they named after themselves, like Westbrook, Maine; Shirley, Massachusetts; and Spencer, Massachusetts, to name just a few. According to our research, there were at least 69 government-issued scalp edicts across the Dawnland from 1675 to 1760, and at least 50 scalp edicts issued elsewhere in the United States until 1885. The proclamations targeted specific tribes by name – and occasionally marked specific tribes safe because they were “allies” of the authorities. But neither scalpers nor authorities had much way of knowing the tribal affiliations of the people whose scalps they took, so for centuries bounties were a license to kill all Indigenous people. We are part of the team behind the new short documentary Bounty. In New England alone, we’ve uncovered government payments for 375 human scalps, submitted in 94 separate claims and equaling government payments of millions of dollars in today’s money. More documents may be buried in colonial archives. In 1755, the lieutenant governor of the province of Massachusetts Bay, Spencer Phips, issued an edict declaring the Penobscot people a target of extermination and commanding “his Majesty’s Subjects of this Province to Embrace all opportunities of pursuing, captivating, killing, and Destroying all and every of the aforesaid Indians”. The Phips Proclamation lives on in collective memory because members of the Penobscot Nation and other Wabanaki peoples sometimes post it on the walls of tribal government offices as a kind of reminder: You tried to kill us, but we are still here. The United States was built on our lands and on top of the bones of our ancestors. We live and thrive on these lands today and are sovereign nations with the right to self-determination. In our film, Penobscot parents and children read and react to one of the dozens of government-issued bounty proclamations that motivated colonial settlers to hunt, murder, and scalp Indigenous people. The lives that were destroyed by scalping were tallied up in a ledger and the human remains incinerated to prevent double payment. But the digits in that ledger represented murdered mothers, fathers, two-spirits, daughters, sons, aunts, uncles, sisters, brothers, cousins and infants, usually rendered nameless in the historical record. Of course, those deadly bounties were only one of the tools deployed by the European settlers to make this land theirs. The legacy of those wrongs manifest today in a range of forms: the epidemic of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls; the fact that Indigenous people have the highest rate of death at the hands of police, the highest suicide rate among veterans, a disproportionate rate of death from Covid-19, and the highest incarceration rates in the US; continued violations of Indigenous sovereignty by state and federal authorities and private extractive industries; the continued use of Indian mascots; and the celebration of national holidays, like Thanksgiving and Columbus Day, that dishonor Native peoples. In spite of countless wars, massacres, land ordinances, and extermination orders, today there are over 5 million Indigenous people in the United States who are citizens or members of more than 600 tribal nations. And while the legacy of anti-Native brutality remains, most Native people are thriving and modeling for all people in the US how to live in caring communities based on mutual respect, reciprocity, and reverence for the land, water, and all our relations. In this season, as families and friends gather to share gratitude, let us seek new opportunities to learn about our collective history, in all its complexity, and embrace a future built upon mutual understanding and respect for our neighbors. Maulian Dana is the Penobscot national tribal ambassador. Dawn Neptune Adams is a Penobscot Nation citizen and a member of Sunlight Media Collective. Adam Mazo is a co-founder of Upstander Project. Together they are part of the film-making team behind the documentary film BountyCan Taylor turn things around at Manchester City? Gareth Taylor said he believed his Manchester City team could still be playing Champions League football next season despite two wins from seven league games. “We know we’re up against some strong opposition especially when we’re probably – well, no probably about it – not strongest in terms of our squad depth,” he said. “But nothing changes. The attitude is still to be in Europe. We still believe that we can get there. We know that today if we had won the game, we would have been a lot closer. But I still think there’s plenty to come.“ City’s bruising 4-0 defeat by the champions Chelsea means City have conceded 16 times in seven games and have the league’s joint second-worst defensive record. They had the second-best defensive record last season, conceding 13 times across the 22-game campaign. Although City had the edge in terms of possession and matched Chelsea’s six shots on target, they weren’t clinical, were error-prone in defence and devoid of luck. Whether Taylor is capable of turning things around is the looming question. SW • Match report: Manchester City 0-4 Chelsea Spurs show how far they have come On 19 March 2017 Arsenal put 10 past Tottenham as they cruised into the quarter-finals of the FA Cup. The teams had met eight times since then before Saturday’s match, including one pre-season friendly, and Spurs had lost every time, conceding 32 goals and sscoring four. Their best result came last season when losing on penalties in the League Cup after a 2-2 draw. This is the context to Saturday’s historic 1-1 draw. The point earned is a huge testament to the long-term development of the team and short-term progress under the former England assistant coach Rehanne Skinner. Had Spurs lost again to the usually rampant Gunners it would not have tarnished their hugely impressive performances this season. Tottenham have 14 points from seven games and sit one point behind the equally eye-catching Brighton, who occupy the third Champions League spot. “We know that we’re aiming for Champions League, but when that arrives we don’t know the answer to that right now,” Skinner said. “We’ve just got to make sure that we improve on last year … and provide consistent performances.” SW • Match report: Tottenham 1-1 Arsenal Women’s Football Weekend needs more backing It will be great for the women’s game when a Women’s Football Weekend is no longer needed because attendances and media coverage are equal to the men’s. The game isn’t there yet, so the flagship event is valuable in raising its profile. An example of a positive outcome came in 2019 when more than 38,000 people attended the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium to watch the north London derby. Such an impact was achieved because the weekend was fully backed by clubs and media but this year it feels as if it lacked support. Only Brighton switched their match to the club’s men’s stadium to increase the attendance. Although it was advertised across the BBC, Sky and some social media, the promotional campaign had to be bigger. Some matches were broadcast on the BBC and Sky but three games were on the FA Player and surely this was the weekend to get every game on TV. In the past, games had staggered kick-offs so fans could watch each but this year two matches, the Birmingham derby and Brighton v Leicester, started at 2pm on Sunday. It felt as if the event came and went without the attention it deserved and with stunning performances and scores across the board a big opportunity has been missed. SR Defensive blunder costs United Manchester United were well on their way to another three points but a defensive error involving Maria Thorisdóttir and the goalkeeper Mary Earps handed Everton’s Simone Magill a second-half equaliser. Thorisdóttir attempted to guard the ball by fending off Magill, who was attempting to get a shot away at the edge of the box. Instead of trusting her defender and taking her position in goal, Earps came to try to catch the ball. Magill got her foot to it and kicked it straight through Earps’s arms. With Thorisdóttir still right by her opponent, no one was on the line to make a last-ditch effort to clear. The backline seems to be United’s achilles heel. SR Symonds’ stunner seals win at the death Bend it like Beckham? Who needs that saying when you can spiral it like Symonds? Brighton’s match against Leicester was 0-0 in injury time and the visitors were looking at their first point when Brighton won a free-kick and Maisie Symonds stepped up. Her strike curled perfectly into the net over the goalkeeper Kirstie Levell’s head. Brighton’s manager, Hope Powell, said of Symonds: “She’s a confident kid, so when she was standing over the free-kick with Inessa [Kaagman] I thought she was going to go for goal; she practises those sort of set pieces a lot. It was a great goal to win it and it’s nice to be up in the top three but we know we can do better.” SR Asante’s first goal of the season The defender Anita Asante is a talisman for Aston Villa and highlighted why by propelling them to their third victory of the season. Villa won a corner which Sarah Mayling swung into the box and Asante beat Birmingham’s defenders to the ball to score her first goal of the campaign. Asante’s header also sealed Villa’s first Birmingham derby WSL win and the manager Carla Ward’s first victory over her former club. Asante told the BBC: “I just watched the flight of the ball and I knew it was on my head so I had to attack it. If I hadn’t, [assistant coach] Alan Reeves would have been on my case.” SRCineworld’s box office revenues surpassed pre-pandemic levels at its cinemas in the UK and Ireland last month as blockbusters such as No Time to Die, Dune and Venom draw film fans back to the big screen. The world’s second-largest cinema operator, which owns the Cineworld and Picturehouse chains in the UK and Regal Theatres in the US, said box office and concession revenues at its UK and Irish operation in October reached 127% of the level in the equivalent month in 2019. Shares in Cineworld jumped 11%, making the company the biggest riser on the FTSE 250 on Monday morning, as investors cheered the news of a recovery in the Covid-battered cinema industry. Cineworld said the recovery was fuelled by the return to the big screen of Hollywood blockbusters including Black Widow, No Time to Die, Dune, Venom and Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. Over the weekend, Daniel Craig’s final outing as the super spy 007 in No Time to Die passed £90m at box offices in the UK and Ireland, only the fifth film to go beyond that mark. “There are real grounds for optimism in our industry,” said Mooky Greidinger, the chief executive of Cineworld. “We are thrilled to see audiences returning in significant numbers. Our partnerships with studios are as strong as ever and [there is] an incredible movie slate to come.” The chain said film releases it expects to perform well at the box office – assuming there is no deterioration in the Covid-19 situation – include Spider-Man: No Way Home, Sing 2, Ghostbusters: Afterlife, and The Matrix Resurrections. Across its global operations at 752 sites in 10 countries, total group revenues in October reached 90% of pre-pandemic levels. Cineworld operates 127 sites in the UK. Cineworld, which reported a record $3bn (£2.2bn) loss in 2020, said last month it managed to return to positive cashflow – “an important milestone in the company’s recovery”. However, analysts at AJ Bell warned that Cineworld should be cautious about raising ticket prices to bolster its battered finances. “We know the company has been trying to strip out costs but it also has inflationary pressures and oodles of debt that needs repaying,” said Russ Mould, the investment director at the broker AJ Bell. “Now is not the time to push through big ticket price hikes. Not only are family finances under pressure from higher energy, fuel and food bills but cinema operators also need to use cheaper prices as a way of attracting anyone still on the fence about wanting to spend two hours in a confined space with a load of strangers.”More frequent spells of intense humidity caused by the climate crisis are more likely than heatwaves to be linked to increased rates of suicide, according to new research. The study found that women and young people were particularly affected by levels of humidity, the intensity and frequency of which are increasing because of global heating. Based on data from 60 countries between 1979 and 2016, the study, by researchers at the universities of the UN, Sussex and Geneva, as well as University College London, found that periods of intense humidity were more strongly linked to suicide than high temperatures. Dr Sonja Ayeb-Karlsson, who co-authored the research, said humidity interfered with the body’s ability to regulate its temperature and that this increased discomfort could exacerbate conditions for people already struggling with mental illnesses. “If you talk about mental health there are quite a lot of links – there’s anxiety, it’s hard to sleep, it becomes unbearable,” she said. “Sleep deprivation is a massive thing … It’s difficult to sleep when it’s hot and even more when it’s humid.” Those already struggling with their mental health could be more affected by increased humidity than other people because antidepressants can interfere with the body’s ability to regulate its temperature, she added. According to the study, 40 countries had a particularly strong link between suicide and humidity. The list included hot countries such as Thailand and Guyana, but also European countries that were less used to higher heat and humidity, including Sweden, Belgium and Luxemburg. “It’s the shock of going from colder temperatures to extreme temperatures that is dangerous to mental health,” said Ayeb-Karlsson. Ayeb-Karlsson said this was the first time such a study had been carried out on a global scale rather than on a country basis. She said it showed the impact that the climate crisis had on mental health and the threat posed to the World Health Organization’s aim to reduce suicide rates by a third by 2030. There are currently more than 700,000 suicides every year. “The study found interesting trends related to the increased suicide rates among, particularly, women and youth in relation to humidity. Women and children are known to be suffering disproportionately from the impacts of climate change and extreme weather events due to social structures and power relations. We need to look further into these relations and the contextual reasons behind this in diverse geographical areas and social groups,” she said. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. The charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and ChildLine on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgIn the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues From the “clues that could equally be headlines elsewhere” department, here’s Tramp … 22a Secret Service after prince over Virginia (7) [definition: secret] [wordplay: synonym for “service” after abbrev for prince, surrounding (“over”) abbrev for Virginia] [RITE after P surrounding VA] … directing us to PRIVATE. Meanwhile, Paul gives us, by my count, at least three definitions for the price of one … 20d Throne issue for PM and POTUS? (7) [definitions: PM; POTUS] [wordplay: synonyms for “throne” (as in WC) + issue (as in offspring)] [JOHN + SON] … when cluing JOHNSON; incidentally Paul is continuing to hold his friendly crosswording Zooms. Latter patter Here’s Anto in the quiptic, the Guardian’s stepping-stone puzzle “for beginners and those in a hurry”: 13a Common man takes on popular politician (8) [definition: politician] [wordplay: common way of addressing a man, containing (“takes on”) synonym for “popular”] [MISTER containing IN] So we have a MINISTER, who may be a politician, but also a member of the clergy, making a link from MINISTER to MONASTERY and all the rest. It’s a pleasing pair of words that, as I understand it, each started out as something in Latin then took different routes to our language. POTION and POISON, I’m told; REDEEM and RANSOM – and a pair that feels very close to once, onze, undici, and various other words for eleven, in which neither has much to say about eleven. One is OUNCE, which is usually a sixteenth of a pound but also a twelfth in some systems of measurement; the other is the subject of our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue INCH? Cluing competition Thanks for your clues for HAMMOCK. I enjoyed discovering your associations with this comforting item and considering which naval ranks might be found sleeping in one. For me, the hammock has always been first and foremost an infallible wedding gift. Friends may not have one; even if they have two, who couldn’t welcome a third? The audacity award must I think go to Combinatorialist for the recherché “In middle of deck, hanging around” and if we had a “discuss this!” award, it would be Lizard’s, for leaving me pleasingly pondering what to do with the hyphens in the splendid “Where to find Drake – edge of Plymouth with middle-of-game taunt”. The runners-up are Sue_Marie’s perhaps-Myopsian “Prone to snigger after joint here?” and Joey_Joe_Joe’s post-2018 “Gammon to make fun of woke here?”; the winner is PugliaForever’s possibly Cop-compliant “Place to hang meat substitute”. Kludos to Puglia. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds, and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below; the latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To is from a “guitarist whose finger-picking style featured in this paper’s “best albums of 2021 so far”. Clue of the Fortnight I’ve lost count of the ambiguities in this clue from one of the Telegraph’s Tuesday team … 24d Playing this, one might be putting upsetting record on loudly (4) [definition: game involving putting] [wordplay: reverse of (“upsetting”) synonym for “record” + abbrev for musical direction forte (“loudly”)] [reverse of LOG + F] … for that game with built-in distancing, GOLF. Stay safe. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.The lesson to be learned from Michal Sulima’s documentary is that if you’re planning to transport a piano to a village school in the Himalayas by yak, it’s advisable to first meet a yak – or at least Google one beforehand. Not having done due diligence, when 65-year-old piano tuner Desmond O’Keeffe turns up in India he discovers that yaks are a bit too titchy to carry his 100-year-old Broadwood &amp; Sons up and down mountains. There is a lot of charm to this film about O’Keeffe’s quixotic (bonkers would be another way of putting it) expedition to deliver a piano to a village in Zanskar, northern India – making it the highest in the world. He’s an endearing eccentric who says he can’t face retirement on a deckchair “eating lemon drizzle cake”. He got the idea for the trip from a customer at his Camden Market workshop, who’d planned to take a piano with her to teach at the school, but got pregnant and couldn’t travel. Somehow, the idea glued itself to O’Keeffe’s imagination. The village is a two-day trek from the road – and in the end the piano is carried by porters. There are echoes here of the grandiose mission in Werner Herzog’s movie Fitzcarraldo to haul a steamship over a mountain. But O’Keeffe is no Klaus Kinski; he is horrified when the piano threatens to pull seven or eight porters down the side of a mountain like an avalanche. “I wouldn’t put lives at risk for a piano,” he repeats afterwards, over and over again. Some might feel that his mission smacks of iffy cultural high-handedness: who is he to bestow this grand gift of music on people who have their own vibrant musical culture, thank you very much? But with O’Keeffe’s openness and warmth, it genuinely doesn’t come over like that. Though I wondered if spending a bit more time with the sherpas would have added another layer of understanding to the film. • Piano to Zanskar is released on 19 November in cinemas.It’s not often you hear a good fart gag, but the Coliseum panto has two. The first is the punchline of a Covid-19 joke, part of a brief pandemic-themed rally by Richard J Fletcher as a lovably vulgar Widow Twankee. He seems coy about reminding us of the outside world, but getting a laugh out of lockdown is no small feat. After that nod to topicality, the show changes tack for an evening of high-energy silliness, although there is a timely whiff of sleaze about Shaun Hennessy’s Emperor pocketing £4.5m profits from his Imperial Washing Corporation. He shares only loose change to show his gratitude before handing out an eviction order to Twankee, proprietor of the last independent laundry in Oldham. Fart gag number two lands with the splendid arrival of Marc Zayat as the Jinn of the Lamp. If you can imagine a camp hippy with a gift for rapping, you’re halfway there. Zayat doubles as one of the comic policemen, entertainingly paired with Alex Phelps, in a show, written by Fine Time Fontayne and director Chris Lawson, that is stripped of racial stereotypes. It observes panto traditions including incompetent cops and clothes-washing routines and has a principal boy, Shorelle Hepkin, who is a triple-threat Aladdin, singing, dancing and charming her way through a show whose energy is matched by its good cheer. She is equalled in gutsiness by Dora Rubinstein’s Princess Jasmine, their romance somehow convincing despite its breakneck speed. It is not a panto to dwell on the big emotions, preferring always to underplay love, poverty and fear if it means skating ahead to the next scene. With Liz Carney arriving from Rochdale (“the land that time forgot”) to wreak her evil magic as Aunty Banazar, there is a forceful female energy, not least because of the tireless work by the quartet of dancers. If Carney weren’t such a good singer, we’d boo her even more. Roused by Dave Bintley’s musical direction and cheered by Celia Perkins’s colourful designs (she uses all the colours), it is a happy, breathless show by a tightly drilled ensemble. Aladdin is at Coliseum, Oldham, until 8 January.Counter-terrorism police and MI5 are investigating a car explosion at Liverpool Women’s hospital that killed one person and injured another. Three people remain in custody after a taxi exploded at 10.59am on Remembrance Sunday. We would like to hear from people who have been affected or have any further information on the explosion. How to get in touch If you would like to share eyewitness accounts or news tips, anonymously if you prefer, directly with our journalists then please do so via the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please leave contact details. Though we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when deciding whether to send your information to the Guardian. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Anders Lindegaard is strikingly honest, open and self-reflective. A member of Manchester United’s last Premier League champions of 2012-13, the Helsingborg goalkeeper has a vivid recall, too, of a 15-year career that has also taken in Odense, Aalesund, West Bromwich Albion, Preston North End and Burnley. As an illustration, the 37-year-old outlines the moment Sir Alex Ferguson called him in 2010 when Lindegaard was with Aalesund, a first-tier Norwegian club. “I was in a grocery shop and had to walk out and call my parents. I was like: ‘What the fuck is happening?’ It was not just taking a step from playing Scandinavian football and going to a better club. It was going to my end destination. Where I’d always dreamed of. Manchester United. It was Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Gary Neville, Sir Alex Ferguson. The ones I’d followed since I was a tiny kid.” Lindegaard would live his United fantasy and become an English title winner but it was coloured by the despair of a serious injury suffered in training minutes after being informed that he had superseded David de Gea as first choice. After departing the club, Lindegaard would have to figure out his priorities, putting a young son first, as a troubled private life turned him “bitter” about England, a view that time has restored to a fondness for the country. His move to United ended a protracted transfer saga. “It ended up taking the edge from my game,” he says. “You wonder: ‘Are they here today?’ I remember we played European football just before the transfer window closed [in August 2010]: Motherwell away. All of a sudden, it wasn’t just Manchester United. It was Arsenal, Celtic, Ajax, Bayern Munich who were interested. “On the way, in the airport, the club director said: ‘If you play well, you’ll definitely be sold to one of the biggest clubs.’ Then he walked away. I was like: ‘Fucking hell, mate. Just let me play. I don’t want to think of the consequences of making a big mistake.’ I didn’t play badly but nothing happened in that window.” Months later it did, but not before dinner with Eric Steele, United’s goalkeeper coach. “Aalesund played a game in Oslo and Eric came to watch and we had a meal together. He said: ‘We can see you’ve got something special but our concern is: how will you react in front of 80,000? We don’t know.’ “Just after this Denmark played Portugal and 20 minutes in Thomas Sørensen gets an injury, and, as the back-up, I’m thrown into the very scenario United highlighted – a high-profile game – and I had Cristiano Ronaldo on toast with six or seven world-class saves. The next day United called and said: ‘You convinced us.’” Lindegaard signed in November 2010 for £3.5m and made his debut the following January in an FA Cup win over Southampton, the first of two appearances in the competition and his only ones that season. In the next, came his first chances for the club in the Champions League – a draw at Benfica – and the Premier League, in a victory over Norwich at Old Trafford. By early 2012 he had made 11 appearances that season, five of these in the league between 21 December – a win against Fulham – and 22 January, victory at Arsenal. Lindegaard was living his dream but was about to suffer injury heartbreak. “Eric came to me at Carrington and said: ‘The gaffer is very happy with you. You’re going to play the rest of the season in the Premier League. David [de Gea] is going to play in Europe.’ “I was thrilled but in training the same morning I was punching a ball over a mannequin and got my foot stuck and twisted my ankle. I lay on the ground and started crying – my whole world was falling apart. “I was out for the rest of that season. The next one, I couldn’t jump off my right foot. My kicking was horrendous. I was not mature enough to say: ‘My ankle is not right.’ I knew it was close between David and me and that David had little room for error before I’d get a chance. And I did – at Southampton, we won 3-2 and I then played a string of games.” From 2-29 September Lindegaard was chosen for four consecutive league matches, then Ferguson went back to De Gea, before the Dane was recalled for a next start on 17 November, briefly retaining his place before being dropped again after a 4-3 victory at Reading. He returned six months later when United had secured the championship, for a defeat by Chelsea and the 5-5 draw at West Brom, Ferguson’s managerial swansong. “We won at Reading but I played a terrible match and he dropped me. I was almost relieved because I could focus on trying to get my ankle right. But, that was it. I played at the end of the season including the last game of Ferguson’s career – another terrible display from me.” Lindegaard has an interesting take on his league winner’s medal. “I’m super proud of it, but it was not me who won that title,” he says. “I’m aware that in the great history of Manchester United I’m a whisper in the wind.” Lindegaard left United for West Brom in August 2015 having made 19 league appearances, five in the FA Cup, two the League Cup and three in the Champions League. Before the move to Helsingborg four years later he played once for West Brom in a single season there, 24 times for Preston across a loan and permanent transfer, and twice for Burnley between September 2017 and July 2019, as his personal life encroached. Of his United career Lindegaard says: “I probably did what was expected but not what I dreamt. Why? I’ve concluded that Anders Lindegaard at 100% could make a difference. It was not enough to be 90% and I dropped to 60%, God knows how low, with the injury. “I had chaos in my personal life, too, which was probably more significant. If that’s not working out you’re in trouble. When I joined Preston I spent up to a year trying to figure out my life. Then, at Burnley, two years dedicated to my son, who had been born in December 2012. I brought a child into the world and that’s your most important job. I wish I could have focused 100% on football without having to worry about what’s going on when I got home. But I’m not looking for people’s pity.” He was, though, soured by experience. “I look back at my years in England and have regrets,” says Lindegaard. “I turned into this bitter human being who was sick of England. It became obvious that it’s a capitalistic society where the rich have fooled the poor to leave Europe [Brexit]. My train of thought was poisoned due to a terrible private life. I lived in Wilmslow – it’s a beautiful place and when my son was born, in Wythenshawe hospital, he was there for a week as he wasn’t well. “One time when visiting him – I wasn’t allowed to stay at the hospital – I went in a grocery store nearby to buy fruit. I remember looking at these bloody hams, blown up by water and they looked disgusting. And many in English society are living in a place like this? I thought there’s something wrong: I can live where I live and see the people with their Chanel bags and Rolex watches, and there’s this as well. “But there’s some very beautiful things in England. First of all, you are an amazing people – the shit you go through and still have a smile on your face.” Lindegaard has found peace living in Copenhagen – from where he drives over the border to play for Helsingborg – with his “missus”, son and second child, with a third one due. He remains thoughtful about many issues. Of the racism that plagues footballers and wider society, Lindegaard says: “We have a WhatsApp group from the last Sir Alex team and I really understand those in it who are sick of all these campaigns to kick racism out of football. Fuck that. Stop campaigning. You got to do something about it. These people needs to be prosecuted.” Lindegaard is speaking the day after a loss for Helsingborg, who play in Sweden’s second tier. His annoyance at the defeat illustrates how a love of the sport remains. He says: “To have a passion is a huge privilege – a lot of people don’t have this in their life. My passion for football can also be scary because of retirement – what do I do then? And, also, when you play for United, it gives you so much from the world; when that stops, it’s not coming back. “It does something to you as a human and I’m not sure I was cut out for that. I reflect a lot on what I’ve become; is this really what I was meant to be? But what if I was another person without football? I don’t know who that is either. “Everyone playing football gets swallowed and at some point is spat out. Many players end up being fucked up. I’m not sure they would have ended up like that if they had a regular life.” Lindegaard, though, is content to keep playing for the foreseeable future and excited about life after football. He continues to learn from, and embrace, life.The US journalist Danny Fenster has been released from prison in military-ruled Myanmar, just days after a closed court sentenced him to 11 years in jail for a series of charges including incitement and visa violations. Fenster’s employer, Frontier Myanmar, an independent outlet, said on Monday afternoon that he had been released and was on a flight out of the country. Fenster, 37, was arrested in May 2021 at Yangon international airport as he tried to fly back home to Michigan. He had spent five and a half months in prison. Speaking after arriving in the Qatari capital Doha, Fenster said he wasn’t “starved or beaten” but was worried his ordeal would never end. Looking gaunt after his six-month imprisonment, said he was held for no reason but not mistreated by the Myanmar authorities. “I was arrested and held in captivity for no reason... but physically I was healthy,” he told journalists. “I wasn’t starved or beaten.” “I’m feeling all right physically. It’s just the same privations that come with any form of incarceration. You’re just going a little stir-crazy,” said Fenster, who will fly onwards to the US from Doha. “The longer it drags on, the more worried you become that it’s never going to end. So that’s the biggest concern, just staying sane through that.” Fenster’s family thanked those who had helped secure his release, saying: “We are overjoyed that Danny has been released and is on his way home – we cannot wait to hold him in our arms.” The military in Myanmar has imposed a sweeping crackdown on the media since seizing power in February, stripping publications of their licences and banning outlets from broadcasting. It has detained at least 126 journalists, media officials or publishers, of whom 47 remain in detention, according to the UN. Fenster is the only foreign journalist to be convicted of a serious offence since the coup. Frontier’s editor-in-chief, Thomas Kean, said the outlet was relieved that Fenster was finally out of prison, adding that he never should have been arrested. “The Frontier team would like to thank all who worked to secure Danny’s release over the past five and a half months. “But we also recognise Danny is one of many journalists in Myanmar who have been unjustly arrested simply for doing their job since the February coup. We call on the military regime to release all of the journalists who remain behind bars in Myanmar.” The former US ambassador to the UN Bill Richardson, who recently visited Myanmar, told the Associated Press news agency he had negotiated Fenster’s release during face-to-face meetings with the junta’s chief, Min Aung Hlaing. Richardson said in a statement that his team and Fenster would return to the US via Qatar over the next day and a half. “This is the day that you hope will come when you do this work,” Richardson said in a statement. “We are so grateful that Danny will finally be able to reconnect with his loved ones, who have been advocating for him all this time, against immense odds.” Last week Fenster was sentenced to three years for incitement for spreading false or inflammatory information, three years for contacting illegal organisations and five years for violating visa rules. Fenster had been accused of working for Myanmar Now, a banned media outlet, in the aftermath of the February coup – a claim his employer and lawyer say was countered by tax and social security records, as well as testimony from a Frontier employee. Fenster had resigned from Myanmar Now in July 2020 and joined Frontier Myanmar the next month, Frontier Myanmar said. He was due to face two further charges under an anti-terrorism act and under a sedition law. Either case could have resulted in a life sentence. The US, press groups, rights advocates and the UN high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet, condemned his detention. Bachelet said last week that his trial was “emblematic of the wider plight of journalists in Myanmar who have been facing constant repression since the 1 February military coup”. Fenster’s family said: “We are tremendously grateful to all the people who have helped secure his release, especially Ambassador Richardson, as well as our friends and the public who have expressed their support and stood by our sides as we endured these long and difficult months.”A taxi exploded outside Liverpool Women’s hospital in England on Sunday morning, killing one and injuring another. Here’s what we know so far: In what is being treating as a terrorist incident, a taxi exploded in flames outside Liverpool Women’s hospital in the city centre, shortly before 11am on Sunday. A male passenger inside the vehicle was killed in the blast and declared dead at the scene. Police believe they know the identity of the dead man, but have yet to release it. The taxi driver managed to escape before the flames spread and has been released from hospital after being treated for injuries. The taxi driver had picked up a passenger from Rutland Avenue in the Sefton Park area of Liverpool, about 10 minutes from the hospital. A police search of an address in Rutland Avenue uncovered items described by police as “significant”. Police inquiries indicate that a homemade improvised explosive device (IED) was brought into the cab by the passenger. The explosion was believed to be due to the ignition of the IED. Following police raids on Sunday, three men – aged 29, 26 and 21 – were arrested at an address in Sutcliffe in the Kensington area of the city under the Terrorism Act, police said in a statement on Sunday night. A fourth man, aged 20, was arrested on Monday at a separate address. All four men are being interviewed by counter-terrorism detectives. In the hours after the blast, a heavy police presence was reported at three streets in the city – Sutcliffe and Boaler streets in Kensington, and Rutland Avenue in Sefton Park. Fire crews and police officers wearing vests marked “negotiator” were seen at Rutland avenue and cordons remain in place. The motive for the apparent attack is unknown. Police assume the IED was built by the passenger who was killed in the blast. The reason why he took it to the Women’s hospital is also unknown, as is the reason for its sudden explosion. One possible motive is that the incident is linked to the Remembrance Day ceremony nearby. Liverpool’s assistant chief constable Russ Jackson, from counter-terrorism policing north-west, said: “We are of course aware that there were Remembrance events just a short distance away from the hospital and that the ignition occurred shortly before 11am. We cannot at this time draw any connection with this. But it is a line of inquiry which we are pursuing.” The investigation is being led by counter-terrorism police who are being assisted by Merseyside police and MI5. There is no specific threat to the area, but police patrols have been increased across Merseyside.The cabinet secretary, Simon Case, has been asked to investigate officials’ communication with four Conservative MPs with lobbying jobs with firms that secured multimillion government contracts or significant beneficial rule changes. Labour’s Fleur Anderson, the shadow cabinet office minister, has asked Case, the head of the civil service, to investigate correspondence with officials between MPs and the firms involved. Two MPs cited in the letter spoke in the House of Commons on issues connected to their lobbying work. Among those whom Anderson has highlighted is the former leader Iain Duncan Smith, who is facing questions after the Guardian reported on his £25,000-a-year second job advising a multimillion-pound hand sanitiser company and his chairing of a government taskforce that recommended new rules benefiting the firm. The MP and former Conservative party leader chaired the Taskforce on Innovation, Growth and Regulatory Reform, which made recommendations on cutting red tape that included alcohol-free hand sanitisers being formally recognised as suitable for use in the UK. The report made no reference to Duncan Smith’s relationship with Byotrol, which provides the NHS with 92% of its non-alcohol sanitiser. Another MP whom Case has been asked to investigate is the former Welsh secretary Alun Cairns, who took a £15,000-a-year job at the diagnostics company BBI Group, which was part of a consortium that secured a £75m government contract for lateral flow tests. He agreed to work up to 70 hours a year for the BBI Group as a senior adviser “providing strategic advice to the board”. MP Mark Pawsey’s role was also highlighted after he took up the role of chairman of the Foodservice Packaging Association in April 2020. Since then, he has twice spoken in the House of Commons about the effect of environmental legislation on plastic producers – calling it a “sad day” during a June 2020 debate over banning single-use plastic straws. Philip Dunne, the former defence minister, was also criticised for calling for more military spending without declaring his job with aerospace company Reaction Engines. The register of members’ interests says Dunne has earned £51,000 since July 2020 from the firm, which manufactures propulsion systems. In her letter to Case, Anderson said she was “writing to invite your assessment and action” after the disclosures during a week of damaging stories about lobbying by Conservative MPs, following a major U-turn by the government after it tried to amend rules governing MPs’ standards. “The companies that they are paid by have won government contracts and there are significant questions to answer regarding how these companies and MPs relate to government Ministers and government policy,” she wrote. “As we have seen with the Owen Paterson corruption scandal, many of these cases of consultancy and advisory work involve correspondence and meetings between Ministers, officials, companies and the MPs they pay as consultants. I am sure you will want to address any concerns around propriety.”This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. The single largest cause of death and suffering around the world is not cancer or dementia, but ageing. This may sound counterintuitive, but when viewed from the perspective of a biologist, the logic is inescapable: the changes that happen in our biology as we get older are the main cause of the diseases that are the world’s biggest killers today. The good news is that there is currently a revolution quietly underway in the world of ageing biology: scientists have discovered dozens of ways to slow - and even reverse - the ageing process in the lab. From changing what animals eat to treating them with drugs and even altering their genetic code, the first of these medicines are already making their way into human trials to explore whether the longer, healthier lives seen in animals are possible among us. In this fascinating masterclass with biologist and author Dr Andrew Steele, you will be introduced to the most exciting and consequential science of our time. He will take you through the fundamentals of ageing biology and why it has paved the way for us to stand where we are now - on the cusp of a medical revolution. You will learn about the ethical implications of longer lives, how you can yourself live long enough to benefit from revolutionary treatments (should you so choose), and how this branch of medical science has the potential to unlock cures for many - or even all - of the world’s most lethal diseases. Discover an entirely new perspective on ageing in this masterclass, from the molecular to the societal level. This course is for … Anyone who is ageing - which is everyone! If you live in the UK, you can purchase a ticket with a copy of Ageless:| The New Science of Getting Older without Getting Old at checkout for the combined price of £57.79 including postage and packing. Course content What is ageing and what are the biological processes that cause it? How can we use this understanding to treat ageing medically? What treatments could be available in the next few years, and the next 20? What are the ethical considerations for treating ageing? Practical tips for maximising your own lifespan Tutor profile Dr Andrew Steele is a scientist and the author of Ageless: The New Science of Getting Older without Getting Old. After acquiring his PhD in Physics from the University of Oxford, Andrew decided that ageing was the single most important scientific challenge of our time, and changed fields to computational biology. Following five years using machine learning to investigate DNA and NHS medical records, he is now a full-time writer, presenter and campaigner. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (GMT). Details This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. Date: Monday 31 January 2022 Times: 6.30pm-8.30 (GMT) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee), or £57.79 (plus £3.04 booking fee), with a copy of Ageless: The New Science of Getting Older without Getting Old This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm GMT | 7.30pm CET | 2.30pm EDT Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.John Nance Garner, vice-president to Franklin D Roosevelt from 1933 to 1941, famously said the office “wasn’t worth a bucket of warm piss”. Kamala Harris may now agree. The White House was moved to defend her on Sunday night, after leading US media outlets portrayed a VP struggling to make her mark. “For anyone who needs to hear it,” said the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, Harris “is not only a vital partner to [Joe Biden] but a bold leader who has taken on key, important challenges facing the country – from voting rights to addressing root causes of migration to expanding broadband.” Psaki was firing back on multiple fronts. On Friday, as Harris wrapped up a visit to France, the New York Times said: “Ten months into her vice-presidency, Ms Harris’s track record on delivering on the administration’s global priorities has been mixed.” Célia Belin, of the Center on the United States and Europe at the Brookings Institution, told the paper: “I think she’s been really hidden this whole time and out of the sight of most Europeans. I think she’s been quite under the radar.” Then, late on Sunday, CNN published a lengthy report headlined: “Exasperation and dysfunction: Inside Kamala Harris’ frustrating start as vice-president.” The report contained supportive voices, including the White House chief of staff, Ron Klain, who said Harris was “off to the fastest and strongest start of any vice-president I have seen”. CNN said Klain emphasised Harris’s work on Covid vaccine equity and foreign policy, and said: “Anyone who has the honor of working closely with the vice-president knows how her talents and determination have made a big difference.” But CNN also said Klain was “known as a Harris defender in the West Wing”. Like much in the piece, it was unattributed. CNN said it spoke to “nearly three dozen former and current Harris aides, administration officials, Democratic operatives, donors and outside advisers”. Its report began with a stark statement: “Worn out by what they see as entrenched dysfunction and lack of focus, key West Wing aides have largely thrown up their hands at [Harris] and her staff – deciding there simply isn’t time to deal with them right now, especially at a moment when Biden faces quickly multiplying legislative and political concerns.” Success on one of the biggest such concerns, the bipartisan infrastructure bill, will see the White House host a signing ceremony on Monday, a chance for the president to bask in public victory at a time when his poll ratings – and Harris’s – are sliding. Reports on Harris’s fortunes generally include discussion of her own political future. As the first Black and Asian woman to be vice-president, she is assured of her place in history. But Biden is nearly 79 and may not run for re-election. Speculation continues to mount over Harris’s chances in a contest for the next Democratic nomination, perhaps in opposition to Pete Buttigieg, who ran much more strongly in 2020 and who as transportation secretary has made a confident start to Washington life. Like Harris, Buttigieg has been attacked by the right – if not so bizarrely as in claims last week that Harris spoke with a French accent while in Paris. Buttigieg recently took paternity leave after he and his husband adopted twins. Criticised by Fox News hosts and others, he was defended by the White House. An unnamed “former Harris aide” told CNN it was “hard to miss the specific energy that the White House brings to defend a white man, knowing that Kamala Harris has spent almost a year taking a lot of the hits that the West Wing didn’t want to take themselves”. There is also a typically outlandish Washington rumour that Biden might remove Harris as VP by appointing her to the supreme court. Speaking to the Times, the former Connecticut senator Chris Dodd, a close Biden friend, said: “I’m hoping the president runs for re-election, but for whatever reason that might not be the case, it’s hard to believe there would be a short list without Kamala’s name on it. She’s the vice-president of the United States.” CNN reported perceived missteps by Harris, struggles to form a relationship with Biden beyond “an exhausted stalemate” and problems with staff. But one of the most widely discussed quotes was attributed to “a top donor to Biden and other Democrats”. “Kamala Harris is a leader but is not being put in positions to lead,” the donor said. “That doesn’t make sense. We need to be thinking long term, and we need to be doing what’s best for the party. “You should be putting her in positions to succeed, as opposed to putting weights on her. If you did give her the ability to step up and help her lead, it would strengthen you and strengthen the party.”Match of the tournament At their best, England were the most convincing team on display, but by the semi-final they had been weakened by injuries – what might Jason Roy have achieved with the 17 balls from which an out-of-sorts Jonny Bairstow scored a scratchy 13? – and then they lost the toss and, batting first, fell under New Zealand’s spell, scoring too slowly to set a genuinely daunting total. Still they nearly won, and after a brilliant 16th over from Liam Livingstone that cost three runs and included the wicket of Glenn Phillips (celebrated by the bowler as if it had actually decided something), New Zealand needed 57 from 24 balls. Jimmy Neesham and Daryl Mitchell got there in 18. Shot of the tournament The first of Asif Ali’s barrage of sixes off Karim Janat. When your team needs 24 off two overs, as Pakistan did against Afghanistan, both batsmen having faced a single delivery and one of them actually turning down a run because they think they ought to keep the strike, they had damn well better deliver. Asif hit four sixes off the next four balls. An awesome display of cool and quality under the most extreme pressure. Catch of the tournament The standard of fielding has been superb but Akeal Hosein’s catch, curtailing his follow-through to dive to his left and pluck a well-struck ball from the air with a single outstretched hand to dismiss Liam Livingstone, during West Indies’ encounter with England, was exceptional. Elsewhere England came first and second in the relay race; Jason Roy and Sam Billings combining to get rid of Sri Lanka’s Wanindu Hasaranga while Jonny Bairstow and Livingstone’s joint effort to get rid of Jimmy Neesham in the semi-finals would have beaten the lot had Bairstow’s knee not caught the boundary padding before he could get rid of the ball. Best bowler of the tournament Across the tournament, Shaheen Shah Afridi cemented his reputation as the Erling Haaland of cricket: young, physically daunting and almost unfairly talented. Often the new ball would swing for only one over and Shaheen could make it move like nobody else. Adam Zampa is the other obvious candidate, but when Shaheen had the ball in his hands at the top of an innings there was nowhere else to look, nowhere better to be. His opening barrage against India was spectacular, but he improved on it in the semi-final, dismissing Aaron Finch, getting about a centimetre away from trapping Mitch Marsh lbw next ball, and a couple of inches from bowling him with a booming inswinger the next. The good-player-in-a-bad-team award Of the teams that made it out of the first group stage, only Sri Lanka managed to beat a pre-qualified team in the Super 12s, while Bangladesh and Scotland finished, and often looked, pointless. But hidden in the Scottish lineup was one of the quiet stars of the tournament in Mark Watt, the left-arm spinner whose displays proved he belongs on a bigger stage than he generally gets to tread. Just ask eventual finalists New Zealand, who by a distance found it harder to score against Watt than any other bowler in the tournament. Rising star of the tournament “He’s a gem and he’s a superstar in the making,” said Sri Lanka’s captain, Dasun Shanaka of teammmate Hasaranga, and the 24-year-old certainly seems to be the full package. With the ball he has control and variation (albeit with a few extra matches to do so having come through the first group stage) and he took more wickets than anyone else in the competition, including 10 in four games against the pre-qualified teams in their Super 12s group, a hat-trick against South Africa and three for just nine runs against the Netherlands. He also scored a 47-ball 71 against Ireland and an outstanding 21-ball 34 against England, and even though in just over half of his 27 T20 international innings he has got out for a single-figure score (or nothing at all) it seems there is some serious batting talent there too.Celeriac is an acquired taste. When I was younger, I was fed so much parsnip, swede and celeriac that they felt like an assault on my underdeveloped tastebuds. But pair this humble root with potato in a silky soup or olive-rich mash, and its celery flavour is calmed and softened; eat it raw in a classic remoulade, and its crunchy, light celery-ness is enhanced. Here, I roast it for ease (cutting those raw batons can be a faff) before tossing it in a remoulade-like dressing; the pairing with lots of crunchy, sweet, peppery ingredients allows the celeriac’s mellow sweetness to sing. Roast celeriac and chicory salad with lentils, apple and a creamy mustard dressing Earthy, sharp, sweet and peppery: an autumnal salad packed with gratifying textures and vibrant acidity. Prep 20 min Cook 50 min Serves 4 60g hazelnuts 650g celeriac, peeled and cut into 2cm chunks 2 tbsp olive oil 1 tbsp thyme leaves or rosemary leaves, chopped Salt and pepper 200g puy or other green lentils 2 garlic cloves, peeled 2 small heads red or yellow chicory, roughly sliced, or 1 head frisee 80g watercress, roughly chopped 2 small crunchy apples (such as pink lady), quartered, cored and sliced into thinnish slices For the mustard dressing 1 small shallot, peeled and finely chopped 1 tbsp Dijon mustard 1½ tsp maple syrup, or honey if you don’t need it to be vegan 5 tbsp cider vinegar 8 tbsp olive oil Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. While it’s coming up to heat, toast the nuts in the oven for five to 10 minutes, until pale golden, then tip out on to a board, roughly chop and set aside. Toss the celeriac, two tablespoons of olive oil and the thyme/rosemary in a bowl, season generously and spread out on a baking tray. Roast for 25-30 minutes, until the celeriac is tender and dark and crisp around the edges. Put the lentils in a pan with the garlic and pour over enough boiling water to generously cover. Add a teaspoon of salt and simmer briskly for 20-25 minutes, until tender (you want the lentils to still hold their shape). Drain and transfer to a large bowl. Crush the garlic from the pan with the back of a spoon and mix in a small bowl or jar with the shallot, mustard, maple syrup and vinegar. Slowly whisk in the olive oil to emulsify, then season generously and toss half through the lentils while they are still warm. Spoon the lentils on to a large plate (or four individual ones). Toss the chicory, watercress and apples in half the remaining dressing, then spread out over the lentils. Scatter over the celeriac and nuts, then spoon over the rest of the dressing and serve. This salad is delicious warm and at room temperature, so you can make the lentils in advance. The simple flex … Thrill meat lovers by topping the salad with wafer-thin slices of briefly sauteed Parma ham or streaky smoked bacon as a crisp, salty garnish. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoEmmanuel Macron’s office has darkened the blue in the French flags flying around the Élysée Palace to bring the tricolore in line with how it looked after the French revolution. Presidential aides said the change happened in July last year, but nobody appears to have noticed until now. France’s navy has stuck with navy blue since the 18th century, when the flag became a symbol of the revolution. The French state introduced a lighter shade of blue on its flags in the 1970s. Europe 1 radio, which reported the story on Monday, said the move had been encouraged by Macron’s operations director, Arnaud Jolens, and adviser Bruno Roger-Petit, with a nudge from the naval officers who at the time made up the Élysée’s military chief of staff. According to officials, navy blue was considered “more elegant” but also felt to “reconnect with a symbol of the French Revolution”. Others had more divisive theories: that the darker blue, now noticeably different to the blue of the European Union flag, signalled a rift between France and Europe. The EU flag is Marian Blue, the tone declared the official colour for the Virgin Mary in the fifth century. The French flag – regularly flown or placed next to it – was changed to match it in the 1970s when the late Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, a staunch Europhile, was in the Élysée and when it was decided to lighten the colour of the French flag for aesthetic reasons to avoid a clash of blues. Presidential aides have denied the change marks “opposition to the blue used by the European flag”. “There is no ‘blue war’, it’s nonsense,” they added. Europe 1’s political correspondent Louis de Raguenel reported that the Élysée Palace is divided between those who consider the new flag ugly and say it clashes with the European flag, and others who are attached to seeing the flag of their childhood before the Giscard years. “No communication was made on this change of colour, no instructions were given to change or not all the official flags, the Élysée Palace affirms that the approach is an incentive,” De Raguenel wrote. “Emmanuel Macron’s entourage has no desire to give the image of a president who touches the deepest symbols of the country, even if deep down, as you might imagine, there is a meaning behind it all.”A 14-year-old black schoolboy has accused the Metropolitan police of racist targeting after claiming he has been stopped by police about 30 times in the last two years. He has not been charged with or convicted of any offence. The boy, who lives in south London with his 41-year-old mother, and hopes to train as an engineer, says he has been stopped and searched so many times by the police that he has become fearful of leaving home. “Every time I hear sirens I think the police are coming for me. I don’t want any headaches. I just don’t want the police to stop me any more,” he told the Guardian. His mother has made complaints to the Metropolitan Police Service, which has confirmed that its Directorate of Professional Standards has launched an investigation, and to the Independent Office for Police Conduct. In her complaint to the IOPC the mother says she believes her son has been targeted on the basis of his race and his age. “When the police stop me in the street to search me they put me in cuffs and ask me if I’m carrying weapons,” the boy said. “I don’t carry a knife and I’m not involved with drugs. I’ve even been stopped by the police when I’ve gone outside our flat to take the rubbish out for my mum.” He said that often when he has been stopped by the police they have not given him a written slip explaining the reasons for the stop. On some occasions when he was stopped they have given him a slip. Some of the slips are hard to read, others say he matches the description of people linked to crimes but does not provide detail of the descriptions police believe he matches. One slip said he matched a description of a person or persons wearing black clothing, another said he matched a description of people carrying out a robbery but does not provide details of the description of the suspects. “The first time the police stopped me was in June 2020 when I was 13,” the boy said. On 4 November 2021 police arrived at the family’s home with a search warrant. They said the boy had been linked to an offence involving road rage that happened in Kingston several months ago. Police searched the boy’s room but found nothing. The boy was at school at the time. Later that morning police called the boy’s mother and said he needed to present himself at a local police station to be interviewed. He attended with his mother but no charges were made against him. “The police showed us a photo of the suspect. He looks nothing like my son. He is a grown man, not a 14-year-old boy. He was wearing different clothing and was wearing aviator shades. My son wears glasses but they are nothing like those ones. My son needs his glasses so he can see.” Kevin Blowe, campaigns coordinator at Network for Police Monitoring (Netpol), said: “Stop and search is a crude tactic with limited value. It legitimises racial profiling by insisting that officers have to stop black children and young black men because they are at a ‘higher risk’ of alleged gang activity. That is why searches happen over and over again – once a young person becomes a target, they tend to remain one.” Habib Kadiri, research and policy manager at the police monitoring organisation Stopwatch, said: “Repeated stop-searches of people with no criminal convictions or offences is a form of harassment worthy of a police state. It is clear to us that there are police units committed to over policing black boys in parts of the capital based on fake racial stereotypes.” A Metropolitan police spokesperson said: “We are aware of two complaints received in respect of the stop and search of a 14-year-old boy. Both incidents happened in June 2021. Both complaints relate to the use of force by officers in the course of stop and search. The mother of the juvenile has been contacted by police to discuss the complaints. Professional standards officers from the south-west command unit and the violent crime taskforce are conducting the inquiries.” The spokesperson declined to answer questions about whether the boy had been targeted and racially profiled by the police, adding that the force did not have a record of all the stops referred to by the boy nor of the road rage incident.Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers was emotional upon his return to the football field on Sunday as the three-time NFL MVP helped his team to a 17-0 win over the Seattle Seahawks. The 37-year-old, who is unvaccinated, sat out the Packers’ loss to the Kansas City Chiefs last Sunday due to the NFL’s Covid-19 protocols, which call for a mandatory 10-day quarantine period for unvaccinated players who test positive. Rodgers completed 23 of 37 passes for 292 yards with no touchdowns and an interception in Sunday’s game at Lambeau Field as the Packers (8-2) returned to winning ways. “A lot of emotions, for sure,” Rodgers said after the game. “Good to be back with the guys, good to be back at home, good to be back on the field, really. Most emotions from the whole night was probably walking off the field after the game. Definitely got me a little misty heading off. So that was good to feel all those emotions and good to be back with the guys.” Rodgers did not practice all week and was cleared to play Saturday under the NFL’s protocols for unvaccinated players. The QB said before the season he was “immunized,” and after his positive test, he detailed in an incendiary radio interview his reasons for seeking alternatives to vaccination and his skepticism about the shots’ effectiveness. He also attacked the “woke mob” over the backlash he received. Rodgers later apologized for the misleading statement about his vaccination status. On Sunday, Rodgers said many had been supportive during his absence, including teammates, neighbors, coaches and Packers executives. “Everybody has an opinion and I understand that it’s a very polarizing issue for some individuals but I’m just focusing on the support that I got and it was deep and wide, and greatly appreciated,” Rodgers said. “There’s always going to be criticism in this world. I don’t define myself by the criticism but I understand it’s a part of this because this issue is definitely polarizing. But again, I’m just so deeply grateful for all the people that reached out.”Researchers say they have identified more than 100 students who died at a harsh residential school for Native Americans in Genoa, Nebraska. The search for the cemetery where many are believed to be buried continues. The Genoa US Indian School was operated by the federal government between 1884 and 1934. Brutal punishments and hard labour were commonplace for students, large numbers of whom were removed from their families and homelands against their will, prohibited from speaking tribal languages and forced to convert to Christianity in an effort to subdue or eliminate Indian culture. The announcement from the Genoa Indian School Digital Reconciliation Project, a collaboration between the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), the Genoa US Indian School Foundation and descendants and representatives from five Nebraska tribes, is among the most significant developments since the project began in 2017. The names of 102 deceased students were gathered from sources including newspaper archives and school newsletters, according to the researchers, who say official records were destroyed or scattered when the school closed. While some names are likely to be duplicates, the death toll from the school – which enrolled thousands from more than 40 tribal nations in its 50-year history – is probably far higher, said Margaret Jacobs, professor of history at UNL and project co-director. She said the names would be released after consultation with tribal leaders and after efforts to trace living relatives of the deceased were exhausted. “These children died at the school,” Jacobs told the Omaha World-Herald. “They didn’t get a chance to go home. I think that the descendants deserve to know what happened to their ancestors.” Some of the students, aged four to 22, died in accidents, by drowning or by shooting and in one case reportedly after being hit by a freight train. But most died from disease. Tuberculosis and pneumonia were rife in the federal Indian school system set up in the 1860s with the intention of educating tribal youth in the English language. The system took a dark turn in 1879 when a US army brigadier general, Richard Henry Pratt, founded Pennsylvania’s Carlisle Indian Industrial School, the first off-reservation boarding school for Native Americans, with the motto: “Kill the Indian, save the man.” In a harsh era, thousands of children were forced to leave their families and travel to schools in other states, to “remove them from tribal influences”. Many teachers forced students to speak only English, and many schools imposed military style rules. Braids were cut off and students given “white” names. Some graduates said they benefited from the experience and educational opportunities they would not otherwise have received, but numerous other accounts record harsh discipline, abuse and exploitation, the Genoa project says. One descendant claimed his great-grandmother was blinded while a student at Genoa, probably by having lye soap rubbed into her eyes as a punishment. The search for the school’s cemetery is continuing in partnership with the Nebraska Commission on Indian Affairs and the state archaeology office. Maps from the 1920s marked a plot of the 640-acre campus where it was believed to exist but ground-penetrating radar has failed to find any graves, project leaders said. “If we’re not able to find them, I think we need to do something to recognize that they lost their lives there,” Judi gaiashkibos, a citizen of the Ponca Tribe and the commission’s executive director, told the World-Herald. The troubled legacy of Native American boarding schools became a focus of Joe Biden’s administration in June when the interior secretary, Deb Haaland, announced an investigation into “horrific assimilation policies”. It followed the discovery of the graves of more than 200 children at an Indigenous residential school in Canada in May. In the US, Haaland, a Laguna Pueblo tribe member, said her maternal grandparents were among those forcibly removed, her grandfather to the Carlisle school. “Many Americans may be alarmed to learn that the United States has a history of taking Native children from their families in an effort to eradicate our culture and erase us as a people,” Haaland wrote in an opinion piece in the Washington Post. “It is a history that we must learn from if our country is to heal from this tragic era.” The Federal Indian Boarding School Truth Initiative will investigate allegations of abuse and assist efforts to locate burial sites. “I’m looking to see something good come out of this,” gaiashkibos said. “Perhaps we will find some way to restore language, to restore some of the culture that was stripped from us. “Everyone needs to learn the stories and say, ‘America did this and we can do better’.”Thousands of children have returned to their classrooms after more than 18 months of home study in the Philippines, thought to be the last country to reopen schools since the start of the pandemic. On Monday morning, 120 schools began on-site lessons through a pilot project. Footage by the broadcaster ABS CBN showed children at a school in Alaminos line up outside to take their temperatures, complete a health form and wash their hands before entering class. Students, who wore face masks and face shields, sat at desks that were partially covered by plastic windows. To reduce mixing, children are required to eat lunch at their desks and are only allowed to leave the classroom to go to the bathroom. Children who attended classes on Monday would be taught in groups of no more than 15, and spend between three and five hours in school, education assistant secretary Malcolm Garma told media prior to the reopening. In September, Unicef identified six countries where schools have remained “almost completely closed” between March 2020 and 30 July 2021: the Philippines, Bangladesh, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Panama, which gradually reopened schools from 31 May. Of these countries, the Philippines is the last to begin resuming in-person teaching. President Rodrigo Duterte said in June 2020 that in-person classes would not return until a vaccine was available in the country. He continued to reject proposals to reopen schools this year, warning that doing so would put children “in jeopardy” and that they could also infect elderly relatives. On top of school closures, children in the Philippines have also faced tough lockdown restrictions, including rules banning them from playing outside or in public spaces. Until this month, children in the capital, Manila, have been barred from going to indoor restaurants, shops and arcades. Earlier in the pandemic, doctors’ groups had advised against allowing young children into malls, arguing they are less able to follow disease control measures such as wearing a mask. Education advocates said the prolonged closure of schools has had a major impact on children’s development and on their mental health. “For many children, particularly in disadvantaged and poorest communities, schools may be the only place where they can have a chance to learn, especially if parents themselves are uneducated or they are too focused on work due to financial stress,” said Shiena Base, a child protection specialist based in the Philippines for the global education NGO Educo. “We also fear that as the situation continues, many children will eventually lose interest in school, or will be forced to drop out.” At least 1.1 million pupils did not enrol at school during the last academic year, after the pandemic prompted a switch to remote learning. “We believe that some children will drop out and simply not return,” said Base. A global report by Educo, which included responses from nearly 8,000 children across 12 countries, found that children surveyed in the Philippines, together with those in Bolivia and Guatemela, expressed the strongest desire to study in school. This is possibly because of the drawn-out closure of schools, said Base. Cases of Covid-19 in the Philippines have fallen since a peak in September, with the country now confirming an average of 2,065 cases over the past seven days, according to Our World in Data, which tracks infections globally. Roughly a third of the population has been fully vaccinated. The Philippines recently began offering vaccination for children aged 12 to 17.Indigenous peoples came to Cop26 in Glasgow with clear goals that we wanted to see reflected in the final results. Now it is over, we don’t see the path forward we were hoping for. There is still too much wrangling between the developed and the developing countries, with the developed nations blocking much-needed agreements on rights and funding. And overall progress towards implementing the commitments made in the Paris agreement is too slow. We wanted to ensure that the decisions included the need to respect human rights, including indigenous peoples’ rights, in undertaking adaptation, mitigation, and loss and damage measures to deal with the immediate effects of the climate crisis. We also wanted Cop26 to adopt the local communities and indigenous peoples platform, as agreed by the facilitative working group, an initiative that would ensure indigenous peoples and their knowledge would be included in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process. It is vital that indigenous peoples are able to directly access finance, so that when they undertake actions on the climate crisis it is from a position of strength, and they are ensured the protection of rights to own, control and manage territories, especially their forests. It was also our view that article 6 of the Paris agreement on market and non-market mechanisms for emissions trading and offsets should include us when these are designed and implemented, and our rights should be protected. Also that an international grievance mechanism be established which we can use in case our rights are violated in the implementation of article 6. I am happy to see the preamble of the Cop26 cover decision states that parties “respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples”. This decision also recognises and acknowledges the important role of stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, in “averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change”. The decision also recognises the “importance of protecting, conserving and restoring ecosystems to deliver crucial services, including acting as net carbon sinks, reducing vulnerability to climate change impacts and supporting sustainable livelihoods, including for indigenous peoples and local communities”. When several countries and philanthropic donors committed $1.7bn to indigenous peoples to protect their forests, I voiced my hope that these resources would be effectively and directly accessed by indigenous peoples and not go through intermediaries such as states or the big conservation organisations. A protocol was adopted, which if effectively implemented, means indigenous peoples and local communities will be able to further develop and strengthen the use of their traditional knowledge, practices and innovation on climate-change mitigation and adaptation. That decision emphasised “the important role of indigenous peoples and local communities’ culture and knowledge in effective action on climate change”, urging parties “to actively involve indigenous peoples and local communities”. Article 6 on market and non-market based mechanisms for mitigation mentions the need to respect indigenous peoples’ rights but does not mention the need to obtain our free, prior and informed consent. We hoped for an international grievance mechanism but that was downgraded. So some good was done, but there were many inadequacies, such as the agreement to “phase down” rather than “phase out” coal production, even if it was an advance to see coal mentioned for the first time in a Cop decision. The biggest coal producers and users, such as China, the US, Australia and India, also did not sign on to an earlier pledge to end the use of coal power. With this, it is difficult to imagine that the 1.5C goal will be achieved. What we need is for countries who are contributing most to greenhouse gas emissions to be serious in cutting back on fossil fuel production. For us in developing countries, the capacity of our governments to adapt and mitigate is directly dependent on the provision of finance from the rich world. And yet, the commitment to deliver $100bn every year from 2020 was not reaffirmed. We indigenous peoples will continue to do our duties and fulfil our obligations to Mother Earth and to our future generations. But we will be able to do these better if our collective rights to our lands, territories and resources, to culture and to our traditional knowledge, practices and innovations are respected and protected. Many lives of indigenous leaders and activists have been sacrificed nurturing the ecosystem the world needs. Cop26 didn’t do enough to set us on a clear path to 1.5C, or to allow vulnerable countries and people to adapt to the ongoing crisis. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz is the director of Tebtebba Foundation (Indigenous Peoples’ International Centre for Policy Research and Education) in the PhilippinesChurches, abbeys and cathedrals have been selling off their pews and we would like to know if you have bought one. Why did you want a pew and what have you done with it: is it a central feature in your home or garden? Are you a business that bought pews from churches and sold them on? Are there lots of customers eager to buy pews? What’s the oldest pew you’ve sold and did it have a story behind it? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Covid booster vaccines can be extended to those aged between 40 and 49 in the UK after being approved by the government’s vaccines watchdog, which also gave approval for teenagers aged 16 and 17 to receive second jabs. While such decisions are devolved, all devolved nations tend to accept JCVI guidance. Ministers in England, Scotland and Wales have already said they would extend boosters. The announcements, made in a virtual briefing by Prof Wei Shen Lim, the chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), will be welcomed by ministers, who have been keen to extend vaccination programmes before winter. Immediately after the JCVI gave the green light for boosters for over-40s, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the advice had been accepted in England. “I have asked the NHS to prepare to offer those eligible a vaccine as soon as possible,” he said. The Scottish government said separately it would also extend its booster programme and allow 16- and 17-year-olds to receive a second dose. The move comes after a study by the UK Health Security Agency found that boosters gave more than 90% protection in people over 50. The research showed that two weeks after receiving a booster dose, protection against symptomatic infection was 93.1% in those who had initially received Oxford/AstraZeneca and 94.0% for Pfizer/BioNTech. Lim said it was possible boosters might be extended further down the age range. “It may well be that adults who are under 40 years might require a booster dose or a third dose at some point. We don’t know whether that is definitely the case yet. “We are looking very closely at the data all the time and should there be sufficient signal to warrant a third dose, so a booster dose for this age group, then certainly we will announce that and advise that accordingly.” Speaking at the same briefing as Lim, England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, warned that even with the extension of boosters, intended to tackle potentially waning immunity from earlier jabs, winter could be a difficult time with Covid. He said: “People keep asking me about Christmas. I think for Christmas and the winter period, we can expect respiratory viruses to be around and we are particularly concerned that flu will come back and add to our problems, and it could be quite a bumpy few months ahead.” Speaking on a visit to a vaccine centre in east London on Monday morning, Boris Johnson also warned of a potential “blizzard” of infections over the winter, urging people to get boosters if eligible. “What we have certainly got to recognise is there is a storm of infection out there in parts of Europe, you can see those numbers ticking up very sharply in some of our continental friends,” the prime minister told reporters. “And we’ve just got to recognise that there is always a risk that a blizzard could come from the east again, as the months get colder.” Those currently eligible for a booster, which is usually given six months after the second dose, include those aged 50 or over, or anyone younger seen as clinically very vulnerable to Covid. Others who are eligible include frontline health and care workers, or those who care for someone at high risk from Covid. There is a separate programme of third jabs for people who have compromised immune system, for whom vaccines are often less effective. It was also announced that people aged 16 and 17 can receive a second Covid jab 12 weeks after their first. The JCVI decided in favour of first jabs for the age group in early August. But there had been no updates since, with some parents reporting that GPs were telling teenagers they would need to wait until they were 18 for their second dose. The JCVI is understood to have approved second jabs in outline last month but nothing had been formally announced. Ministers see the extension of boosters as a key element in efforts to mitigate the impact of Covid over the winter, with the number of jabs now picking up after as slow start. So far, 12m boosters had been given, with 2m in the last week, the Conservative party co-chair Oliver Dowden said. Among efforts to speed up the process, some people are being invited for boosters five months after their second jab, rather than six. Covid infection rates have fallen during November but they are rising again, and more than 1,000 deaths connected to the virus were recorded in the week to Sunday.The Trump Organization has reportedly agreed on a $375m deal to sell its hotel near the White House in Washington DC. The Wall Street Journal first reported the long-in-the-offing deal, with CGI Merchant Group, a real estate investment firm from Miami. The New York Times said the buyer was exploring a renaming of the hotel, replacing the Trump brand with Waldorf-Astoria, under a deal with Hilton. Any deal must be approved by the federal government, which leased the Old Post Office building on Pennsylvania Avenue to Donald Trump in 2013. The hotel opened for business in 2016, shortly before Trump defeated Hillary Clinton for the presidency, and swiftly became a magnet for controversy. Trump allies and foreign governments seeking to do business with the Trump administration made the hotel a Washington power centre, leading to accusations of self-dealing and violations of the emoluments clause of the US constitution. The Trump Organization explored a sale before the coronavirus pandemic, during which business suffered badly. Problems deepened after Trump was beaten at the polls by Joe Biden, a defeat he attempted to overturn by stoking supporters to attack the Capitol, at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue. In March this year, Sally Quinn, an influential Washington author and journalist, told the Guardian she could not “imagine most people staying there when they come. I don’t know anybody who goes there or has gone there. “I suspect that whoever does buy it will take down all the gilt and all of the trimmings and turn it into something very un-Trump-like.” Documents released amid House investigations of Trump’s affairs have shown that the hotel lost $74m between 2016 and 2020. Trump’s financial problems have been widely reported – in October he fell off the Forbes list of the 400 wealthiest people in America for the first time in 25 years. He is also in widespread legal jeopardy, over his business dealings as well as his attempts to subvert the election. Nonetheless, Trump remains the dominant power in the Republican party and seems likely to mount another White House run. Noah Bookbinder, president of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, which sued Trump for accepting payment from foreign governments via the hotel, said: “Donald Trump is now selling … the location of four years of self-enrichment, conflicts of interest and constitutional violations.” “Selling it now that he’s out of office and the grift dried up is, to say the least, too little, too late.” The Crew lawsuit was dismissed after Trump left office, and the matter deemed moot by the supreme court.This musical, boasting a lively voice cast and original songs by Lin-Manuel Miranda, has been promoted as the 60th “canonical” film from Walt Disney Animation Studios. But however well-meaning, this milestone movie could almost represent a creative crisis for Disney – it feels like yet another step down the cul-de-sac of bland, algorithmically generated entertainment: more Stepford content from the dream factory. There are some nice moments and sweet show tunes, but Encanto feels like it is aspiring to exactly that sort of bland frictionless perfection that the film itself is solemnly preaching against, with a contrived storyline that wants to have its metaphorical cake and eat it. Our heroine is Mirabel Madrigal: a smart, introspective, bespectacled teen living with her extended family in a magic house with a mind of its own in an idyllic village in a magically created valley somewhere in Colombia (“encanto” means enchantment or spell). She is voiced by Stephanie Beatriz, who recently had a small role in Miranda’s musical In the Heights but is probably still best known for playing the supercool tough cop Diaz in the TV comedy Brooklyn Nine-Nine. Mirabel’s grandma is the formidable matriarch Abuela (voiced by María Cecilia Botero), who lost her husband many years ago, and for whom this magical house was mysteriously created at the time, apparently rising up in defiance of this great sadness. And all of her children and grandchildren turn out each to have a magic power, of which Abuela is intensely proud. Mirabel’s mum Julieta (Angie Cepeda) can heal people with her cooking, and I guess only a pedant would ask why she doesn’t heal Mirabel’s eyesight. Mirabel’s sister Isabella (Diane Guerrero) is a perfect Instagram-style princess who can make flowers bloom with her sheer loveliness. Her other sister Luisa (Jessica Darrow) has super-strength and can lift buildings. Her aunt Pepa (Carolina Gaitán) can control the weather and cousin Dolores (Adassa) has super-hearing. This is a pretty heteronormative household but her cousin Camilo (Rhenzy Feliz) can shapeshift because he doesn’t know who he is yet. But wait. There is one person who doesn’t have a gift and that is poor Mirabel herself. Yet when a sudden, terrible crisis occurs and all the members of the Madrigal family look like losing their powers, it is Mirabel who must step up and save everyone and everything – by tracking down the family’s missing uncle Bruno (John Leguizamo) whose own gift of prophecy allowed him to foresee this awful eventuality and Mirabel’s own part in the fightback. And … well … maybe this family of fanatical overachievers need to see how their supernatural superiority is a neurotic group symptom of unhappiness. Maybe they need humble Mirabel to bring them to a new enlightenment. So are their gifts a good thing or a bad thing? They didn’t seem like such a bad thing in the film’s opening two acts: these gifts seemed to be part of everyone’s innocent well-being, abilities lightly and modestly worn. And as the rescuing of these powers is the plot motivation, it is an uncomfortable turnaround for these powers to be represented as something to be opposed or surmounted – a paradox which the film does not acknowledge or resolve – especially as we get a pretty broad hint that they may in any case be magically restored. This is a flavourless, unsatisfying film.The launch of the UK’s first bottle and can deposit scheme is expected to be delayed again, with Scottish ministers accused of giving in to lobbying from retailers and industry. The scheme, in which shops in Scotland will be required to install recycling machines and charge a 20p deposit on every can and bottle, was due to be launched in July next year – three years after it was originally unveiled. Deposit return schemes have been shown to cut littering, reduce waste sent to incinerators that contribute to climate heating, conserve scarce resources and cut energy use by boosting glass, plastics and metal recycling. It is understood Nicola Sturgeon’s cabinet will be told on Tuesday the scheme will not now start until March or October 2023, despite the Scottish National party’s manifesto pledge earlier this year it would start as planned next July. The delay has alarmed environment campaigners, who had originally praised the Scottish government’s leadership. The Association for the Preservation of Rural Scotland, Greenpeace UK and Surfers Against Sewage are lobbying MSPs to reject the delay, which will need to be approved by Holyrood. The scheme was originally due to start in April this year. “A further delay just after Scotland hosted Cop26 would send out a clear message to the world that – despite all its fine words – the Scottish government is simply not serious about striving for net zero,” the campaigners told MSPs last week. The delay is expected to be announced in Holyrood on Wednesday by the Scottish Greens minister, Lorna Slater, who was appointed Scotland’s green skills, circular economy and biodiversity minister in a historic cooperation deal between Sturgeon’s government and the Greens in August. Slater’s decision to approve the delay will cause anger and disquiet among Scottish Green activists and voters: next year’s start-date was also set out in the party’s manifesto at May’s election. Three days after Sturgeon revealed her government would begin official talks on a cooperation deal with the Greens, Slater tweeted: The deposit return policy will directly affect major drinks firms such as AG Barr, the makers of Irn-Bru, which won worldwide fame when it became a talking point during the Cop26 climate talks. AG Barr had the monopoly on supplying soft drinks inside the summit venue. Sturgeon, who has criticised the Glasgow climate deal as inadequate, presented the US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a can of Irn-Bru last week. A Scottish government spokesperson said ministers “remain fully committed” to implementing the scheme but would not confirm or deny it would be delayed. He confirmed the start date was under review. “Industry has made progress, including the establishment of a scheme administrator, Circularity Scotland,” he said. “This has been done in trying circumstances, with those sectors responsible for delivering the scheme facing unprecedented disruption as a result of the pandemic and Brexit.” Angus MacDonald, the former SNP MSP who chaired the Holyrood committee that oversaw the scheme’s legislation, said there was no good reason for another delay, and that Norway and Germany were far faster in implementing their schemes. “Modern systems tend to take about a year to get set up once the structure is agreed, as happened here months ago. I’ve seen no good reason why our clear commitment to launch Scotland’s already delayed system next year can’t be met,” he said. Circularity Scotland hinted on its website the start date could be delayed. “Currently, the launch of the scheme is anticipated to take place on 1 July 2022, however this may change depending on the outcome of a review currently being undertaken by the Scottish government,” it said. APRS, Greenpeace and Surfers Against Sewage predict a further delay will lead to millions of used cans and bottles littering towns and the countryside. In a briefing given to Holyrood MSPs last week, they said 64m bottles and cans would be littered in Scotland between April 2021 – the scheme’s original start date, and July 2022, increasing cleansing and waste disposal costs for local authorities. Zero Waste Scotland, a government-funded charity, has estimated the deposit return scheme will cut Scotland’s carbon emissions by 160,000 tonnes a year. Nina Schrank, a plastics campaigner at Greenpeace, said: “It’s shocking to see the Scottish government once again choosing to delay the long-awaited deposit return scheme until 2023, while continuing to spout fine words about environmental protection. This vital manifesto promise, backed by the Scottish Greens and SNP, has yet to be delivered and this new delay is not good enough. “If Nicola Sturgeon’s government wants its green credentials to be taken seriously, it needs to start turning words into actions: more delay means plastic pollution continues to devastate people and planet, and her words ring hollow. Our planet can’t afford many more broken promises and delays like this.”The US private equity group Bain Capital has insisted that LV= customers will “receive significant financial benefits” as it tried to counter growing concerns over its proposed £530m takeover of the mutual insurer. In a statement circulated on Monday morning, Bain insisted that it was “committed to the long-term growth and success” of LV=, originally known as Liverpool Victoria, by growing its customer base, reclaiming its position as one of the top three life insurers, and increasing the reach of its equity release mortgage product. “LV= members will receive significant financial benefits from our investment, while simultaneously being safeguarded from substantial future liabilities,” the American firm, which was co-founded by the Republican senator Mitt Romney, said. It highlighted a £160m investment to modernise the business, develop new products and improve customer service, as well as £264m to fund future pensions payouts for customers and service debt, which would otherwise be paid through profits. Bain also pointed to the £111m earmarked for LV=’s near 1.2 million members, as well as the £101m that will be shared with its 297,000 “with-profits” policyholders – who legally own LV=. However, customers have balked at the fact that it will only result in payments worth £100 each for regular policyholders. Gareth Thomas, Labour’s shadow minister for international trade and the chair of the all-party parliamentary group for mutuals, suggested Bain’s statement was “just spin”. He said: “There’s nothing new here; some money from the Bain deal but also money already in LV’s coffers from the sale of its insurance arm.” Bain’s charm offensive comes as LV= members and politicians raise concerns over the deal, which will mean abandoning the mutual status of the insurer and shifting ownership from its members to the private equity house. Campaigners have said the takeover could result in worse payouts for customers and poorer customer service. MPs also worry that private equity firms’ focus on profits could result in stripping the company of its assets and loading it with debt before selling it to another bidder in a few years’ time. Bain has said it will not saddle LV with debt. Thomas also highlighted concerns that members have little information about a rival bid by the mutual Royal London, which could have maintained the company’s mutual status – as well as what LV=’s chief executive, Mark Hartigan, and the chair, Alan Cook, may gain from choosing Bain over rival suitors. LV= has denied that either of the men stand to personally benefit. “We are still not being told how much other bidders including Royal London would have invested in Liverpool Victoria’s members and they have a right to know that before they vote to close down their business and sell up so Bain, Cook and Hartigan can become even wealthier,” Thomas said. Matt Popoli, a managing director of Bain Capital, said: “Our proposed investment maintains an independent LV=, and is predicated on LV=’s inherent significance, its heritage and brand. To be sustainable and achieve long-term success, LV= needs capital to address its heavy debt pile, fund its pension liabilities and invest for growth. “With-profits members should not bear the burden of this investment. As a result of the transaction, LV= will be strengthened with access to more capital and structured with less debt.” Members will be asked to vote on Bain’s proposed takeover on 10 December.Online abuse is still rife almost two years after presenter Caroline Flack’s death, her friend and fellow broadcaster Laura Whitmore has said. Speaking to the Guardian restaurant critic Grace Dent on the Comfort Eating podcast, which is released on Tuesday, Whitmore said not much had changed since Flack took her own life in February 2020. The presenter died following her arrest on charges of assaulting her boyfriend, Lewis Burton, which led to intense public and media scrutiny. Whitmore, who took over from Flack in presenting ITV’s Love Island, said: “I think there’s still a lot of anger in the world. And I think the press still tends to prefer to go with a negative headline. It’s hard because you would hope after something as shocking that you know, and something as horrific as what happened – I can’t even believe how long ago it is now, does it still feel so fresh – that some change will happen.” After Flack’s death, Whitmore said: “You don’t have to tear down someone to feel good about yourself.” On the podcast, the presenter said not much had changed since she made these remarks, adding that the way people spoke to one another online was “not OK”. She said: “There are certain papers I refuse to work with. And because of that, they will come for me and it’s hard. And it’s hard because I refuse to do an interview with them because of how they’ve treated friends of mine in the past or how they’ve written about them. And until they change, until they apologise or until they become better, I’m not going to work with them. But because of that, I’m fair game and that’s hard because it’s exhausting and it’s tiring. But if you don’t stand up, it’s not going to get better. And if you don’t say something, change won’t happen. But it’s just knowing what battles to fight.” Since Flack’s death there has been scrutiny of how parts of the media cover mental health problems, and in particular the treatment of young women in the public eye. After the release of a US documentary exploring coverage of Britney Spears in the 2000s, the Duchess of Sussex’s comments in her interview with Oprah Winfrey prompted calls for greater care over the handling of the issue – alongside some responses casting Meghan as a liar. Flack’s mother has previously said the media have failed to learn the lessons of her daughter’s death and must take responsibility for coverage of public figures struggling with mental health problems. She said she hoped the outlets that “wrote all the horrible things about Caroline” would “take away that, before they print anything, at least find out if it’s true. It’s someone’s life, it’s someone’s child, it’s someone’s sister or brother.” She added: “I don’t think they’ve learned yet.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.It was not so long ago, children, that a person desiring to watch a movie at their leisure had no choice but to purchase a round, shiny object called a Digital Video Disc. The early days of DVD continued and widened a debate begun during the VHS era, in that many titles were released in both “widescreen” and “fullscreen” formats from which a discerning customer could make their own choice. The widescreen presentation would fit the theatrical projection to the average consumer TV, “letterboxing” the frame with black bars called mattes above and below to squeeze a long rectangle into a shorter one. As promised by the name, fullscreen versions instead filled the entirety of the TV by cutting off space on the left and right of a shot. This was the demonstrably inferior option – you’re missing parts of the movie, sometimes elements integral to the text – but customers kept buying. For them, the feeling of seeing more overruled the fact that they were in actuality seeing less. Fast-forward to today, and the cinematic medium now faces an odd inverse of this schism in visuals. The notion that every inch of our massive televisions should be put to active use has compelled Disney to re-release 13 of their Marvel Studios films in “Imax Expanded Aspect Ratio”, ostensibly bringing the immensity of the multiplex into the living room. In practice, this special feature of the Disney Plus streaming app unmasks the image, restoring space on the top and bottom that had previously been cropped out for ordinary theaters. The taller Imax screens allow for a width-to-height ratio of 1.90:1, as opposed to your given movie house’s anamorphic standard of 2.35:1, without the sacrifices in visibility of a fullscreen DVD. Disney wants to extend this experience to the home, where the usual high-def TV has a ratio of 16:9 (or more relevantly for comparison here, 1.77:1). As the press release on Marvel’s own web site puts it, this on-demand Imax “offers up to 26% more picture for select sequences – meaning more of the action is visible on screen, just as the film-makers intended”. Whether this represents the realization of the film-makers’ intentions is between them and their god, but it’s true that in terms of simple volume, we’re afforded greater coverage of the hectic battle scenes that have become this studio’s trademark. For a scene like the climactic Götterdämmerung that closes out Avengers: Endgame, wherein every speck of the frame has been crammed with computer-generated visual information, the Imax ratio has a practical utility. In the extreme wide shots of the fracas, the expanded canvas affords a view of additional flying ships, Iron Man’s robotic minions, and Thanos’s enemy combatants as they clash everywhere at once. For those Marvel obsessives set on digesting every crumb of content, this boils down to a basic question of volume, this new functionality allowing for another step toward total completism by showing what’s been previously unseen. But for those viewers who wish only to enjoy a film in its most logical and natural form, there’s a distracting toll to be paid. When the Imax versions aren’t revealing the full scale of scenes jam-packed with commotion, they’re destroying the composition of passages that would otherwise be normal, unremarkable film craft. Consider a moment early on in Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings, when the martial arts master Xu Wenwu first meets the forest guardian Ying Li; when they exchange dialogue before scuffling, what should be a by-the-book shot/reverse shot set-up is turned sparse and strange by the thick stripes of negative space in the Imax-enabled zone. A few inches of emptiness hang over Wenwu’s head, moving him from the frame’s center to an awkward lowered position, as if his photograph has been taken by someone not that fluent with point-and-shoot camera use. This counterintuitive maximalism comes from the same paradigm of blockbuster muchness that has compelled many MCU entries’ run times to strafe the three-hour mark. We’ve been made to believe more is more, despite control and restraint having always been keys to film-making brilliance. Just as the sprawling lengths of these films come at the price of brisk, satisfying pacing, so too does the anti-grandeur of this pseudo-Imax distort the very art it attempts to take to the next level. There’s a reason this format has been restricted to brick-and-mortar cinemas up until now, and not just because it plays better when looked up at from an auditorium seat rather than down on from a couch. The thrill of this moviegoing mode depends on its huge proportions, a dwarfing sensation completely lost when transposed to the TV. The streaming giants would love nothing more to prove that there’s no difference between exhibition in public and the home, but this latest innovation succeeds only in proving the opposite.Tesco’s festive TV ad featuring Santa Claus bearing a Covid vaccine passport has prompted more than 1,500 complaints, making it the most complained-about advert of the year. The advert, titled “This Christmas, Nothing’s Stopping Us”, shows the public determined to enjoy a proper Christmas with family and friends after lockdown restrictions prevented gatherings last year. However, in one scene a reporter appears on TV with “breaking news” telling viewers that “Santa could be quarantined”. Father Christmas is then shown presenting his Covid pass at border control, proving he has been vaccinated to a customs officer so he can enter the country without restriction. Most of the complaints made to the UK advertising regulator state the scene is coercive and encourages medical discrimination. The scene sparked controversy on social media, attracting criticism from those in the anti-vaccination movement. The Advertising Standards Authority, which enforces the UK advertising code, said that it is reviewing the complaints to see if they warrant an investigation for a potential breach of the rules. “We’ve currently received over 1,500 complaints regarding this ad,” said an ASA spokesperson. “The large majority of complaints assert that the ad is coercive, and encourages medical discrimination based on vaccine status. We are currently carefully reviewing these complaints to determine whether there are any grounds for further action.” The 90-second ad, which is set to Queen’s Don’t Stop Me Now, premiered on Saturday during ITV’s Celebrity Chase Special. It is being supported by a mix of press and out-of-home advertising, such as poster sites, billboards and bus stops and sides, as well as radio, social media promotion and in-store displays. At launch, BBH, the London-based ad agency behind the campaign, described the ad as a “rallying cry to show we’re made of harder stuff this year”. Tesco has been approached for comment.The explosion outside a hospital in Liverpool that left one man dead and another seriously injured has been declared a terrorist incident, police have said, as the terror threat level in the UK was raised. Police said that following discussions with bomb disposal officers the explosion was being treated “as the ignition of an explosive device”. A taxi burst into flames outside the Liverpool Women’s hospital at 10.59am on Remembrance Sunday in dramatic scenes that were captured on video. Police later confirmed that a male passenger was declared dead at the scene, while the cab driver, who has been widely named in reports as David Perry, from Kirkdale, managed to escape, and has since been discharged from hospital. The threat to Britain from terrorism was raised to severe on Monday – meaning that an attack is deemed highly likely. The decision, taken on Monday by the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre, represents an upgrade of one notch from the previous threat level of substantial. The threat level had been at the lower level since 8 February following a “significant reduction” in the momentum of attacks in Europe, including those seen in Austria and France between September and November 2020. The improvised explosive device had been manufactured and the assumption is that it was built by the deceased passenger, according to early police findings, and while the motive is unclear one line of inquiry is a possible link with remembrance events taking place on Sunday. The assistant chief constable Russ Jackson from Counter Terrorism Policing North West told a press conference police believed they knew the identity of the passenger but could not confirm at this time. Three men aged 21, 26 and 29 were arrested on Sunday under the Terrorism Act, while a fourth man aged 20 was arrested on Monday. Jackson told the press conference that the taxi driver picked up a fare in Rutland Avenue, Liverpool, shortly before 11am on Sunday. The fare, a man, asked to be taken to the Liverpool Women’s hospital, which was about 10 minutes away. As the taxi approached the drop-off point at the hospital, an explosion occurred from within the car, which quickly engulfed it in flames. The driver escaped from the cab and was treated for the injuries he sustained and later discharged from hospital. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, praised the efforts of the taxi driver. He said: “This is an ongoing investigation so I can’t comment on the details or exactly what type of incident it was, what type of crime it may have been. But it does look as though the taxi driver in question did behave with incredible presence of mind and bravery. “But I’ve got to say this is something that is an ongoing investigation. I think it would be premature to say much more than that.” The Guardian understands Johnson will chair a Cobra meeting on the attack on Monday afternoon. Cobra is shorthand for the Civil Contingencies Committee, which is convened to handle matters of national emergency or major disruption. Jackson said inquiries indicated that the device was brought into the cab by the passenger, who was declared dead at the scene. The first three arrests took place in Sutcliffe Street, where witnesses reported seeing armed officers swoop on a terrace house on Sunday afternoon. Keith Ford, 47, a production operative who lives in Sutcliffe Street with his partner and 13-year-old daughter, witnessed the dramatic arrests. “I’d say about an hour and a half later, a man came out of the property that they were pointing the guns at,” he said. “He came to the front door, police shouted at him, saying ‘hands up in the air’, then he walked to the pub on the end of the corner.” Ford described the man as having dark hair, dark trousers and a blue T-shirt. He continued: “A couple of hours later, another man came to the door, the police were shouting at him, saying: ‘Hands up in the air, hands up in the air.’” He understood that the occupants of the property changed around two months ago and had not seen anyone since they moved in. Ford was told to evacuate his home and spent the night at his parents’ house before returning on Monday morning. Jan Temple, 61, who lives with her two sons in Sutcliffe Street, was evacuated at 9.30pm on Sunday night. Of the people living in the property, she said: “We very rarely saw anybody coming or going.” The fourth arrest took place in the Kensington area of the city, police said. A second address was searched in Rutland Avenue in Sefton Park, where police found “significant items”, Jackson said, adding that further searches would be necessary. A cordon was in place at this location on Monday and eight families had been evacuated from the area. Jackson said the motivation behind the incident was unclear. “The reason why he then took [the device] to the Women’s hospital is unknown, as is the reason for its sudden explosion. “We are of course aware that there were remembrance events just a short distance away from the hospital and that the ignition occurred shortly before 11am. “We cannot at this time draw any connection with this but it is a line of inquiry we are pursuing.”Britain’s racism crises now come around as regularly as the seasons. As certain as Wimbledon heralds the summer, the next scandal is sure to appear on the horizon, and with it a storm that darkens Britain’s sunny view of its racial progress. But like all storms, it will pass, leaving little but a sort of atmospheric discomfort, and even that eventually dissipates. Because it seems to have been decided, at some meeting to which an awful lot of people weren’t invited, that Britain has been cured of its racism ills. The occasional flare-up is something to be extinguished, rather than an indication that there is a larger undiagnosed issue underneath. You can see it in how we have chosen to talk about race – dragged kicking and screaming. What passes for a national conversation is just a weather front of scandal, one that “rocks” or “shakes” or “engulfs” an institution or, in rare moments, the country as a whole, before we all move on. Periodically, a public figure of black or other minority ethnic background will reveal something horrifying about how they were treated by colleagues or superiors in their profession. And consistently, their demands for redress take too long to be met, which becomes an injury in itself. Whether it’s footballer Eni Aluko being told by the England manager to make sure that her Nigerian relatives weren’t carrying the Ebola virus; or most recently cricketer Azeem Rafiq allegedly being called the P-word by teammates, investigations are drawn out, then quickly closed, leaving little room for reflection on the climate that enabled the abuse. For all the sound and fury of each incident, little changes because the country gives itself a pass. It either minimises the seriousness of the affair; or chooses to believe that, while there is a problem, it is the fault of a “small minority”. It’s something that should not be “amplified”, rather than something endemic that calls for uncomfortable questions and meaningful reform. It’s banter or bad apple. Take your pick. For these are pretty much the only explanations offered for scandals that have engulfed a variety of institutions over the past five years: the Home Office, the police, the Football Association, with Yorkshire County Cricket Club just the latest. List them and they seem less like anomalies and more like features of contemporary Britain – miscarriages of justice towards members of the Windrush generation, excessive use of police force, racial abuse towards footballers and cricketers. That’s a lot of banter, a lot of bad apples. The incidents occur separately, different people at different times in different places, but still there is a subtle pattern in how the allegations are received. There is an incredulity, a pushback – hesitant at first then increasingly confident – an assertive and well-rehearsed damage limitation exercise that seeks to reassure the public that, however bad matters seem, things are very much in hand. Part of this is best explained as the irony of racial progress: the more diverse and liberal a society becomes, the more that white people, more secure in their values and proximity to people of colour as friends, colleagues and even family, are likely to reject claims of racist treatment. And the result of that is a destigmatisation of slurs and behaviours that should have been heading to extinction. When a formal investigation, in 2021, concludes that someone calling you the P-word is all “in the spirit of friendly banter” then what we are witnessing is a regression. One in which people have decided, without consulting those being insulted, that we are post-racial and that people should just really be able to take a joke. For the larger manifestation of this retrenchment, look to the war on anything considered “woke” – a campaign popular with both the tabloid press and certain liberals who increasingly define themselves in opposition to “wokeness” too. Another step forward that has propelled us two steps back is a neighbourhood-watch-style understanding of racism: one that assigns white individuals the task of policing their own behaviour. This emphasis on what white people can personally do to check themselves, although welcome, also regrettably serves as a diversion from all the higher and broader ways in which institutional racism operates. Whenever one of these racism scandals hits, it seems to me that the biggest fight of all is to challenge the complacencies and complicities of progress. To talk not in terms of the spirit or the good intentions behind the words of Rafiq’s teammates, but what recent histories they echo, how they land, what hostility or inhospitality they create for players like Rafiq. More representation and diversity is always touted as the answer, but they are not ends in themselves. They are merely part of a process of learning in which we figure out once again how we coexist in a country that is becoming more diverse – and beneficially so – but has decided that the hard graft is done and its journey towards equality is over. It isn’t. And really, it’s fine for it not to be. The demand isn’t to vanquish racism overnight, just to commit to the process of constant finessing. Better as a nation to be a work in progress than a prematurely ended project. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistTim Burgess, singer, songwriter I was in a band called the Electric Crayons and we managed to get a gig supporting the Charlatans. They had a different singer, Baz Ketley, then. I ended up jumping on stage and singing one of their songs. Shortly after that, I got a call from the band. They didn’t ask me to audition. It was more a case of: “Would you like to come down to Wednesbury in the Midlands and hang out?” When I got there, it turned out the singer had left, and they asked if I would have a go. In the Electric Crayons we’d covered LA Woman by the Doors, so at first I did a sort of Jim Morrison impression. Martin Blunt, the bass player, went: “Right, let’s try again, but can you try singing this time?” I did and everything clicked. The Electric Crayons’ first single, with me singing, came out on the day I joined the Charlatans. The Only One I Know was an instrumental at first. I had a job at ICI and one night after tea with mum and dad, I went to the local garage to get some fags and halfway there realised I had the melody and some words. I didn’t have my Dictaphone, which I always carried around with me, so had to pelt back to my mum and dad’s to get it before I forgot it all. I never got the cigarettes. It’s a song about teenage feelings: I like somebody, why do they not like me? I was 21 or 22, but still had those powerful emotions. I was a big Byrds fan so the line “Everyone’s been burned before, everyone knows the pain” is a nod to their song Everybody’s Been Burned. I was ecstatic when the Byrds’ Roger McGuinn said he loved us. We went into the Windings studio in Wrexham to record the song Polar Bear as our second single, but my mate Jonah – David Jones – said: “You’re recording the wrong one!” He’d come to all our gigs and pointed out that everyone went nuts for The Only One I Know. Then when we got to the studio there was a fax from Beggars Banquet, who’d just signed us, also saying: “We think you should record The Only One I Know.” It’s an unusual song construction. I’m still not sure which bit is the chorus. The title and main hook is in the verse, but the intro – before the main song crashes in – gives people just enough time to get on the dancefloor. Martin Blunt, bass, songwriter We’d been influenced by the Stranglers, Stax Records, Joy Division and the Doors, but when everything came together in the summer of 89 acid house was in full swing. The repetitive beats rubbed off on what we were doing, so we suddenly sounded like the Spencer Davis Group on E. In those days, most of our songs would start off with just drums and bass. Then Rob Collins, who played the Hammond organ, would put chord sequences over it to give it a template and add some organ stabs. To give The Only One I Know a bit more urgency, Jon Baker added a stream of repetitive guitar notes similar to part of the Supremes’ You Keep Me Hangin’ On. I remember telling him, “Try to make it sound like morse code”, which he did. After the second chorus, we dropped it down to the bass, like all the best old Stax and funk tunes. When we recorded it, Tim was stuck in a tailback on the M6, so the vocals were added when he finally made it. Then Chris Nagle wanted to spend more time mixing it at Strawberry studio in Stockport, where he’d worked on the Joy Division stuff with Martin Hannett and where bands s like the Human League and the Housemartins had recorded. We were very young and excited and had all these mad ideas. Chris was very tolerant with us. Whenever we played the song live, the reaction was carnage, in a good way. John Peel played the single on night-time Radio 1 and Simon Mayo made it single of the week. We were invited to go on Top of the Pops but being silly sods we turned it down, like the Clash had, but the single still went Top 10. At one point it was so popular that people said: “It’s the only song they know.” But thankfully, the songs kept coming. The Charlatans’ Covid-delayed 31st anniversary box set, A Head Full of Ideas, is out now. Their UK tour starts at Limelight, Belfast, on 22 November.What has been announced? Until now, Covid booster jabs were only being offered to adults aged 50 and older, and those in at-risk groups. This is now being extended to include all adults aged 40 to 49, and Boris Johnson has said the concept of what constitutes “full vaccination” will need to be adjusted. This third jab will be given six months or more after the second dose. The Scottish government said 40- to 49-year-olds would be invited to receive a booster once everyone in the earlier priority groups had been offered one, but that they would be able to book an appointment through the NHS portal “shortly”. They were also considering how best to implement the advice for 16- to 17-year-olds. The Welsh government also said it would provide information shortly on how they planned to roll vaccines out to these groups and Northern Ireland is expected to follow suit.The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) is also advising that a second dose of Covid-19 vaccine should be offered to all 16- and 17-year-olds, 12 weeks or more after receiving their first vaccine dose. Previously, only those in at risk groups were eligible for a second dose; other teenagers had to wait until they turned 18. Why now? Primarily, to help maintain high levels of protection against hospitalisation, severe illness or dying from Covid-19 this winter, and reduce pressure on the NHS in the coming months. Recent data from the UK and elsewhere have indicated a slight fall in the levels of protection against severe Covid-19 among adults who received their initial two doses some time ago. For 16- to-17-year-olds, the decision to advise on a second dose was based on a review of the latest evidence of the benefits of the vaccine programme, compared with the risks of any side-effects, the JCVI said. Not only does a second dose increase the level of protection and extend the duration of that protection, it may also reduce the risk of onward transmission to vulnerable close contacts, such as grandparents. How much additional protection will a booster provide? Newly published data from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) suggested that Britons aged 50 years and older who received a third booster dose of either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccine increased their level of protection against symptomatic Covid-19 infection to 93.1% for those who had previously received two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and to 94.0% for those who previously had the Pfizer jab. Twenty weeks or more after receiving their first two doses, the level of protection among those who did not get a booster was 87.4% for those who had had the AstraZeneca vaccine, and 84.4% for those received the Pfizer jab. “This is the first real evidence of the effectiveness of the booster in the UK setting,” said Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia. “This is perhaps even more impressive when considering that a significant proportion of people who have not yet had their booster will have had an infection and so had some additional protection now. This report also gives reassurance that whether someone had AstraZeneca or Pfizer as their first course, the booster provides similar excellent protection.” Because of the natural lag between acquiring infection and experiencing complications, it is too early to say what the impact of boosters on hospitalisations will be. When will I be able to book an appointment? According to NHS England, the National Booking System will open for those aged 40-49 from 22 November, allowing those who had their second dose at least 152 days (five months) earlier to book a third jab – although the appointment itself won’t take place until at least 182 days (six months) after their second dose. For those aged 16-17, the booking service for second jabs will be available from 22 November, with appointments available no earlier than the recommended 12 weeks after their first. Will it be the same vaccine as I received the first time around? Not necessarily. The JCVI is advising that booster jabs for adults aged 40 years and over should be either Pfizer or Moderna – irrespective of the vaccines given for the first and second doses. For 16- and 17-year-olds, the second dose will be the Pfizer vaccine – the only vaccine currently licensed for this age group in the UK. How long will it take for the additional protection to kick in? In the UKHSA study, the level of protection five to six days after the booster dose was similar to that seen in individuals who had received two initial doses but no booster. It is unclear precisely when the additional protection from the third jab would kick in, but the higher levels of protection observed in this study were recorded 14 days post-jab. It’s possible that protection will be higher still as time progresses, although how long this additional protection will last is unknown. It is also unclear whether further booster doses will be required in the future, and if so, when. Will younger teenagers and adults be offered second jabs or boosters as well? According to the JCVI, there is currently no robust evidence of a decline in protection against hospitalisation and deaths among under-40s who have received both vaccine doses. However, since these individuals are at lower risk of severe disease and received their first two doses later than older adults, it may simply take longer for any decline in protection to be detected. Vaccination of 12- to-15-year-olds is ongoing, with some yet to receive a first dose. However, many scientists believe they should be offered a second vaccine dose in due course. The JCVI said it would continue to closely review all available data to develop further advice. What if I’ve recently been infected with Covid-19? The NHS advises adults to wait four weeks after having a positive Covid-19 test before booking a booster. For 16- and 17-year-olds, the second vaccine dose should be given 12 weeks or more after the first dose, or 12 weeks after a positive Covid-19 test result, whichever is later.After Norwich lost their first six matches of the season, they became an existential question. What is the point of a club that reaches the Premier League only to crash back down to the Championship? Such a fate, the same as last time they were in the top division, appeared certain if Daniel Farke were to remain in charge. Modern football clubs do not merely sack managers. New appointments are greeted with talk of culture shifts, the practice of playing matches now has words such as “project” and “philosophy” attached. All part of the game being ever more entwined with business culture. Dean Smith, with a LinkedIn account in which his “sports management” is endorsed by a succession of football insiders including Chris Powell, the England and Tottenham coach, would appear to fit the search profile of a club such as Norwich. His career blueprint, as an influential assistant at Leyton Orient before managing Walsall, Brentford and Aston Villa, has been to stabilise a club and progress it to the next stage of development. For Norwich, that next stage equals staying in the Premier League for more than one season at a time. Relegation will probably have to be shouldered before that can happen. In the statement accompanying his appointment, Smith mentioned “the ultimate aim of surviving in the Premier League” this season, something that ought not to be beyond a team five points from safety. However, only scoring five goals and conceding 26 in 11 matches suggests it will be difficult to find three teams to finish below them. With 19th-placed Newcastle flush with January spending power, third-bottom Burnley masters of pulling off results in the winter months, and Leeds gradually starting to recover their footing, it looks a tall order. For Norwich to survive, they probably need to pull Aston Villa, Smith’s former employers, into the mire. Losing five consecutive matches there made him the fall guy for Christian Purslow, the Villa chief executive, and his ambition to employ Steven Gerrard as manager. “Steven’s coaching ambitions, philosophy and values entirely match those of Aston Villa,” said Purslow last week of someone he befriended at Liverpool. Purslow, a minority shareholder, had also been responsible for Smith’s appointment in October 2018, one that took Villa back into the Premier League. That Smith’s stay at Villa Park might not be as long as he and many fans might have liked became clear when it was speculated he was in line to be replaced in the early months of 2020, only for the pandemic to intervene and Villa’s form improve after the Premier League’s Project Restart. Once Villa wobbled again, always likely after Jack Grealish was cashed in, Smith came under threat. He departed as the latest victim of a star system where a heralded foreign coach or former big-name player will be favoured ahead of those working their way up from the lower divisions. Of managers working in the Premier League now, only David Moyes, Sean Dyche, Brendan Rodgers and Graham Potter have taken the traditional route, with Potter, the relative newcomer, having done so after winning acclaim in Sweden with Östersund. Coaches such as Smith, pragmatic rather than didactic, comfortably dressed rather than sharp-suited, are unfashionable to clubs with pretensions of blue-chip status and high social media approval ratings. Villa, whose summer transfer activity included trying to poach Emile Smith Rowe from Arsenal, now want to act and be seen like a big club. Which takes Smith, after just seven days of unemployment, to Norwich, a club yet to attach such aspirations and still rather quaintly owned by local business people in Delia Smith and her husband, Michael Wynn-Jones. Instead of an emotional return for Steve Bruce, a former Norwich captain, or an attempt at replicating the Purslow model in Frank Lampard, they have alighted upon someone proven in meeting realistic expectations. Norwich do not shoot for the stars but hope to punch above their weight. Historically, the club’s best managers have done just that from Ron Saunders in the 1970s, to Dave Stringer in the 1980s, to Mike Walker in the 1990s and Paul Lambert a decade ago. A manager recognising that as the point of the club can be a success. Smith, unassuming yet progressive, seems a decent fit for that profile.Aaron Ramsey has called on Wales to evoke the spirit of landmark victories over Belgium as they aim to complete their qualifying group with a victory that would earn a home draw in the World Cup play-offs in March, avoiding Portugal and Russia. A draw on Tuesday would also be sufficient to finish runners-up to Belgium. A Wales team that included Ramsey recorded a 1-0 victory over Belgium in June 2015 in Cardiff that paved the way towards qualification for their first major tournament in 57 years. At Euro 2016 Wales enjoyed the greatest night in their history against the same opposition, as Hal Robson-Kanu’s Cruyff turn and finish helped them to the semi-finals. “We’ve had some good games against Belgium over years, home and away,” Ramsey said. “That [1-0 win] was a massive game in our quest to qualify for a major championship.” The Juventus midfielder added: “We all know the quality they have in their team, the players they have – they have the ability to do something or turn a game on its head, produce a bit of magic. We’ll have to be right on it and we’re going to need our fans to come away with a good result. To qualify for a World Cup, these opportunities won’t come along very often. It might be the last time we have an opportunity as good as this. We have a game now to finish the job off so, hopefully, we can produce another special night in Cardiff.” The Wales captain, Gareth Bale, will not start as he continues his recovery from a hamstring injury. Bale, who played 45 minutes as he won his 100th cap against Belarus on Saturday, trained alone on Monday. “We will leave it until the last minute to see if he can play any minutes,” said the interim Wales manager Robert Page. Roberto Martínez’s side – ranked No 1 in the world – are without Bale’s Real Madrid teammates Eden Hazard and Thibaut Courtois, as well as Jason Denayer and Simon Mignolet. Matz Sels of Strasbourg, Koen Casteels of Wolfsburg or Thomas Kaminski of Blackburn will start in goal. “Whatever team they put out will be strong and can punish the opposition,” Ramsey said.Police in Austria have begun carrying out routine checks on commuters to ensure compliance with a nationwide “lockdown for the unvaccinated”, as the Alpine country tries to get on top of one of the most rapidly rising infection rates in Europe. The restrictions, which came into effect on Monday morning, will affect almost 2 million Austrian citizens aged 12 and older who have so far not been fully vaccinated against Covid-19. Of those, the 356,000 people who have been vaccinated only once can be released from lockdown if they show a negative PCR test. Those who are found to be in breach of the rules face fines between €500 and €3,600. “It can happen any time and anywhere,” the interior minister, Karl Nehammer of the Austrian People’s party, said of the police checks. “Every citizen has to expect to be checked.” However, a long list of exceptions has led critics to warn that the partial lockdown will be difficult to enforce: unvaccinated people will still be able to go to work with a negative test result, do essential shopping and outdoor physical exercise, meet their partner or other select individuals, and “satisfy their basic religious needs”. Schoolchildren, who are tested regularly, are also exempt from the lockdown. The measures, details of which were announced on Sunday by the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, are provisionally designed to last for 10 days, though the government said it would discuss potential further restrictions on Wednesday, such as a nighttime curfew that would also apply to those who have been vaccinated. “My aim is very clear: to get the unvaccinated to get vaccinated, not to lock up the unvaccinated,”Schallenberg told ORF radio station. The week before the new restrictions came into place, almost 130,000 people in Austria chose to be vaccinated for the first time, the highest weekly number recorded since the second week of July. The far-right Freedom party has said it will seek legal action against the lockdown measures and announced plans to organise a protest in Vienna on Saturday. The leader of the Freedom party, Herbert Kickl, announced via Facebook on Monday afternoon that he would not be able to participate in the protest since he had tested positive for Covid-19 and would have to quarantine for 14 days. Over the past week, Austria has recorded almost 840 new cases per 100,000 people, the highest infection rate in western Europe and the highest recorded in the country since the start of the pandemic. On Monday, Austria reported 11,889 new cases and 40 new deaths. At 63%, the country’s vaccination rate is also the lowest in western Europe, though only a few percentage points lower than the 67% of the population fully vaccinated in Britain. The UK, which has so far declined to reintroduce any curbs on social movement, has been recording a similar number of weekly Covid deaths relative to its population. In Germany, the parties of the likely next government have also signalled they would be prepared to reintroduce some restrictions on social gatherings and checks of vaccine status or test results on public transport in an attempt to curb rising infection rates.Taylor Swift runs a close second to Ezra Pound for having devotees scour every word of their hero’s writing in search for a deeper meaning. Those on social media may have spotted “Swifties” in a lather over a recent reference to the pop star’s mysterious red scarf. Like a BBC Radio 4 discussion of Pound’s The Cantos, the forensic analysis of Swift’s famous winter accessory may have left some on social media perplexed. As a result, Nadia Khomami has prepared a guide for the uninitiated. Where does the scarf chatter come from? The reference originates in Swift’s 2012 song All Too Well, included on her hit album Red which was rereleased on Friday. Subtitled “Taylor’s version”, the album is the second instalment of the singer’s ongoing project to re-record and regain ownership over six records which she alleges were sold out from under her by her former label. Swift, who has long had a habit of writing songs about her private life, particularly her former relationships, used Red to rebuke an older man who broke her heart when she was 21 – widely rumoured to be Hollywood A-lister Jake Gyllenhaal, whom she dated back in 2010. As a result, Gyllenhaal’s Instagram has been besieged by people interrogating him about the whereabouts of said scarf. What are the lyrics? The track All Too Well features some of Swift’s most poignant lyrics on heartbreak, and opens with the lines: “I walked through the door with you, the air was cold, but something about it felt like home somehow, and I left my scarf there at your sister’s house, and you’ve still got it in your drawer, even now.” Although Swift has never confirmed the song to be about Gyllenhaal, she sings of “weeping in a party bathroom” after the man did not attend her 21st birthday, which fans see as the clearest symbol that it is Gyllenhaal, her boyfriend at the time. Other, more brutal lyrics such as “and I was never good at telling jokes but the punchline goes, ‘I’ll get older but your lovers stay my age’” have had fans weeping. Where is the scarf now? Jake’s sister Maggie Gyllenhaal has even been pulled into the drama, though she has previously said she didn’t get why “everybody” asked her about the scarf. “I am in the dark about the scarf. It’s totally possible, I don’t know,” the actor told US talkshow host Andy Cohen. Jake’s friend, Broadway actor Andrew Burnap, on Friday claimed he was actually in possession of it. “This is gonna sound crazy and you will definitely think I’m kidding but I’m not – I think I am in possession of that scarf,” he tweeted. Is the scarf really just a scarf? A small number of fans speculate the scarf may actually be a metaphor for Swift’s virginity (though this is entirely conjecture), although that’s highly unlikely. “I was going through a bit of a sad time,” Swift said of the song on the Tonight Show. “I started ad-libbing what I was going through and what I was feeling.” Whether or not it was Gyllenhaal, comments including “Where’s the scarf Jake?” and “Send the scarf back, it’s not too late” continue to be posted on the actor’s account. For now, the official Taylor Swift store is selling red scarves for $35. Due to extremely high demand, the website warns buyers it may not arrive by Christmas.“They stabbed me and locked me in a broom cupboard. It’s not looking good mate.” If someone slipped Guy Ritchie a monkey or two to direct a low-budget gangster Britflick it might look a bit like this feature debut from Jez Alsop. It opens at a bare-knuckle boxing match in Birmingham, lairy geezers watching as two fighters pound each other’s faces into steak tartare. Just before the knockout punch, a shifty looking man slips out a side door. This is bookie Daz (Nicholas Clarke), who has fixed three fights by passing professional boxers off as amateurs. Now he’s been rumbled. For the rest of the film, we’re mostly confined in the broom cupboard with Daz, waiting for a gangland boss to show up. The camera keeps close to his face, cranking up the claustrophobia. Daz is a man in lockdown, but he’s not alone. He manages to get his smashed phone working and is constantly on the blower. First up is a call to his girlfriend at the airport. Tonight is the night they’re meant to be flying off to Spain to start a new life (that old crime-world chestnut). Mostly, the people he phones don’t want to know: “Piss off, Daz!” Clarke’s performance draws you in up to a point (some of the acting elsewhere is pretty ropey). He plays Daz as a bit of a loser, someone who’s got by on cheeky-chap banter. Now his luck has run out and he’s desperate. The script turns the screws with workmanlike efficiency until the arrival of a sob story intended to make you feel sorry for Daz and it all gets a bit exasperating. The film is never that believable either: set in gangster-movie-world where mockney geezers with necks the size of tree trunks in black leather jackets call each other “muppets”. • Fixed is released on 22 November on digital platforms.This week, a rare outbreak of sanity is predicted in British government rail policy. The eastern branch of David Cameron’s HS2 vanity railway is likely to be cancelled in favour of a flurry of other improvements to rail services. Rather than whingeing, red-wall Tories should be cheering. Their constituents should be getting about sooner and faster, rather than merely getting more swiftly to London some day. This leaves in place the southern leg of what now appears to be principally a London-to-Birmingham high-speed “shuttle”. Its value for money – which was based on the northern leg – has collapsed. The chief beneficiaries of the surviving HS2 will be Midlands commuters into the metropolis. The contribution to “levelling up” will be zero. Meanwhile, anyone criticising China for carbon-guzzling should witness the carbon-fest that is HS2’s devastation of the London Borough of Camden. Several hundred homes have already been destroyed. The real truth is that lockdown is throwing transport investment into turmoil. While car use is surging back to pre-pandemic normal, rail use, and especially rail commuting, is down by 30-35%, with no one able to predict how it might recover. Investment in trains is still locked into decades-old predictions of hypermobility, bedevilled by arguments over costs, subsidies, emissions and pollution levels. Meanwhile Heathrow has still not been put out of its third runway misery, it appears largely because Grant Shapps, the transport minister, has a soft spot for domestic air travel. The government’s planning favouritism towards sprawl housing is carpeting the countryside in road-hungry, car-reliant development. New railways are hugely costly – as against resignalling and other upgrades – but remain politically appealing. This is despite their being used for barely 2% of journeys, with ticket prices ensuring for trains a wealthier passenger profile than either planes or cars. As for new lines, it appears that the £100bn cost of the original HS2 has not only killed its own completion, but also the equally wasteful new Manchester-Leeds HS3. A courageous Shapps would have killed the whole of HS2 and doubled his spend on other lines in the north of England. As it is, the overwhelming bulk of his investment in new railways now appears to be going south of Crewe. Where is the politics in this? If Boris Johnson really wanted to do the popular thing by his northern voters, he would hurl his money into upgrading rail commuter services in south Lancashire and West and South Yorkshire. Other than that, he would tinker with the north’s dire roads, which are overwhelmingly how northerners, their goods and services get around, whether or not southerners find this politically correct. As it is, transport policy is being fashioned from maps, one showing lines flowing to and from London and the other showing marginal Tory constituencies. This is a high-speed route to chaos. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThe EFL season 2022-23 will start in July to accommodate the World Cup. The schedule was revealed on Monday and showed that the Championship will not break for the whole tournament in Qatar but will resume while the quarter-finals are being played. All three Football League divisions will open on 30 July 2022, one week before the Premier League. Leagues One and Two will not stop for the World Cup but the Championship will halt after the round of games due to take place on 12 November and will start again on 10 December. The group stage is due to end in Qatar on 2 December. The schedule raises the possibility of clubs having to play without key individuals. EFL rules allow a club to request a postponement if three players are on international duty and the league said: “Existing international calls postponement criteria will be applied throughout, where necessary.” The EFL said its regular season would end on 6 May 2023, with the play-off finals scheduled for the 27-29 May.A Cambridge college which became the first institution in the world to return a looted Benin bronze to Nigeria is to appear before an ecclesiastical court early next year over its attempt to remove a memorial in the college chapel to one of its most significant benefactors because of his links to the slave trade. Jesus College is seeking to relocate a memorial to Tobias Rustat (1608-1694), an investor with the Royal African Company, which according to one historian shipped more enslaved African women, men and children than any other single institution during the transatlantic slave trade. After the “joy” of the handover of the Benin bronze cockerel to a Nigerian delegation last month, Sonita Alleyne, master of Jesus College, conceded that progress on the Rustat memorial would be more difficult, with opposition from about 70 alumni who are against plans to remove the memorial from the chapel and install it in a permanent educational exhibition space elsewhere in the college. The memorial was created by the studio of the Anglo-Dutch sculptor Grinling Gibbons and has been described as one of the most important pieces of funerary art in the country. Lawyers have been hired on each side and the case will be heard on 2 February in the consistory court of the diocese of Ely in a hearing expected to last two to three days. Both the Benin bronze and the Rustat memorial at Jesus College were examined by a legacy of slavery working party (LSWP), made up of academics, students and the college archivist, which was set up as part of a process of “critical self-reflection on the long-term legacies of slavery and colonial violence”. Alleyne, a businesswoman and entrepreneur, became the first female master at Jesus and the first black leader of an Oxbridge college when she took up her role in 2019, a few months after the working party was set up. “The decision on the Benin bronze was straightforward,” she said. “We knew the problems with it, it was looted from Benin. It was an unanimous decision that we should give it back.” As a result, on 27 October a delegation from Benin City and Nigeria came to Cambridge to retrieve the bronze – one of thousands looted by British forces in 1897 from the kingdom of Benin, later absorbed into Nigeria – in an emotional ceremony witnessed around the world. “We did not set out to be the first institution in the world to do this,” Alleyne told the Guardian. “That was not our goal. It was just right. The day that it happened, it was quite emotional for the contingent who came. There was real joy.” Aberdeen University followed suit and returned its bronze, the Smithsonian Institution in the US has taken down its items from show and is planning to return them, and Alleyne is optimistic that other institutions will follow suit, including Cambridge’s own Musuem of Archeology and Anthropology. All eyes are however on the British Museum, which has the largest collection in the world, with 900 bronzes. A spokesperson said the museum was part of the Benin dialogue group and was involved in talks over the construction of the Edo Museum of West African Art, which will reunite Benin artworks from international collections. On Rustat, Alleyne said it was not about erasing or changing history, but about respect for the young, diverse community using the chapel today. “His name is on our donor wall which is in the cloisters in the middle of the college. It will always be on the donor wall. “It’s the fact that it’s a chapel and it’s a place of worship. In this day and age, in this community that we have in our chapel, with our very diverse student body, are you really saying to young people as they come in, this is what part of being in a place like Cambridge is about?” Those objecting to the removal of the memorial told the Times that Rustat made the bulk of his wealth elsewhere and his investments in the Royal African Company represented just 1.3% of the money he had at the end of his life or gave away as a philanthropist. Edward Colston, whose statue was toppled and pushed into Bristol harbour last year during protests in support of Black Lives Matter, was deputy governor of the Royal African Company.When jury selection starts in earnest on Tuesday for British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex trafficking trial in Manhattan federal court, many observers might think that they will finally learn the full truth about the crimes of her consort, disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein – and any subsequent cover-ups. On the surface, this conjecture makes sense: Epstein killed himself in jail more than two years ago, while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial, leaving many to wonder whether there would ever be justice for victims. But when Maxwell was arrested one year after his arrest – for her alleged role in procuring teenage girls for Epstein between 1994 and 2004 – some believed the case would provide a second chance for a full accounting of what Epstein did. Indeed, some might think that witness testimony, which will include multiple accusers, might provide bombshell details on Epstein’s decades-long sexual abuse of minors and the shadowy network of people who enabled him. Some observers might believe these proceedings will name previously undisclosed names, given that his associates included rich and powerful men from all over the world such as Prince Andrew, Bill Clinton and Bill Gates. Some are probably awaiting a definitive answer as to why Epstein and Maxwell never faced federal charges in south Florida more than a decade ago, when he was accused of sexually abusing underage girls. The controversial non-prosecution agreement Epstein brokered there with federal authorities included a provision that purportedly protected potential co-conspirators – including Maxwell – raising still more questions about his seeming impunity. But, as Maxwell’s trial looms, there is a strong chance such hopes might be dashed by the upcoming proceedings. While allegations against Maxwell are inextricably linked to Epstein’s abuse, it’s all but guaranteed that this trial won’t answer all of the most pervasive questions about him – let alone satisfy the cravings of conspiracy theorists who are convinced of the existence of a global cabal of sexually predatory elites. Judge Alison Nathan, who is presiding over the case, has made clear that she wants Maxwell’s sex trafficking trial to be about Maxwell’s alleged sex trafficking. Full stop. In several rulings, Nathan has largely prevented this trial from becoming a referendum on authorities’ handling of Epstein, and whether Maxwell is a scapegoat because Epstein escaped earthly justice. “Jeffrey Epstein is dead. Judge Nathan obviously is concerned about undue prejudice against Ms Maxwell and making sure that she’s going to have a fair trial,” said Moira Penza, a partner at Wilkinson Steklof who, as an assistant US attorney in Brooklyn, successfully prosecuted the NXIVM sex cult case. “This is very much her trial. This is very much not Jeffrey Epstein on trial.” Because the facts relevant to Maxwell are “damning on their own”, Nathan will probably be very hesitant to permit anything into trial that is “on the cusp of being overly prejudicial”, Penza told the Guardian. (Penza’s comments were in reference to the allegation in prosecutors’ case; her statements are not an opinion on Maxwell’s innocence or guilt.) Maxwell was arrested on 2 July 2020 at a secluded, luxurious estate in the small town of Bradford, New Hampshire, for alleged sex crimes, conspiracy and perjury related to Epstein. Audrey Strauss, then the acting Manhattan US attorney, said Maxwell “played a critical role in helping Epstein to identify, befriend and groom minor victims” and that “in some cases, Maxwell participated in the abuse”. Maxwell “would try to normalize sexual abuse for a minor victim by, among other things, discussing sexual topics, undressing in front of the victim, being present when a minor victim was undressed, and/or being present for sex acts involving the minor victim and Epstein”, the indictment alleged. Maxwell tried to conceal her involvement in Epstein’s heinous acts, providing false information “under oath” in civil litigation, the indictment claimed. That litigation was the defamation lawsuit filed against Maxwell by the longtime Epstein accuser Virginia Giuffre. She has alleged that Epstein and Maxwell forced her into sex acts with Prince Andrew when she was just 17. Maxwell has maintained her innocence, as has the British royal. In a recent interview with the Daily Mail newspaper, Maxwell sought to highlight what she alleges is cruel treatment and poor sanitary conditions at the hands of the authorities while she has been in prison. “I am weak, I am frail. I have no stamina. I am tired,” she told the British tabloid. One indicator that Maxwell’s trial would stick to the charged sex crimes came this spring. The defense had asked for the perjury counts to be tried separately, arguing that they relate to “entirely separate offenses that involve different time periods, different alleged victims, and different substantive charges”. Trying perjury alongside sex crimes counts might spur jurors to convict her on sex crimes charges “based on a false inference of criminal propensity”, her lawyers claimed. Nathan agreed with them, ordering a separate trial for the perjury counts. She wrote in an April opinion that these counts “would introduce unrelated allegations of sexual abuse, which would potentially expose the jury to evidence that might otherwise not be admissible”. “In particular, a joint trial would potentially expose the jury to a wider swath of information regarding civil litigation against Epstein that is remote from Maxwell’s charged conduct,” Nathan said. “This presents a significant risk that the jury will cumulate the evidence of the various crimes charged and find guilt when, if considered separately, it would not do so.” Nathan has also barred some routes for Maxwell’s lawyers to claim that she’s a surrogate for Epstein, saying at a 1 November proceeding: “The court will exclude much of the evidence outlined in the defense’s papers of the government’s alleged motives for investigating and charging Ms Maxwell.” Nathan also said she would currently exclude evidence of the non-prosecution agreement, “both its existence and its particular terms”. Maxwell’s defense has argued that the non-prosecution agreement was relevant to pointing out bias and financial interests of two witnesses – including one who received immunity from prosecution under the deal. While the trial will not answer all questions about Epstein, it would be a mistake to think that he won’t feature prominently. “Without a doubt, Jeffrey Epstein is going to be a major part of this trial,” Penza remarked, saying of the charges, “When you’re thinking about the bad actors here, obviously you have Jeffrey Epstein as the top and then you have essentially Ghislaine Maxwell as his chief enabler.” Penza said: “I think where the lines will likely be drawn is that it is going to have to be very directly tied to these victims, and these specific crimes – and not just pulling up everything bad that Jeffrey Epstein ever did.”Name: TV bluffing. Age: It probably dates back to the first regular BBC broadcasts in 1936. Appearance: Imagined. What are we talking about? We’re talking about talking about TV shows. Which shows in particular? Popular shows such as Game of Thrones. Have you seen it? Yes. Have you? I have. What about Stranger Things? Yes, that is also a show. That I’ve seen. Are you certain? What’s it about? It’s about things that are strange, to a generally larger degree than other things. I can see I’m talking to a bit of an aficionado. I’m lying! I’ve never seen a single episode! Don’t worry, you’re not alone: in a new poll from RadioTimes.com, 52% of respondents admitted to lying about having seen a TV show, with Stranger Things and Game of Thrones the two most lied about. What came third? Breaking Bad. Never seen that, either. Why are we all bluffing? To avoid being left out during conversations with friends and colleagues. That’s so depressing. How did it come to this? Probably because viewing habits have become so atomised. “With so much choice in a truly golden age of TV it’s almost impossible to see everything,” says RadioTimes.com’s editorial director Tim Glanfield. And yet we still need to talk about stuff at work. Exactly, only there’s no such thing as water cooler TV any more. My office doesn’t have a water cooler. Just a fridge full of kombucha. It’s also possible that people lie about having seen something so people will stop telling them they absolutely must see it. Yeah, I had that with Schitt’s Creek. Oh my God, have you not seen Schitt’s Creek? Er, yes, I have. Who’s your favourite character? The woman. A diehard fan, then. I’m lying again! How can I be better at this? Try pretending to be an episode behind, and shouting “No spoilers, please!” with your fingers in your ears. I think I could carry that off. Or stick to generic comments – such as: “That guy can really cook!” – that could apply to Breaking Bad or Bake Off. Would it also work for Stranger Things? Probably. I’m sure somebody makes a meal at some point. I thought you you’d seen it. I have. Season 11 is the most hilarious yet. Do say: “Did you catch yesterday’s Homes Under the Hammer? Best. Episode. Ever.” Don’t say: “Head office are a bit concerned that you’ve never watched The Crown, because you’re the series producer.”According to one report on Monday morning, it could be “a matter of months” before any detail emerges about what, exactly, officials from Ireland’s Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine found when they raided Ballintogher Stud in County Kildare last Tuesday. Even the results of blood and hair tests by the Irish Horseracing Regulatory Board (IHRB), on samples from thoroughbreds that were on site when the DAFM investigators arrived, are still working their way through the system. But that has not stopped battle lines being drawn as Ireland’s closely knit racing and breeding industries face up to a potentially devastating threat to their public image and integrity. A private investigator – hired reportedly by a group of British trainers – photographed 56 horseboxes arriving at John Warwick’s clinic at Ballintogher between 15 June and 31 August this year. Yet with the main exception of Jessica Harrington, who has said that she has been sending horses to Warwick, a renowned specialist in tendon injuries, for a number of years, a number of leading Irish trainers and breeders have been keen to distance themselves from the clinic at Ballintogher. Coolmore Stud, the biggest beast of all in Irish racing, firmly rejected a claim by Warwick, in a recorded telephone conversation seven months ago reported in the Sunday Independent, that he had worked with their yearlings in the past. Aidan O’Brien, who has trained so many of their champions and future stallions at Ballydoyle, also denied any links with the therapist, with the minor caveat that a former owner might have asked Warwick to look at one of his horses “a long time ago”. Veteran trainer and TV pundit Ted Walsh, who happened to be dropping off a horse for treatment when the raid was under way, told RTE Sport: “It’s a bad old thing for racing. I’m sorry that someone as high profile as me in racing was even there. To cast a shadow on the game. I can’t do anything about that now. I drove in, I was there.” And we also know that three trainers whose boxes were pictured entering Ballintogher when Warwick was holding one of his clinics denied having sent horses to be treated there when asked by a reporter from the Sunday Independent – though the denials seemed less assured when they were told there was photographic evidence which linked their stables to the stud. A second front, meanwhile, also appeared to be opening up as Noel Meade, one of Ireland most successful and respected trainers and the current chair of the Irish Racehorse Trainers Association, turned his ire on fellow trainer Jim Bolger in an interview with Racing TV on Sunday. Bolger, of course, is widely seen as having initiated the current focus on the possible use of performance-enhancing drugs in Irish racing when he told an interviewer in October 2020 that it is “the No 1 problem” facing the sport in Ireland. Meade told RTV that Bolger “doesn’t appear to have anything”, adding: “If he has, he hasn’t told anyone. So everybody as far as I can see, and any trainer I have met, is very annoyed with Jim over that.” With so much still unclear about what was going on at Ballintogher on the days when Warwick was in residence, this wagon-circling approach feels premature. It could be more useful instead to see the intense interest surrounding events at the stud as a reminder that the potential use of illegal medications and drugs is now, and will remain, the most serious of all threats to racing’s integrity and image. When so much of what goes on away from the track is hidden from view, there will always be speculation about what might, or might not, be going on to give an individual stable an edge. And even if a racing industry is completely clean from head to toe, proving that negative is extremely difficult. As a result, everyone in the sport should be shoulder-to-shoulder against the illegal use of drugs and medication. And yet, the ultra-competitive nature of racing – its lifeblood – is also what can allow the poison to find its way in. When your business thrives or dies on results, and owners – quite rightly – want to see their horses run, the pressure just to get them onto the course, never mind into the winner’s enclosure, is huge. If Vet X has a track record, say, of getting horses back into training in four months when others recommend box rest for eight, the temptation to give them a try must be very hard to resist, not least because if you do, the owner can easily move the horse to another trainer down the road who will not. As things stand, we know – thanks to Warwick’s interview with Sunday’s edition of the Racing Post – that drugs that should not have been in the country in the first place were seized in last Tuesday’s raid. Warwick claimed that these substances were en route to Kuwait, and that “no dope … nothing that would fail a dope test” – – was involved. While the IHRB recently acquired the right to access stud farms to test horses on site, the premises are not directly licensed by the regulator. Had these drugs been seized at a licensed racing stable, however, the licence holder could potentially have been looking at a significant ban. Warwick’s client list, meanwhile, is thought to have included trainers in both Ireland and Britain, and they are now in the unfortunate position of being linked to an unlicensed premises where banned drugs were clearly present. That, and the potential damage to racing’s image and reputation, should be the immediate concern for trainers as the case continues to unfold, not a “Jim doesn’t have anything” claim that could yet prove to be a hostage to fortune.After last Christmas was so badly affected by Covid, there is huge anticipation around next month’s festivities. But Britain’s supply chain meltdown is causing gaps on supermarket shelves – and price rises – with warnings of shortages of everything from turkeys to pigs in blankets and even the fizz for the Yuletide toast. So should you be worried about being able to buy all the food you want for a traditional Christmas spread? And what does it tell us more broadly about price rises and food shortages? We looked at the different elements and considered how easy it is to buy them, and, based on current prices, whether they will cost more. Turkey Extra large turkey crown (frozen) up 83p to £21.33 +4.1% The poultry industry caused much angst with its warning that Christmas dinner was at risk as producers were raising 1 million fewer birds because of a shortage of workers in processing plants. Switching to goose is probably not an option now either, due to the recent closure of the UK’s last two hatcheries combined with an outbreak of avian flu. Paul Kelly, managing director of KellyBronze, which produces free range turkeys in Essex, does not expect people to have to go without. The government allowed thousands of seasonal poultry workers into the UK, and any shortfall will be topped up with imported birds, he explains. However, consumers buying British can expect to pay more as farmers have faced soaring feed, packaging and wage bills. Industry estimates suggest consumers will see price increases of between 5% and 10%, depending on whether they buy from a supermarket or local butcher’s, when birds arrive in store next month. “You will get whole birds and crowns, that will be fine, but there will be a smaller range of stuffed joints with bacon lattices and so on because there aren’t enough people in factories to make them,” explains Kelly. To avoid the unthinkable, many Britons have opted to pre-order a bird or buy a frozen one – supermarket sales are far ahead of normal levels. These early birds are emptying supermarket freezers; a recent official survey looking at product availability in shops showed they were the item most likely to be out of stock. Pigs in blankets Twelve pack up 12p to £2.87 +4.2% These tasty morsels often top polls of favourite Christmas foods, so a warning from the British pig industry that this year’s supply was under threat owing to a shortage of abattoir workers was met with disappointment. This crisis, which has been heartbreaking for farmers who have had to cull 14,000 healthy animals, has been mitigated by the decision to allow butchers in on temporary visas. But with the food industry’s workforce still depleted due to the post-Brexit exodus, Zoe Davies, chief executive of the National Pigs Association, says firms are trying desperately to catch up. She is hopeful there won’t be a problem, however, pointing to a plentiful supply of streaky bacon and chipolatas which means people can assemble their own in an emergency. Around 80% of bacon and 60% of the pork we eat is imported anyway and she suspects retailers will go abroad for emergency rations rather than disappoint customers. The veg White potatoes (2.5kg) up 3p to £1.05 +2.9% Carrots (1kg) up 3p to 46p +7.0% Brussels sprouts (200g) up 13p to £1.25 +11.1% While this is one food group where shortages might be welcomed, the British Growers Association (BGA) says there are plenty of brussels sprouts. “It has been a good growing season,” says Jack Ward, chief executive of the BGA. “The volume and quality of the crops are good. It ticks all the boxes.” There is a sting in the tail, for farmers anyway, as Ward says they are dealing with cost inflation of about 25%. “Labour has gone up by 15% to 20%, fertiliser has more than doubled, while packaging is up 25%. Everything has gone through the roof.” Our data showed small price rises and in December veg prices can fall sharply as supermarkets use tactical promotions to pull in shoppers. Ward predicted shortages of some lines, but suggested they would be more obvious to growers than consumers. He says that it won’t be a case of there being nothing to choose from, but that the selection and availability will be depleted. Nut roast Own label (440g to 550g) up 17p to £4 +4.3% Even with Cop26 raising awareness of the need to eat less meat, no one is predicting a shortage of nut roasts, although they look pricier than in previous years. We looked at one mainstream retailer’s recipe and Jara Zicha, a senior analyst at Mintec, the commodities data group, said nearly all the ingredients, including palm and rapeseed oil, brown rice, wheat, almonds and peanuts, had gone up in price over the past year as a result of higher fertiliser, packaging, energy and transport costs faced by producers. Extreme weather events, such as the summer drought that affected the wheat crop in Canada, one of its biggest producers, have also been a factor at a time of extreme demand as economies around the world reopen after Covid. “There is a lot of pressure on food manufacturers to lift prices,” Zicha says. “Some of these additional costs would be absorbed by the supply chain, but some get passed along to the consumer.” On the side Paxo sage and onion stuffing mix (170g) up 11p to £1.20 +10.1% Yorkshire puddings (own label 12 pack 185-230g) up 5p to £1.04 +5.1% Bisto onion granules (170g-190g) up 16p to £1.32 +13.8% In recent weeks food manufacturers, including big ones like Marmite-maker Unilever and Nestle, home of the KitKat, have blamed planned price increases on a perfect storm of soaring food ingredient, packaging, transport and energy costs, as well as the the driver shortage that is pushing up wages in the haulage industry. Paxo and Bisto maker Premier Foods is likely to be facing similar pressures. The most recent figures from supermarket industry analysts Kantar showed annual food price inflation hitting 2.1% in October. In our sample shopping basket that figure is higher at 6.3%, but people can shop around to save money, while festive treats like mince pies and Christmas puddings actually cost the same as in 2020. The shop price of groceries such as coffee is more closely linked to the cost of goods, but the situation is muddier with processed foods. Manufacturers can only recommend a price to retailers. Sometimes stores will pass on increases, but when they are substantial, will expect the manufacturer to share the pain. Ongoing supply chain problems mean shoppers can’t find everything on their shopping lists now, so it is impossible to predict levels of availability in the biggest food sales week of the year. The Office of National Statistics survey data found the supply of only half the products checked was high, while about 9% of items were either sold out or stock was low, including frozen turkeys, sparkling water, pork, milk and pasta (although the picture was better than the week before). Champagne Veuve Clicquot yellow label 75cl up £3 to £44 +7.3% It’s a first world problem, but experts have also been telling Britons to steel themselves for a shortage of champagne as well as other popular wines, such as New Zealand sauvignon blanc. The higher champagne price is linked to production problems in the region as well the delivery problems bedevilling the whole retail supply chain. Analysts think wine prices more broadly are going up, but just not before Christmas. Extra “wine trains” are being laid on to keep supermarket shelves full, but Robert Foye, the chief executive of Accolade Wines which owns Hardys, recently summed up the outlook: “If you are a consumer, you won’t be out of wine, but you might not be able to get the one you want.” Drinkers should be open-minded, he suggested, and swap sauvignon for sancerre or opt for an English sparkling wine. Buy now? This uncertain picture has seen Britons start their Christmas preparations earlier than usual. Many shoppers have sought the added security of pre-order food services offered by stores like Marks &amp; Spencer, which are seen to offer more surety than online orders, where you run the risk of last-minute substitutions. There might be gaps on shelves, but supermarket executives are putting their head above the parapet promising shoppers that it will be all right on the night. Simon Roberts, the chief executive of Sainsbury’s, recently wrote to customers promising there would be “plenty of food” and “even if the exact product you are looking for isn’t available, there will be a good alternative”. Fresh food is of course fresh food, but you can buy longer-life products, such as a favourite wine or a stuffing mix, now. “There is still confusion around whether there is a shortage of the actual product or a shortage of distribution capacity,” says Bryan Roberts, an analyst at Shopfloor Insights. “Is there lots of milk? Yes. Are there lots of drivers? No, which is why some stores are not getting deliveries.” Roberts suggests you might have to forego some traditions and buy a frozen turkey rather than having a fresh one, for example, or make your own pigs in blankets. In general, he says, embracing frozen food could be the way to go. “A lot of stuff is already available frozen: party food, joints, turkeys, pigs in blankets and – if you are lazy – roast potatoes,” he says. “You can have a perfectly adequate, if not delightful, Christmas dinner using 100% frozen food with perhaps the exception of gravy.” It’s a thought. Shopping basket Extra large turkey crown (frozen) up 83p to £21.33 +4.1% Nut roast (own label 440g to 550g) up 17p to £4 +4.3% Pigs in blankets (12 pack) up 12p to £2.87 +4.2% White potatoes (2.5kg) up 3p to £1.05 +2.9% Carrots (1kg) up 3p to 46p +7.0% Brussels sprouts (200g) up 13p to £1.25 +11.1% Paxo sage and onion stuffing mix (170g) up 11p to £1.20 +10.1% Bisto onion granules (170g-190g) up 16p to £1.32 +13.8% Champagne (Veuve Clicquot 75cl) up £3 to £44 +7.3% Yorkshire puddings (own label 12 pack 185-230g) up 5p to £1.04 +5.1% Total cost up £4.62 to £78.52 +6.3% Data source: Assosia This is based on average prices across the UK’s four biggest grocery retailers. The data compares prices on 11 November 2020 with those on 11 November 2021, and prices have been pro-rated where relevant.ON THE BALL, SMITHY, NEVER MIND THE DANGER Norwich City get promoted to, and relegated from, the Premier League quite a lot. We would describe them as a yo-yo club, but that suggests a level of dynamism signally lacking. Their antics are less yo and yo, more a long slow circular grind, like an aged dog preparing to lie down in front of the fire at night, or the old well-Brexit Anglia logo. Norwich need snapping out of it, some Quiz of the Week energy, and yes The Fiver is aware these golden-age-of-ITV references are extremely unlikely to land with anyone under the age of 50, but this is who we are, and if the Canaries are allowed to plough the same rut year after interminable year, then The Fiver should get a free pass too. To be scrupulously fair to Norwich, they do seem to have realised things couldn’t go on the way they were forever. Daniel Farke was dispatched last week, Frank Lampard was briefly considered before everyone came to their senses, and now Dean Smith has been confirmed as the new boss. “Norwich City is a big club with a massive hardcore of supporters,” Smith said today, immediately pushing all of the big fan buttons in the correct sequence. “Together, we all have to make Carrow Road a really tough place for visiting teams,” he added, perhaps getting a little bit overexcited, writing a cheque even Pep Guardiola would find difficult to cash, but you may as well aim for the stars. Smith’s CV should give Norwich hope. He helped Brentford gather the momentum that eventually propelled the Bees to the Premier League, then led sleeping giant Aston Villa back to the big time, and while his last few weeks at Villa were admittedly a bit grim, the team were slowly adjusting to life after Jack Grealish, so fair’s fair, and good luck $tevie Mbe. However, The Fiver also notes, reluctantly, that Villa’s downturn in fortunes this season coincided with the departure of Smith’s assistant Plain Old John Terry, which opens up the possibility, not so much of Smith losing his mojo, but of everyone’s favourite leader-legend being either a tactical mastermind or man-management guru par excellence. We’re going to have to go away and think about this. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Scott Murray at 7.45pm GMT for live minute-by-minute coverage of San Marino 0-7 England while Daniel Harris will be on hand with a World Cup qualifying clockwatch including Northern Ireland 0-2 Italy, Scotland 1-2 Denmark and more. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Payback time for Scotland, with interest … the coach [Dragan Stojkovic] had told us that we are capable of producing miracles. When he entered the dressing room after the game, he said ‘You guys are out of your minds’” – Alexander Mitrovic is still trying to come down after scoring the last-minute winner in Lisbon that sealed Serbia’s Human Rights World Cup qualification ahead of Portugal and sparked a pile-on for the ages. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get a piping hot hit of Football Weekly here. FIVER LETTERS “So the suits are blocking the idea that clubs could wear away shirts on Boxing Day to show support for a very worthy cause. Yet England choose to wear their third kit at Wembley against Albania because ...” – Alex Folkes. “On the subject of rude names (Fiver passim): anyone remember Uwe Fuchs who was brought in by Bryan Robson to revive Middlesbrough’s promotion push from the Championship? It was a success but as the local paper announced at the end of the season: ‘Uwe Fuchs off to Millwall’” – Graham Liggitt. “I can’t believe no one has mentioned former [Queen’s] Celtic defender Rafael Scheidt yet. Most commentators ended up referring to him as just ‘Rafael’. At the time, Celtic had another defender named Olivier Tebily. The hope was that they would sign Everton’s David Weir as well, so they could field a back three of “Weir Tebily Scheidt” – Sam Barber. “With a mediocre squad and 1.35 billion debt, you have to admire Barcelona trying to (re)capture the fans’ imagination on the cheap by re-signing a former player or two from a time when Barca were actually any good. Big clubs struggling to live up to previous glories do love a big name past their best as a gimmick to get the fans excited and take the focus away from the failings of the rest of the squad/club don’t they? Also, see Manchester United and Ronaldo …” – Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Alex Folkes. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Louis van Gaal will coach Netherlands from the dugout despite suffering hip-knack after falling off his bike before the vital HRWC qualifier with Norway. “Physically I’m not good, but the brain is still working,” he winced. “I’m in a lot of pain, that’s why I was in a buggy during training.” In shutting the stable door long after the horse has bolted news: England’s players plan to discuss how to express their concerns about human rights in Qatar once they have qualified for the World Cup there. Gareth Bale will not start for Wales against Belgium after playing 45 minutes against Belarus. “He was never going to start,” blabbed manager Rob Page. “The plan was always for him to get a half in the first game and then come on and maybe have an impact in the second game.” Harvey Elliott has given Jürgen Klopp a rare bit of good news to grin about after returning to outdoor fitness work at Liverpool’s training ground. Jermain Defoe is among a four-man caretaker team appointed by the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers as the club search for someone to plug the $tevie Mbe-shaped hole in the Ibrox dugout. And an 11-year-old girl who ran on to the Aviva Stadium pitch to get Cristiano Ronaldo’s shirt when Republic O’ Ireland hosted Portugal has been fined €3,000. “My dad’s going to pay for it,” tooted Addison Whelan. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Dean Smith may not be a glamorous appointment but he makes sense for trend-defying Norwich, so says John Brewin. Anders Lindegaard tells Jamie Jackson about having Cristiano Ronaldo on toast, his Manchester United heartache and the “disgusting, bloody hams, blown up by water” that reflect all that is wrong with English society. The WSL points are talking, and telling us the Women’s Football Weekend was a wasted opportunity. Glenn Hoddle reflects on his England critics, dropping David Beckham and his row with Alex Ferguson in this forthright book extract. And if that isn’t enough Hoddle for you, you can read about why managing Spurs was one of his greatest regrets. And Ruper Neate asks why Joe Lewis – the 457th-richest person in the world – won’t dig a little deeper to halt Spurs’ slow decline? And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! STRONG PUNDITRYOn Wednesday the Bureau of Statistics will release the latest wages data. It will, as with the GDP figures due next month be massively affected by the lockdowns in the south-eastern states. But the problem of low wages goes well beyond temporary lockdown. Amid all the talk of rising inflation and the likelihood of the Reserve Bank increasing interest rates, one thing has frequently been overlooked – the RBA is as concerned about rising wages as it is about prices. When announcing the latest decision on monetary policy on Melbourne Cup day, the RBA noted that “wages growth at the end of 2023 is expected to be running at 3%. While this is higher than it is now, it is still below the average over the two decades to 2015.” And the pertinent point is that 3% wages growth is not enough to warrant the RBA lifting interest rates. Because if wages are growing at just 3%, inflation is likely to still be in the lower part of the RBA’s target range of 2% to 3%. If you want to know what wages growth the Reserve Bank is after we need only refer to governor Philip Lowe’s own comments to the House economics committee in 2018. It is a level of wages growth not seen since 2012 – through the entirety of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison period of government. The target is 3.5%. This not a random number Lowe plucked out of the air. It is based on a solid economic principle that wages should grow at the level of inflation plus the growth of productivity. As Lowe told the committee in 2018: “I think wages in Australia should be increasing at three point something. The reason I say that is that we are trying to deliver an average rate of inflation of 2.5%. I’m hoping labour productivity growth is at least one per cent – and I’m hoping we can do better than that – but 2.5 plus one equals 3.5.” If the graph does not display please click here Because inflation is targeted and remains relative stable, this means the key to wages growth is productivity. The problem is that while this is a nice theory, over the past decade or so (and even back to the mining boom) wages have grown by less than the combination of productivity and inflation growth: If the graph does not display please click here In the past decade, inflation has risen 20% and market-sector productivity (ie excluding education, health and public administration) has increased 15%. But in that time private sector wages have only gone up 25%. In effect that has covered inflation growth, but workers have not been adequately rewarded for their increased productivity: If the graph does not display please click here So when we have low productivity growth there is little prospect of improved wages growth for workers. On Monday the Bureau of Statistics released its latest estimates for industry-level multifactor productivity. Multi-factor productivity basically examines how effectively labour makes use of new machinery and other “capital” investments. The story of 2019-20 is not good. Smashed by the bushfires and then the pandemic, multifactor productivity fell in 11 out of 16 market-sector industries: If the graph does not display please click here But while a large part of that was due to the pandemic, which drastically reduced output while notionally keeping people employed, the problem is 2019-20 was not just a one-off. While it was the worst for over a decade, the number of industries each year producing multifactor productivity growth has now been low for three years. The last time a majority of the 16 market-sector industries increased productivity was in 2016-17: If the graph does not display please click here This highlights that we have a massive wage crisis in this country that is a factor of two aspects – the first is slowing productivity growth. The second is that workers are not getting rewarded for the productivity growth they do produce. The Reserve Bank wants wages to grow at 3.5% each year. But unless productivity growth increases and the industrial relations system rewards workers appropriately, that will not happen.In 1995, Australian author Gerald Murnane published what he thought would be his final work of fiction, Emerald Blue. He quit writing for 14 years. He returned with the novel Barley Patch in 2009, and since then has had an unexpected late-career resurgence, including seven new books and the Prime Minister’s Literary award for fiction. Murnane’s books are now published by highly respected publishers in Australia, the US and the UK, and he can count many high-profile authors among his admirers, including JM Coetzee, Ben Lerner, Teju Cole and Hari Kunzru. He has been the subject of a lengthy profile by the New York Times and a dedicated television segment on the ABC’s 7.30. By any measure, he is one of Australia’s most decorated living novelists. Now, Murnane has published another final book, Last Letter to a Reader. The idea for the book came to Murnane during lockdown in the small Victorian town of Goroke in 2020, when he decided to read his books “in the order of their publication” and write a “report of my experience as a reader of each book”. While this might seem strange, Murnane notes that he had “previously read none of my books in its published form”. He often discusses differences between the manuscripts he wrote and the books that resulted from them. His most celebrated work, 1982’s The Plains, started as “a sort of florid descant accompanying a conventional narrative” in a much longer work, entitled The Only Adam. He also “sometimes regrets” the title The Plains, which his publishers suggested over his preferred Landscape with Darkness and Mirage. He reveals that he published a still-unknown book of poetry under a pseudonym before he began writing novels. The essays in Last Letter are neither literary criticism nor memoir. They ruminate instead on unexpected connections between books, ideas and the specific life experiences that informed his writing. His discussion of his 1988 novel Inland turns from Murnane’s love for the sonorities of the Hungarian language (which he taught himself) to a discussion of Proust. These connections are important and meaningful for those who have read Inland, but they are hardly an explication of authorial intent. Though Last Letter is meant to be a final book, it is often more cantankerous than elegiac. Murnane, at various points, expresses his dislike of scholarly literary criticism, book reviewers, philosophy, neuroscience, cameras, publishers, the way we talk about characters as if they were actual people, and readers’ tendency to conflate their memories of reading a book with the book itself. While Murnane expounds upon his love for long sentences, he dislikes when they violate traditional rules of syntax. He criticises several well-known authors – including Thomas Pynchon, Hermann Broch and László Krasznahorkai – for writing the wrong kind of long sentences. These complaints might seem curmudgeonly, but Murnane’s unusual perception of the world and refusal to take concepts at face value are what make his fiction unique. That he has managed to publish such unusual books despite the enormous commercial difficulties of doing so testifies to a persistence that is probably indistinguishable from stubbornness. But Murnane’s strong views about literature also reflect his belief that writing is a vital mode for exploring truth. He argues that his books have enabled him to see “connections” and have “revelations” about the world, which for him are “my true reward for writing fiction”. It is an incredibly sincere sentiment that seems out of step with a post-postmodern world where truth is typically seen as perspectival rather than absolute. Perhaps even more baffling for contemporary readers is the real meaning of the title, Last Letter to a Reader. The reader here is not “us”, but a figure of Murnane’s “personal mythology” – his “Ideal Reader” who “supervises most of my writing”. This Ideal Reader is a “woman” who “has a distinctive appearance but resembles no person that I have actually met” and “has never uttered so much as a syllable” but is “well-disposed to me”. But Murnane also undercuts his idealistic notions in various ways. The title of the book references another of Murnane’s stories, Last Letter to a Niece, in which the main character says: “I began to foresee the peculiar course that my life would take in the future: I would seek in books what most others sought among living persons.” This tendency becomes unexpectedly comic when Murnane tells an unusual horse racing story to an incredulous punter before admitting that the events described occurred in a complex, imaginary horse racing game of Murnane’s devising rather than in reality. In a typically recursive gesture, the final chapter of Last Letter to a Reader is dedicated to the book we’ve been reading. Murnane has long been interested in framing the way readers encounter his work, and has frequently discussed the contents of the “16 crowded cabinet drawers containing my Literary Archive”, which seem organised for future critics. This book will similarly be most meaningful to dedicated readers who have already made their way through his other works. Last Letter to a Reader might best be seen as Murnane’s complex and often ironic attempt to have a say about the meaning of his books before other critics inevitably do. Last Letter to a Reader by Gerald Murnane is out now through Giramondo Publishing (A$26.95)Residents of the town of Nundle are calling on the New South Wales government to impose the same standards of community consent for existing renewable development proposals as it has for the state’s new renewable energy zones. As the first two of five REZs were declared in the central west-Orana and New England regions, the NSW government’s electricity infrastructure roadmap mandated that “renewables are developed where regional communities want them”. There has been an overwhelming expression of interest in response. As a result, the member for Northern Tablelands and NSW agriculture minister, Adam Marshall, said the government had “the luxury of supporting only the best projects that benefit the community, maintain the highest and strictest development standards and maximise local renewable jobs and investment in the region”. Communities with existing renewable development proposals say they are frustrated that these standards do not apply to them, with Nundle residents citing the Hills of Gold windfarm proposed in 2018. Megan Trousdale, an executive member of the community group Hills of Gold Preservation Inc, says at the forefront of community concern is the conviction that their town is an inappropriate location. There have been 666 submissions from a town of under 300 people, with two to one opposing the windfarm. She called on the government to follow its own mandate for renewables – “community consent and least environmental impact”. The state’s director for energy infrastructure and zones, Chloe Hicks, has previously said social licence was central to the delivery of REZs, the electricity infrastructure roadmap and its enabling legislation. Trousdale cited Middlebrook solar farm at Loomberah, 30 minutes’ drive away, and massive solar and wind projects near Coolah as “great examples of minimum objection at public meetings, in the media and during public exhibition. That says community consent.” Chris Eagles, a farmer who lives on the southern side of the Great Dividing Range, said: “Can you imagine the outrage if this happened to the Blue Mountains? Yet it is the same range with the same environmental values.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter He added: “The reason projects in remote and rural areas are attractive to the government is that they impact fewer people. It is precisely because there are less people in these areas that the environmental values are so high.” Phil Spark, an ecologist engaged by the community group, opposes the project in its current location. “I support renewable energy 100% [but] we’ve got to get it in the right places to have the minimal impact,” Spark said. The project’s environmental impact statement identified a total development footprint of approximately 513 hectares (1,270 acres), with more than 206 ha of native vegetation to be cleared, including threatened fauna such as koalas, squirrel gliders and booroolong frogs, and flora including a variety of red, ribbon and mountain gum species. While the environment impact statement says a biodiversity offset strategy will mitigate this, Spark said he did not believe in offsetting “at all”, especially in places like in Nundle where the conservation value was high. “You destroy what’s there today with the intention of someday regenerating the same habitat,” he said. “You’ve got all those years until that happens and in the meantime species can decline and become locally extinct.” In addition to community concerns about the effect on wildlife and the flow-on effect to tourism, there are serious concerns about the appropriateness of the terrain itself. Dr Robert Banks, a soil scientist engaged by the community group, said the area proposed for the project was unsuitable for the construction of both the roads and the turbine pads, as steepness and soil characteristics meant construction could cause land slides. Banks said landslips would cause further problems, including large sediments entering the upper catchment of the Chaffey Dam and the Isis River that flows into the Hunter, which would impact water quality as well as the dam’s capacity to hold water. The windfarm developer Engie’s general manager, Andrew Kerley, previously told Guardian Australia, “Dr. Robert Banks’ assessment is desktop based and without the benefit of site-specific knowledge.” Banks said in response that his assessment was entirely field-based. “I’m the author of the mapping, which is based on thousands of hours of fieldwork, as well as thousands of soil tests relevant to the region in question,” he said. “I know it well because I have driven, dug and walked over most of the footprint in the course of my work.” Kerley said: “Engie is committed to developing the Hills of Gold Wind Farm and to making a positive economic and social contribution to Nundle and the New England region. We’re continuing to engage with our stakeholders to ensure the development minimises any proposed impacts to biodiversity and heritage.” He told Guardian Australia Engie had “undertaken several additional technical assessments to identify where these impacts could be further mitigated”. Trousdale said the minority of submissions supporting the project expressed eagerness for local job creation. Her group was concerned that the project’s benefits had been overstated, she said, with the developer first estimating the ongoing jobs at 35, later reduced to 16, and the community organisation Re-Alliance’s estimating in its submission that there would be 12 ongoing positions. The Department of Planning, Industry and Environment told Guardian Australia: “The NSW Government expects all projects to work closely with local communities to make sure they are building in the right places that complement farming and other land uses.” The nearby Liverpool Range windfarm attracted fewer than 100 submissions, some of whichvoiced concerns about the impact of visual and sound pollution. But Greg Piper, a member of the project’s community consultative committee, said on the whole “the community has been quite supportive”. Piper said there would be long-term economic benefits, with money coming into the community through the voluntary planning agreements, and from his point of view it was a question of: “Do we want coal or wind turbines?” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityIt’s been a wonderful year for documentaries about Indigenous Australian artists, with Firestarter: Story of Bangarra charting the evolution of the magical Bangarra Dance Theatre and My Name is Gulpilil presenting a portrait, in the spirit of a living wake, of the great Yolŋu actor David Gulpilil. Now comes director Larissa Behrendt’s Araatika: Rise Up! – which isn’t about artists per se but certainly about creative expression, poised at the intersection of art and sport, following a group of NRL players as they create the First Nations equivalent of a haka. It’s not on the same level as the aforementioned productions (being a more modest and unprepossessing documentary, with fewer frills) but it’s nevertheless a warming and compelling watch, populated by likeable people pursuing a valuable endeavour. Splashes of visual bravado indicate a desire to create a more cinematically elevated work, which, while only partially realised, sprinkles the film with lovely images such as an opening drone shot of beautiful green terrain that lateralises the title, moving into the air and reaching towards the heavens. We’re soon taken to moments of action on the footy oval intercut with vision of an Indigenous dancer in the mid air, in front of a surreal brown background: a tableau divorced from space and time. This reminded me of Laurence Billiet’s Cathy Freeman documentary, Freeman, which also embraces athleticism as a form of expression and is laced with visions of Bangarra performer Lillian Banks playing “the spirit of Cathy”– attempting to channel via interpretative dance the emotional journey of the superstar sprinter. In Araatika we meet Dean Widders, former footballer and now Indigenous pathways manager for the NRL, who notes that he’s “seen from an early age what rugby league can do for an Aboriginal community”, with its emphasis on teamwork and sticking up for each other. Widders says watching the New Zealand team perform their haka, and observing the pride with which they do so, “always niggled at me”, given the Australia team had no such equivalent. He sets out on a mission to fill this void, consulting various parties for advice and at one point sitting down with Wesley Enoch, artistic director of Sydney festival, who compares watching sport and experiencing art as similar in the sense that both evoke in observers the feeling of “that’s part of me up there – you’re representing me and my culture”. He then delivers a proposition: “Get a mob together and come and dance,” and “Let’s make sure the rest of the world sees.” He gives Widders a platform at the Sydney festival for a performance, and by doing so, also gives the film-maker a tournament movie-esque trajectory, whereby the subjects work and train for a big third-act finale. This is an irresistible development (though it takes almost an hour of running time to get there), marking the kind of narrative inflection point that sometimes prompts a film-maker to modify their original vision to maximise a storytelling opportunity. Behrendt’s direction is a little distractible, partly due to the wealth of potential talking points, some of which are introduced and moved on from quickly. About half an hour in, for instance, we see visions of people in New Zealand performing the haka in the wake of the Christchurch massacre and are told it was “almost a way of uniting the nation” during a terrible time. This fascinating connection is befitting of more consideration, but it’s over in seconds. Documentarians invariably weigh up such challenges (ie to include or not to include, and if so, for how long) and sometimes settle on half solutions: resolving that the material is too good not to include, but not providing the space for it to be properly considered. Behrendt’s directorial style, broadly speaking, is that of a cine-essayist, talented at fishing through and arranging evidence, particularly when it comes to political and cultural context – an approach especially well-suited to her previous documentary, After the Apology. Just when you feel you have the tone and trajectory of Araatika: Rise Up! pegged, it has a habit of unexpectedly throwing something lovely or arresting at you – such as the sight of men in traditional Aboriginal makeup and garb walking down a Sydney street, flanking the harbour, en route to the final performance, of which the film’s weight and energy is behind. Dancers in this finale include Adam Goodes – recently the subject of The Final Quarter and The Australian Dream – and the journalist Stan Grant. The latter eloquently identifies the spirit of optimism implicit in Araatika and other recent docos about Indigenous Australians who have made highly significant contributions to public life, among them She Who Must Be Loved, Gurrumul, We Don’t Need a Map and parts of the Australia in Colour series. Grant sums it up when he reflects on how, during moments such as the time Australians took to the streets in droves in the 1960s to welcome back boxer Lionel Rose from Japan, “You can believe in something else: that there is another Australia, a better Australia.” Araatika: Rise Up! is streaming at the Sydney film festival On Demand until 21 November. It will air on NITV in 2022.It was the proposal designed to take the heat out of when and where the leaders of the two major parties would debate each other in the lead-up to the election. But a take-it or leave-it model for an “Australian Debates Commission” circulated by the government – far from cementing the independence of the body – proposes six of its 10 members be appointed either by the government, opposition, Liberal or Labor head offices. The model also proposes that if consensus isn’t reached on when, where and how to engage, three debates will be slashed to just one outing in Canberra, overseen by the government-appointed “independent” commissioner or their choice of moderator. At the conclusion of the third leader’s debate in May 2019 Scott Morrison and then opposition leader, Bill Shorten, both committed to set up “an independent debates commission”. On Thursday the special minister of state, Ben Morton, wrote to the federal leaders of the parliamentary and organisational wings of the Liberal and Labor parties, the public broadcasters ABC and SBS, the three media organisations that own free-to-air television stations, News Corp Australasia, the National Press Club and the federal parliamentary press gallery. In the letter, seen by Guardian Australia, Morton sought approval for a prescriptive set of rules described as a “prerequisite” for the commission, warning that it will not be established “unless there is agreement to do so from all relevant parties and media organisations”. The parties have until 22 November to sign up. Morton explained that at least for the 2022 election the commission will “hold no formal or legal status”, but will be supported by the finance department and cease operation two months after the election. The framework proposes a 10-person commission consisting of two representatives from each of the Liberal and Labor Parties; an independent commissioner appointed by each of the government and opposition; two representatives from the broadcast media companies; and the chief executive of the club and president of the gallery. The 20 “foundation principles” set out that there will be three debates in every election campaign, with one to be held in a regional location and at least one in Canberra. Debates will include one with a moderator and panel, one town hall with a moderator and audience participation, and one with a single moderator. However, as the rules claim that “two interviews broadcast on the same night by a single program is considered a debate” – even back-to-back appearances of the two leaders on ABC’s 7.30 or on a Q&amp;A special could constitute a “debate”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Debates will be provided to all networks, but none may overlay the broadcast “with any worm or like device” registering audience approval and disapproval in real time. All decisions of the commission must be reached by consensus, and its deliberations are confidential. It is overseen by the convener, the government-appointed “independent commissioner”. “The date and location of all debates must be agreed within seven days of the writs being issued,” Morton’s proposal said. “Should the commission fail to reach consensus there will be a single debate held in Canberra during the election campaign, with the commission convener as the single moderator (or their nominee) with no panel or audience participation.” ABC AM’s Sabra Lane, the former Press Club president, noted the proposal on Friday querying whether the major parties and media organisations could agree on it. Andrew Hirst, the federal director of the Liberal party, said it supports the commission, which he hoped would put an end to “inane debates about debates”. “The proposal put forward by minister Morton is a good one and we look forward to working with the government, the opposition and media organisations on its establishment,” Hirst told Guardian Australia. The National Press Club board and the press gallery committee are yet to consider the proposal. Gallery president, David Crowe, said a commission “needs to be set up”. In the United States, debates are overseen by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a not-for-profit. Since 1989, the two major parties have had no input into its rules and no sitting officers on its membership. Morton said his proposal “fulfils the prime minister’s commitment to provide certainty around the debates process in the lead up to the federal election”. “I am confident that this model will put clarity around the debates process, and let Australians focus on the issues that matter most,” he told Guardian Australia. In his letter, Morton said the proposal strikes “a balance between having sufficient details or guide rails to enable agreement to establish a commission, while allowing the commission to do its work”. Guardian Australia contacted Morrison and the Australian Labor party national secretary, Paul Erickson, for comment.On 4 January 2020, the western Sydney suburb of Penrith was one of the hottest places on Earth at 48.9C. The heat that day, at the foot of the Blue Mountains, gave a brief window into what the future will be like in the city’s outer rings, soon to be home to more than 1.5 million people. Climate change is no longer looming. It’s here. Since records began, Australia has warmed by about 1.44C and rising, but the heat isn’t felt equally: few places are suffering as severely as western Sydney. With plans to construct a new city around the Nancy Bird Walton airport at Badgerys Creek, and thousands of families moving into new release areas in the north-west and south-west, the time to insist on climate sensitive development is now, experts say. “Australians deserve a better future and if we don’t design for the changing climate, dwellings will ultimately be uninhabitable and we know that is worse in areas of disadvantage,” says Davina Rooney, chief executive of the Green Building Council. “We will be entrenching energy poverty, and the consequences are quite substantial.” But there are fears the impact of climate change has been compounded by slapdash urban planning and shortsighted design preferences, which have favoured big sprawling houses with dark roofs, black driveways and small yards over more energy-efficient properties. It was only in August that planning controls were implemented banning dark roofing in Sydney’s south-western growth area and specifying room for trees in back yards. Rob Stokes, the NSW planning minister, said the changes marked a new direction from decades of development on Sydney’s fringes. “When designing lots for detached housing, we need back yards which are big enough to plant a tree or have a garden,” Stokes said. “We need to say goodbye to the trend of having dark roofs that not only attract and retain heat and raise ambient street temperatures, but lead to astronomical electricity bills because of the need to cool homes.” Sebastian Pfautsch, associate professor of urban studies at the University of Western Sydney, says the region is an important marker for other capitals, since it has one of the fastest growing urban populations in Australia. “The mistakes [in urban design] being made in western Sydney are being made in Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth. We’re not really thinking [about] how … we deal with the changing climate, particularly heat.” How did we get here? Successive governments in NSW have talked about “liveable suburbs” as they grapple with waves of migration, demand for housing and soaring property prices. The state’s population will swell by 3.3 million to more than 11 million by 2061, according to the latest intergenerational report, requiring 1.7m extra homes. More than half that growth will come from immigration. Many of these new arrivals are leaving behind crowded cities and have chosen Australia because of the lifestyle it offers. Those who come to Sydney will overwhelmingly settle in the western suburbs, and for many that will mean new houses in areas long designated for expansion. Many of the developments now being built were planned under Labor a decade ago under its Draft Metropolitan Strategy. Areas of the north-west around Rouse Hill, and the south-west around Oran Park and Leppington, were earmarked for development in the 2000s. Labor set out to address the planning failures of the 1990s, when areas of the north-west were opened up with no public transport, resulting in horrendous commutes and choked roads. Labor pledged it wouldn’t build any more suburbs before it had committed to rail infrastructure. Railways to Rouse Hill and Leppington have now been built, although their completion lagged well behind development of the suburbs. After leaving parliament, the former planning minister Frank Sartor recalled the pressures he felt from colleagues to allow developers to open up new areas, despite the stated policy of ensuring infrastructure was in place first. Sartor claimed he came under pressure from colleagues on behalf of the Urban Task Force, a group Sartor described as “nothing more than a lobby group for land speculators dressed up in the clothes of a respectable property group”. The group and its members were major donors to the ALP until the ban on political donations from developers was introduced in 2008. Developers hated some of the decisions that defined new release areas – such as the introduction of levies to help pay for infrastructure. The levies had long-term consequences too. Because they were imposed per hectare of land there was an incentive to squeeze in as many blocks as possible, whereas a charge per house or lot would have encouraged a mix of block sizes. Powerless councils In NSW, if a planned dwelling satisfies the broad criteria of the building codes it does not have to go to the local council for individual assessment, under the rules known as “exempt and complying development”. This means that councils have little say over the final look and feel of the suburb. “Zero setbacks” permitted as part of exempt and complying development mean that one wall of a house can be built right to the boundary of the lot, leading to cramped streetscapes where the eaves of neighbours almost touch each other. “The problem is that the houses are flat and wide,” Pfautsch says. “They’re from fence to fence. “The problem is with the state government. They say this new growth area will have 8,000 homes. If local government comes up with requests, the developer resists and just says: ‘We won’t do it’.” Councils also struggle to enforce building codes. NSW’s Basix rules, introduced in 2008 and designed to drive more sustainable housing, require water-saving native plants. Many councils also require a significant tree to be planted in the back yard of new houses. But stretched councils rarely have the resources to check that the plants – often the last step in the building process – have been planted, let alone whether they have survived their first couple of summers. The same goes for street trees – the developers put them in, but there is little attention given to whether they survive. What do homebuyers want? Developers stress that what they build is driven by demand – families want large single dwelling homes, not units. Pfautsch agrees: “People who buy off the plan don’t want gardens, they want a big house. “Two storeys are not favoured in the new estates, instead they choose sprawling houses … High rise would be much more sustainable. They could have open space around them and parks and community facilities.” Pfautsch says that people who buy into these estates have been drained of resources buying the land and then try to put up the biggest, least expensive house possible. That means they don’t always have the budget for double glazing or other features that might improve liveability and energy efficiency. Prof Bill Randolph, from the University of NSW’s City Futures research centre, says the size of plots is falling and housing is getting bigger. “It’s what the market wants,” he says. “I don’t know why [development control plans] don’t require more open space. The floor-space ratios are quite permissive, and most unsustainable. “Black roofs mean you need cooling systems and because they are built right to the boundary, often the air-conditioning systems are competing with each other and blowing hot air toward the neighbours.” In 2007, Oran Park, the site of a former racetrack, was given the green light for accelerated development into a suburb of more than 9,000 homes, with an eventual population of 45,000. The suburb has a masterplan and 38 hectares of open space has been reserved, but critics say little thought has been given to sustainability. Oran Park was permitted to have much smaller lots than previously allowed, because the government wanted to meet its housing targets. Land buyers then chose houses from display homes resulting in a mishmash of styles that filled the blocks. There are trees in the streets, but very few in the tiny yards. Oran Park is served only by infrequent buses, which take residents to train stations at Campbelltown, 14km away, or Leppington, 12km away. Understandably, many residents rely on cars. Ryan Azzopardi and Melissa Lauricella, a newly married couple, have been living in Oran Park for about a year. They bought the land four years ago and then built a project home which they saw at a display village. The couple are very happy with their choice, and like the suburb, but their house has familiar energy drawbacks, despite having solar power installed. The roof is dark, bricks are also a darker brown, with front pillars a lighter beige. Azzopardi says no one asked him about the colours of bricks and roof tiles. “It’s a funny situation. The sun goes over the house, and in the morning it’s hot on one side, and in the evening it’s warm round the back. And in winter, it is freezing out the back of the house. But when summer comes around, and we get the intense morning sun, the rooms around the front can get really hot. It doesn’t get too discomforting, but it is noticeable.” How can we do better? State planning ministers have tried various means to drive more sustainable development. Sartor introduced the Growth Centres Commission in 2005 to speed land releases and tame the forces of the market. The Coalition set up the Greater Sydney Commission in 2015 and appointed Lucy Turnbull, a former lord mayor of Sydney, as its initial chair. It was an effort to coordinate development across the metropolis, envisaging Sydney as three linked cities. Some of the age-old failings were top of mind: ensuring infrastructure kept pace with new housing developments, ensuring there was enough housing in the future and making sure jobs were near where people lived. It had a goal of creating “the 30-minute city,” an ideal maximum time for people to travel to work, childcare or shops. It talked about walkable neighbourhoods. And for the first time it talked about addressing urban heat. That meant more green space, greater tree canopy and more sustainable housing. When Gladys Berejiklian became the premier in 2017, two measures designed to make cities more liveable were among her 14 stated priorities. The first was increasing the proportion of homes within a 10-minute walk of “quality green open and public space” by 10%, or 230,000 homes, by 2023. As of January 2021, the government said it had met that goal for 100,000 homes. The second was achieving an increase in the tree canopy by planting 1m trees by 2023. By March it was claiming to be halfway there. But the target does not measure trees cleared or the loss of farmland as Sydney keeps expanding. Pushing the limits Badgerys Creek on Sydney’s south-west fringe is the next frontier of large-scale urban planning. The so-called aerotropolis (recently renamed Bradfield) beside the new Nancy Bird Walton airport will be home to an eventual population of 1.5 million people. Billed as “the beating heart of the Western parkland city”, Bradfield will be done differently, according to Planning NSW. The department has announced precinct plans for three large areas that will have different purposes: an employment zone, a city core and residential area, and an agribusiness zone that will largely focus on food processing. The planners promise “excellent access and connectivity, provided through public infrastructure” and “excellent liveability, where a ‘beyond business as usual’ approach will focus on creating a cooler and greener city”. “In this place, blue/green systems will be particularly important, forming the basis for a more sustainable, resilient plan, one that respects and connects with country,” the key documents say. A draft sustainability report from consultants Alluvium says it is possible to have “a greener more resilient Western Sydney area with up to 7C of cooling on extreme heat days provided by better design, greening and irrigation”. It says extreme and strong heat stress days can be reduced from 47 to 19 days each summer. The report says this will be achieved by larger natural areas of vegetation to provide cooling and biodiversity, water bodies to provide evaporative cooling through misting and irrigation breezes, and more vegetation, including green roofs, walls and facades providing shade, insulation and evapotranspiration. Green space needs to be placed upwind of significant areas and “high albedo” (lighter coloured) building materials should be used to reflect light and heat, while shade should be provided through eaves, overhangs, ventilation and street trees that need deep soil planting spaces and passive irrigation. It all sounds promising, but no one expects the good intentions to translate easily into reality. The wildlife assessment management report, also part of the publicly released planning documents, warns that the airport itself is a threat to achieving the vision because green initiatives will “increase the risk of bird strike”. “Safeguarding the 24/7 operations of the airport and the vision of the Western Sydney Aerotropolis are essentially at odds,” it states. And this is before the powerful forces of commercial development bear down on the planners. Outside observers remain cautious. Rooney, of the Green Building Council, says: “The Greater Sydney Commission has put out a very strong vision for a green Aerotropolis and … the planning concepts are very focused on bringing green living spaces. But obviously the devil is in the detail of planning implementation. It’s just too critical for this not to be delivered.” Events in the north-west offer a further reason for pessimism. At Jordan Springs, the developer Lend Lease promised “tree-lined streets, picturesque parks and a thriving mix of community-focused businesses”. In fact Jordan Springs has many of the same attributes as Oran Park – few trees, small lots and dark-roofed houses that stretch to the property boundaries. But it is the NSW government’s recent decision to reverse its requirement for an employment zone that has planners and local residents worried. In October 2020, at the height of the concerns about a Covid-induced downturn in the housing industry, Stokes announced that the 38 hectares reserved for a jobs hub would instead be turned into 500 more houses, and fast-tracked. Geoff Brown, a local resident and activist, told the ABC it was a terrible deal for local workers. “How is that a net benefit for NSW? A long-held promise [of] 38.4 hectares of employment land and thousands of ongoing local jobs, scrapped for 500 homes and just 252 temporary construction jobs.” Onus on government Perhaps the big picture answer is that more Australians should opt for denser living, allowing more space for parkland and community facilities. But even if we continue to build on the fringes while also building more apartments around railway stations and in the inner city, Prof Bill Randolph of City Futures says the challenge is the same: good planning lies in a much higher level of government intervention to ensure and prioritise sustainability. “The origin [of the problem] is the department of planning and their determination to get the numbers of dwellings [up], and the development industry. The prime criteria for both is the development numbers. It’s not sustainability or liveability.” Randolph says the hands-off approach by government is particularly obvious in urban redevelopment around railway stations and is responsible for the lack of urban green space. “In urban renewal areas developers have to buy expensive land. No one wants the park. The government doesn’t buy up the land then develop it, it leaves it to the private sector. The planning system acts as an enabler to the market rather than thinking about sustainability.” He believes the state government should take a much more hands-on role in shaping new urban areas, as occurs in other countries. Rooney agrees: “If we look at long-term sustainable projects like Barangaroo, which has been delivered as a net zero precinct, it had incredibly strong governance and government leadership through a really long trajectory,” she says. She says an important step is the update the national construction code, which can ensure buildings are fit for a changing climate. “It’s been a decade since we have updated the national building code. We need to have an ecosystem that lifts standards,” she says. The new code has been on exhibition for the last three months and will be in place by late 2022. It proposes upgrades to standards for glass, insulation, water heaters and other materials to drive thermal efficiency. “There will be a lot of discussion about the cost of making homes better but we have to really lean into the long-term value. “We need net zero homes. There is a commitment to a trajectory and now we need that to happen. There is a whole lot of green infrastructure – we know that with large green spaces, light-coloured roofs, tree cover, that we can change the temperature. Then we need to look at other elements like public transport, walkability, a sense of community.” She also suggests that the pandemic, far from being an excuse for backing off higher standards, should be a catalyst for change. “The community has become aware of the value of green space. Councils have put in pop-up cycleways and pop-up outdoor dining. I think there has been a community renaissance of their understanding of green spaces.”It’s time. The seasons have changed, we are out of lockdown and nearly at the end of spring. Hopefully, we can retire our heaviest coats for the summer (although I’m writing this in Melbourne, where you can never rely on the weather). Before you do, we asked some experts for their advice on the best way to store your coats to ensure they’re in optimal condition when you reach for them next winter. Decide what to store “Not all coats need to be stored throughout summer,” says Australian Wool Innovation (parent company of The Woolmark Company) chief executive John Roberts. This is because wool has inherent benefits such as breathability and moisture control, which means it can be worn all year round. “But certainly, for those living in areas where the mercury soars in summer, some heavier wool felt coats may indeed be stored away,” he says. Storing wool the right way “will increase the active-use phase of the garment”. Daniel Nieslsenbeck, the owner of Shop Bruce, a vintage consignment store in Melbourne, suggests “trying on the coat or jacket to see if you’re still connected to the piece” before you store it. “If you’ve moved on from the style or fit, you might consider consigning or donating the item.” Restore before you store Charlotte Hicks, the founder and designer of Esse Studios, suggests spending time at the end of the season making your coat “look as good as it did when you bought it”. She advises getting any small faults repaired, such as torn pocket linings, belt loops, or lost buttons. She says this is important “so things don’t continue to fall out of shape” while the piece is packed away. She recommends getting your coat dry cleaned at the end of the season, “to avoid any residual spills discolouring the fabric over time”. She points out that this will also “remove odours, which can attract unwanted friends”. Nieslsenbeck agrees. “We recommend dry cleaning coats prior to storage if necessary.” If the coat is still in “excellent condition”, it “can be lightly steamed and given ample time to dry” instead. Practise best storage Be aware that wool and other animal fibres contain keratin, which attracts moths, so it’s important to ensure woollen, cashmere or mohair coats are kept in a place where they won’t be eaten. Once your coat has been cleaned and any repairs have been handled, do not file it away in a plastic dry cleaning bag. Hicks suggests hanging coats on hangers with round, wide ends to ensure the shoulder shape holds through the off season. Then cover it in a calico suit bag, with cedar wood balls to repel moths and silverfish. A cedar wood suit hanger should also do the trick. Roberts agrees that “wrapping your wool coat in a light cotton fabric ensures your wool retains its as-new appearance”. Avoid vacuum-packing coats in airtight bags, both Nieslsenbeck and Hicks say, as the suction can compromise the shape of the coat. If you don’t have enough hanging space, Nieslsenbeck recommends storing coats folded, with acid-free tissue paper, in plastic bins with clear lids and some Huon pine blocks to repel moths. He says “packing boxes should never be over-filled and we recommend storing in a weatherproof environment free from mould, damp [and] humidity”. Storing puffer jackets Like woollen coats, puffer jackets or down jackets should be stored clean, but generally taking a down jacket to the dry cleaner is ill-advised. Instead, machine wash your down jacket on a gentle cycle at 30C, select the extra rinse option and skip the spin cycle. Use a down-specific detergent and follow the directions on the bottle. This is important because traditional detergent can strip down of its natural oils and negatively affect the loft (how puffy it is) and performance. For handwashing, puffer jackets can be soaked in a sink or bucket for an hour. Once the coat has soaked, gently squeeze any excess water out, being sure not to wring it. Before putting your puffer into storage, it’s important to dry it properly. This can be tricky – as down absorbs so much water, it may feel dry long before it really is. Storing down wet can result in mildew. Generally speaking, it will take 24–48 hours to drip dry, depending on the weather. To prevent clumps from forming, it’s a good idea to give it the occasional fluff as it dries. When the coat is almost dry, put it in the tumble dryer on low heat with some tennis balls or dryer balls to break down any clumps. Once you’re sure it’s dry and safe to store it, be sure it isn’t squashed or stuffed into a tight space, so the loft isn’t damaged. Kathmandu has an online guide if you’d like to see how it’s done.A First Nations community in Canada has learned that levels of a cancer-causing chemical in its air are 44 times higher than is considered safe, after years of fighting for the data. Aamjiwnaang First Nation in Ontario is surrounded on all sides by petrochemical facilities, and members have long suspected that the facilities in “Chemical Valley” have exposed them to potentially dangerous substances. . Data obtained using freedom of information laws by Global News has revealed elevated levels of benzene, a known carcinogen, and sulphur dioxide – and indicated the provincial government had previously known the levels were far higher than the province’s standard. After a 2019 visit to Aamjiwnaang, Baskut Tuncak, the UN special rapporteur on toxic chemicals, told the Guardian: “I was struck by the incredible proximity of the affected First Nation to dozens of intense chemical production and processing facilities, which resulted in incredible releases of pollution and waste affecting the [residents’] health.” A bill meant to tackle environmental racism passed through a number of committees earlier this year, but died after a snap election was called by the Liberal government. The bill would have required the federal government to collect data on where environmental hazards such as pulp mills, dumps and mines are located and study whatever links exist between race and health. The bill would have also required Ottawa to compensate communities whose air, water and land is poisoned by industry, and to ensure they are consulted on future development projects. The Ontario government has recently moved forward with proposed new rules that would strengthen emissions caps as well as require companies to disclose emissions data with affected First Nations. Already, emissions have seen a drop in recent years but are still above the province’s benchmark.Adjacent articles online – Fear, panic and chaos: the joy of flying from the UK to New York again (Emma Brockes, 12 November) and How can Britain cut emissions when the Tory party fetishises travel? (Andy Beckett, 12 November). Not only Tories… Eddie Dougall Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk • I apologise for the delay in sending this letter, but I have been busy for the past few days scouring supermarkets for mulberry pekmez (From gözleme to pekmez: Yotam Ottolenghi’s Turkish-inspired recipes, 13 November). John Crawshaw Wakefield, West Yorkshire • In answer to the first question in the kids’ quiz (13 November), babies grow in women’s wombs (colloquially, perhaps, “tummies”) but not imprecisely “in a person’s tummy”. If we are imparting biological knowledge through fun (the aim, surely, of a kids’ quiz), let’s get it right. Gillian Dalley London • I have for some months carried a Boriscard, which states that I do not wish the PM to visit me in hospital under any circumstances (Letters, 12 November). They are available, and free, from the excellent independent bookshop News From Nowhere, on Bold Street in Liverpool. Jean Davies Woolton, Liverpool • I’m with Pat Notley (Letters, 11 November). Making batches of four Christmas puddings every three years means that there is always a mature, delicious pudding for Christmas. They really are one of the easiest puddings to make. Diane Woodley Westgate-on-Sea, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sick of those Qigong sessions? Wolverine claws not doing it? Medical grade charcoal drink less tasty than it once seemed? Then you have a soulmate in David Hockney, who finds wellness boring, bossy and ridiculous. His views on the vast, seemingly unstoppable industry have been revealed after Hockney’s assistant bought 10 packs of beer mats featuring an image of an ashtray and a cigarette along with the words: “Bored of wellness.” They were made by an artist called Mr Bingo. He was so chuffed at someone he considers “the world’s greatest living artist” buying them that he asked Hockney if he could talk about it on social media. Bradford-born Hockney replied yes and added: “I too am bored with wellness, the concept seems ridiculous and too bossy for me, I’m still smoking and enjoying it enormously. “I have never been to a gym in my life. I walk a bit slower and not so far, but I am still working away every day. I have a show in Paris of a work 90 metres long that shows a whole year in Normandy. Love life.” Mr Bingo – Bingo to his friends – told the Guardian he was thrilled to get a response from the artist and the positive comments on Twitter and Instagram were a joy. “It is amazing that he’s bought something. Personally, he is my favourite artist so it is the biggest compliment you can get when your hero buys something off you … it is pretty amazing.” On the beer mats themselves Bingo said it was up to other people to decide what he might be saying, what his message was, if any. “I’m not one of these people who makes artist statements or really talks about it. I just want people to look at it and decide what they like.” It is, though, understood that Bingo does do Qigong, yoga and has had the odd craniosacral therapy session so his views may not be fully aligned with those of Hockney. It could also be that Bingo, like many, is exasperated at how huge and money-oriented the wellness industry has become. One estimate has put its global value at $4.2tn. Clearly the last person to be adding to that figure is 84-year-old Hockney, who moved to rural Normandy in late 2019 to paint the changing landscape. His daily iPad sketches documenting the arrival of spring were exhibited to acclaim at the Royal Academy of Arts in London this year. Inspired by the Bayeux tapestry, he has created a huge frieze depicting a year in Normandy, currently on display at Paris’s Musée de l’Orangerie.Mary Berridge’s article and images (‘Without what made me “me”, I’d be a shadow of myself’ – portraits of life on the autism spectrum, 13 November) capturing the non-stereotypical characteristics of children and families affected by autism highlights the lack of understanding and stigma associated with the condition. She says: “Knowledge about autism is not that widespread.” Our daughter, who will turn 40 next month, was diagnosed with developmental difficulties and delay at six months, in 1982. But it took years of pressure to get her subsequent behavioural problems taken seriously, and a diagnosis to be given that would open the door to support. Following an article on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in the Observer, we successfully pressed for a referral to the consultant mentioned, at the Maudsley hospital. Finally, at the age of 10, our daughter was given a diagnosis of ADHD. She remained under the care of the Maudsley hospital and the same consultant for more than 10 years. But it was not until the age of 20 that the consultant amended her diagnosis to one of high-functioning autism. In doing so, he stated that “so little is understood generally about autism that we did not feel she would get the support she needed if we had diagnosed her with autism earlier”. How disappointing to see that a further 20 years on, the levels of ignorance and misinformation about autism remain so uncomfortably high. Judy Evans Brighton, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.John Oliver explored the many sinister and effective methods through which US companies bust unionization drives on Sunday’s Last Week Tonight, at one of the worst times for organized labor in the country’s history. Though nearly half of non-union workers say they would like to be in a union, only 10.8% of American workers belong to one, just above half the rate of unionization in 1983. “If you’ve never been through a union organizing drive yourself, you might assume that a union vote is a completely free and fair election,” the host explained. But “that is an illusion fed by executives like Jeff Bezos,” who told Business Insider in 2018 that Amazon didn’t “believe that we need a union to be an intermediary between us and our employees, but of course at the end of the say, it’s always the employees’ choice”. “I don’t know about you, but I’m personally not comforted by hearing one of the richest men on earth say ‘it’s your choice,’” said Oliver. “No matter the context, all I can hear is, ‘spear or arrow, how would you prefer to be hunted, it’s your choice.” Oliver delved into a major reason for unions’ declining power in the private sector: the ability of large companies such as Amazon, Starbucks and Target to prevent unionization drives and protract contract negotiations with relatively few and meaningless consequences. Such “union busting” begins, Oliver explained, with preventing workers from holding a secret ballot election, typically through influence campaigns and intimidation. During a recent unionization attempt at a center in Bessemer, Alabama, for example, Amazon inundated workers with anti-union signs throughout the workplace, including in bathroom stalls, and used workers’ contact information to send multiple anti-union text messages per day. Both Starbucks and Amazon held “captive audience meetings” disguised as union information sessions to persuade workers not to organize. Companies also engage in scare tactics regarding union dues; in 2019, Delta Airlines produced posters which told employees to use the $700 for union dues toward “a new video game system with the latest hits.” “Telling your workers to play video games instead of unionizing is incredibly condescending, and doubly so when you consider video game characters are the ultimate example of exploited labor,” Oliver said. “Think about it: they take orders all day, usually get paid in coins, and not once in 36 years of playing Mario have I ever seen him get to take a bathroom break. Not once! “And you might say, well, of course a union collects dues, how else are they going to have the resources to fight for their members?” he continued. But anti-union consulting firms retained by large companies “will insist that unions simply take money and offer nothing in return”. One 2016 video by the Labor Relations Institute, Inc, an anti-labor consulting firm, argued that unions sent out “high-pressure salespeople” to sell a “bill of goods” because declining membership meant unions were “in danger of going out of business”. “Just to be clear, that is a for-profit consulting firm being paid by a for-profit company arguing that unions are only in it for the money,” said Oliver. “It’s not even the pot calling the kettle black, it’s the pot calling the kettle a pot. It’s like being called a bad first date by Ted Bundy.” It is also easy for companies to engage in illegal intimidation with little recourse. Though it is against the law for companies to threaten workers’ jobs if they unionize, it is legal for companies to “predict” that a workplace will close should a workforce unionize, “which is obviously not a real distinction”, said Oliver. “When a loanshark threatens to break your legs, that’s not meaningfully different from a loanshark predicting that legs will be broken as a result of market forces related to lack of payment.” Penalties for companies wrongfully terminating pro-union employees are “just pathetic”, said Oliver. A company might be forced to provide backpay, “but that on its own is a pretty small price for them to pay if it helps them crush a union”. Which is why US employers are charged with violating federal law in over 41% of union election campaigns, “because why wouldn’t they?” Oliver exclaimed. “Even when the charges are proven, the consequences are laughable.” The host then offered a few potential fixes, starting with the Protecting the Right to Organize Act, or Pro Act, currently working through Congress, which would outlaw captive audience meetings and prevent employers from protracting negotiations for years. “Perhaps most importantly, it would put real financial penalties in place to prevent companies from violating workers’ rights without consequence,” Oliver said. “But until that law is passed, and it should pass, one of the most important things a worker could do is to try not to get disheartened during a campaign,” he added, “which I know isn’t easy, but union busting is all about killing momentum, splintering unity, and exhausting workers’ spirits.”Ben Okri (Artists must confront the climate crisis – we must write as if these are the last days, 12 November) is quite right. Artists have often worked during wars and other crises, asserting the importance of positive expression in the face of many events and activities that are depressing and likely to cause disillusionment. This was the case in the 1930s in Nazi Germany, when Kurt Weill, Lotte Lenya, Bertolt Brecht and others created memorable music/theatre pieces that were memorable then, and remain so. The same was true of Michael Tippett’s oratorio A Child of Our Time, which started as a protest against the persecution of Jews, but was soon adopted around the world as a general statement of support for any people who were oppressed. Lately, it made a big impact in Russia. I myself, as a musician, continue my work as an arranger of existing music. Meirion Bowen London • “Less is more” is, I believe, one of the keynotes of Ben Okri’s article. We are familiar with less is more as an aesthetic quality, but it also has a moral quality that goes to the essence of what really matters. The phrase – that originated in Robert Browning’s poetry and is a tenet of Japanese Zen Buddhism – is more often than not associated with the architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, one of the pioneers of modernist architecture and a proponent of simplicity in design. Less is more can now serve as the wake-up call we all need – shining a light on how we can bring our habitat, economy and society back into equilibrium with nature. Trevor Jones Sheringham, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There was chaos at the border. Thousands of Middle Eastern refugees and migrants had massed at the crossing point to the European Union, hoping for a better life. Many had been taken to the barbed-wire fence on state-funded buses, after the authoritarian leader made good on years-long threats “to open the gates to Europe”. But when people arrived, the hope of a better life collided with police teargas and stun grenades. This was not a scene from the Polish-Belarus border this week, but Greece’s land border with Turkey less than two years ago. Belarus’s authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko has realised – as Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan knew before him – that desperate people fleeing war and violence can be used as pawns in a cruel political game. The game can be played because the EU wants to keep out irregular migrants at any price, even if it means outsourcing border security to repressive regimes. “Lukashenko is using the only language he understands – force – to try to reopen dialogue with the EU,” Maxim Samorukov of the Carnegie Moscow Center has written. But the plan has come unstuck. Poland, which has banned media, NGOs and even EU officials from its border with Belarus, has refused to allow migrants to enter. Migrants found shivering in thin blankets in no man’s land have told of being figuratively kicked around like a football, neither allowed to enter Poland, nor return to Belarus. Farther north, Lithuania is reported to be adopting similar tactics along its 420-mile border with Belarus. If Lukashenko was counting on Poland and Lithuania coming under heavy criticism for their treatment of people – and reopening divisive splits within the EU – he was wrong. Six years after the migration crisis, when a million asylum seekers crossed into the European Union, the EU’s gates are tightly shut. While Germany’s outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, was widely praised for her humanitarian gesture of welcoming Syrian asylum seekers in 2015, most EU officials drew a different lesson: she was wrong. The combination of “wir schaffen das (we can do this) without any consultation … and [mandatory] quotas” to redistribute refugees around the bloc was an error, one former senior EU official told the Guardian. The second lesson the EU drew from 2015 is that it needed a stronger external border. In 2021, the talk in Brussels is about walls, not wir schaffen das. “We really are in a different place to five years ago. We have to realise that in some parts of the world physical barriers are a necessity,” said a senior diplomat, from the large group of EU member states arguing for common funding of external walls and fences. If anything, in the short-term, the crisis has bolstered EU unity at a time when Poland’s nationalist government was under intense scrutiny for undermining the rule of law. On a recent visit to Warsaw, which could have been dominated by the ongoing assault on Poland’s independent judiciary, the European Council president, Charles Michel, said that Poland was facing a major crisis at its border: “It is a crisis which we are taking seriously, and which calls for both solidarity and unity across the entire European Union.” The tone was similar when the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, flew to the Greek-Turkish border in March 2020, praising Greece as Europe’s “shield”. A decade earlier the EU was bargaining with Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who played on the EU’s fears, demanding billions to stop people sailing across the Mediterranean in small boats. Since 2017, the EU has funded Libya’s coastguard, paying it to intercept people in the Mediterranean, despite knowledge of widespread human rights violations and unexplained disappearances of the returnees. But there are some important differences between Turkey, Libya and Belarus. Turkey has been housing more than 4 million refugees, securing an EU promise to spend €6bn on aid. Libya was for many years a departure gate for people from across Africa looking to get to Europe. More than those states, Belarus has manufactured the crisis, with reports of state-backed travel agencies offering visa-hotel package deals with mendacious promises of a short walk to the EU border from Minsk. (The distance is about 200 miles). Lukashenko, however, looks unlikely to gain anything. Instead of an opening with the EU, he has triggered a further round of sanctions against his regime, with a promise of tougher measures to come. While diplomatic wrangling goes on, thousands are trapped in no man’s land on the EU’s eastern frontier, as winter temperatures plummet. Diplomats say they want to help organise repatriation flights, but only from Belarus, not from the EU. As the humanitarian crisis escalates, there will be no chink in Fortress Europe.Your editorial (11 November) calling for safeguards against sleaze to be strengthened heightens the case for parliament to establish an effective, non-partisan means of systematically holding to account any prime minister for personal breaches of the ministerial code, as well as in instances of gross personal misconduct or incompetence. The recent report by Lord Evans’s committee on standards in public life avoids this pivotal question, and so have the some 500 backbenchers and more than 700 sitting peers forming our parliament. Yet this matter is becoming ever more crucial for adequately safeguarding the public interest as UK politics becomes ever more populist and presidential. Should it not be examined urgently by parliament’s constitution committee under its remit to keep the operation of our constitution under review? Notwithstanding the political sensitivities involved, the growing chargesheet against Boris Johnson surely provides more than enough grounds for such an inquiry. Steve Elton Mary Tavy, Devon • The tide has undoubtedly turned for Boris Johnson and his government as they become deluged with sleaze, or should we say corruption, allegations. But your editorial (12 November) is absolutely right to point out that the critical factor in shaping our nation’s future will be the British economy over the next two years. The amount and value of cash in people’s pockets will invariably prove a more decisive factor at election time than the politics of sleaze and Brexit lies that we are enduring at the moment. If the chancellor gets the economy right, he may yet inspire some mistaken confidence in another Conservative government. If he doesn’t, the Tories are likely to be out of power and Rishi Sunak will not succeed Johnson as party leader. The stakes are high, but never underestimate the economy. David Walker Dunsfold, Surrey • As you note, there is a range of areas in public life that need better regulation if potentially corrupt practices are not to flourish. Unsurprisingly, Boris Johnson plans to do nothing about any of them. There may be a price for inaction. The extent of sinecures and political placemen in the 1820s led to pressure for democratic parliamentary reform. It was resisted until, in 1831, Britain came close to revolution. Only at this point was it decided that perhaps the 1832 Great Reform Act was a better way forward. If that’s what it takes to get Johnson to act… Keith Flett Tottenham, London • Perhaps one reform would be to publish parliamentarians’ tax returns, as then many surplus members of the House of Lords would rush to retire rather than reveal their intrinsic conflicts of interest (To rid Britain of corruption, start by reforming the House of Lords, 11 November). Plus, this might put off some chancers wishing to stand in Westminster elections. Furthermore, it’s high time we got rid of non-domiciled tax status for British and Commonwealth citizens living here who are eligible to vote. Does any other advanced democracy allow their wealthiest citizens this bizarre privilege? David Nowell New Barnet, London • The prime minister says that the UK is not remotely a corrupt country (Boris Johnson says the UK is not ‘remotely a corrupt country’. Is it?, 11 November). Clearly he is working hard to address this issue. Richard Walker West Malvern, Worcestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As Cop26 drew to a close over the weekend, Chinese media highlighted Beijing’s contribution over the last fortnight in Glasgow. “The Chinese delegation took a constructive attitude, actively communicated and negotiated with all parties,” said CCTV’s main evening news bulletin on Sunday. “[It] provided China’s wisdom and China’s solution …” But when China and India chose the last few hours of negotiations to push for the language on coal to be diluted from “phase out” to “phase down”, both countries came under nearly immediate fire from commentators. Cop president Alok Sharma later urged both countries to “explain themselves and what they did to the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world”. On Monday Beijing kicked the ball back to developed nations. Zhao Lijian, a spokesperson at China’s foreign ministry, said that before asking all countries to stop using coal, developed countries should remember how far many developing countries need to travel in order to find sustainable ways to provide electricity for their citizens. “We encourage developed countries to take the lead in stopping using coal while providing ample funding, technological and capacity-building support for developing countries’ energy transition. We need concrete actions more than slogans.” Developed countries have not yet delivered on all their promises, he pointed out in answer to a question from the Communist party mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, at Monday’s regular press briefing. “There were regrets and deficiencies at the session, and the global response to climate change still faces many challenges.” The framing of the negotiations as developing versus developed nations was clearly aimed at China’s domestic audience, analysts say. During the first week of Cop26, as international media criticised Xi for not turning up in person, a decade-old video clip of the Chinese representative, Xie Zhenhua, resurfaced and went viral on Chinese social media. In it, an angry Xie criticised developed countries for putting too much pressure on developing nations in a string of parallel sentences. “We need to develop, we need to eradicate poverty, we need to protect the environment. We have done everything we could. We have also done things you have not done. What qualifications do you have to teach me here?” Xie’s past fury prompted social media users last week to start a hashtag with a line from Xie: #sloganscannotreplaceactions. On Weibo this hashtag has been viewed more than 1.3m times. China and India ‘side by side’ The Chinese media are now wondering if Beijing’s solidarity with Delhi on climate would improve the strained bilateral relationship, following territorial disputes in the last year, prompting a statement by India’s chief of defence staff, Bipin Rawat, that China is the biggest security threat facing his country. But on Sunday, Chinese state media praised China’s solidarity with India. The state-owned Global Times claimed in a piece that China and India “stood side by side together” at a critical time. “As the two biggest developing countries, China and India face similar situations, similar stances and similar demands,” it wrote. But it’s not all power play in Beijing’s view of Cop26. Surveys from recent years have consistently shown that the Chinese public has been more aware of the climate emergency and the main source of it – a message that state news agency Xinhua also echoed, saying that “the dominant source of carbon dioxide emissions is the process of electricity generation”. And Beijing has certainly promoted tackling the climate emergency as a part of President Xi Jinping’s catchphrase of a “shared future for mankind”. On China’s social media, one hashtag, #Cop26, had been viewed more than 120m times during the conference period. Another related hashtag, #COP26 ongoing, had been viewed for at least 110m times, suggesting a high level of interest in the Glasgow conference within China. “The deep decarbonisation required by climate science needs the full support of the public. This is the case for all the major emitters. China is not an exception,” said Li Shuo, a Beijing-based policy adviser at Greenpeace East Asia. “Public opinion has advanced China’s environmental agenda. “But the climate crisis demands more. The gap between Chinese public perception and what needs to be done to keep [a reduction of] 1.5C alive will determine the speed of China’s decarbonisation,” he said.At peak lockdown, all anyone living with a family or flatmates fantasised about was getting 20 minutes at home alone. None of us had a concrete plan for what we would do in that time. It was just a longing for silence, for the guarantee of a short window in which nobody would be hungry or thirsty, or break anything, no incursions would be made into anyone else’s concentration, no fresh hostilities launched between household rivals, the incredible peace of nobody even moving from one room to another. To have dreamed in 2020 of having a whole 24 hours alone in a house would have been pointless and absurd, a waste of imagination. Wish fulfilment should always double up as positive visualisation, which is to say, the wished-for thing must have at least a sliver of a chance of coming true, otherwise you’re asking the universe to ignore you. I would never, for instance, sit around wondering how I would spend €25m from the lottery, or what kind of display cabinet I would like for my Nobel prize. Then, out of nowhere, a day of alone time dropped into my lap. The kids were with my and Mr Z’s exes, which is not unusual, but it coincided with Mr Z’s away day. I had this filed in my head as online team-building, exactly like his regular schedule of eight hours opposite a ring light. The reality – that he might get on a train, for an intensive schedule of ping-pong, personal disclosure and everyone using the word “mission”, didn’t really hit me until the day before, and then I spent so much time smirking about his plans that I didn’t make any of my own. So at 8.30am on a Wednesday, the house was my oyster. Exhilarated, I tried to make an inventory of all the things I would normally avoid doing because they were antisocial. I got as far as singing along to Enya and eating raw onion, then my mind went blank. So from 9am to 11am, I ate raw onion on toast and waited for Magic FM to play Enya. Obviously, I could have found limitless power ballads on Spotify, but in a weird, self-defeating habit of the married, I only use it with Mr Z’s password, which I’ve never memorised. Can’t sing to Enya with him, can’t do it without him. I also had ants in my pants and smelled very strongly of onion. Turns out this isn’t only distracting for other people. Spontaneously, I hatched a lunch plan, with the worst possible person, a friend who starts work at 5am and thus finishes by noon. Lunch is effectively dinner to him, and I wasted a load of priceless empty-house time in a pub. Mid-afternoon, I was back, my suite of choices reduced to one: have a snooze, or don’t. Twenty minutes can’t do any harm, I reasoned, then wham, it was two hours later. Weird thing to forget, that I’ve never knowingly been woken up by my own alarm; it is always someone else in the house, hearing my alarm and petitioning me on its behalf. I was out again in the evening, and ended that with the meta-solitude experience of getting the last tube home, which had not a single other person on it. It was now 1am. I couldn’t possibly sleep, having slept so much already. There were decadent, selfish things I wanted to do, such as watch the Buffy musical episode in bed and eat more onion. It was three in the morning before I knew it, the hour at which everything starts to sound like an intruder: the dog’s heartbeat sounded like someone on the stairs, the wind like someone getting in through the window. I could not shake the certainty that I was being burgled, that some Home Alone memo had gone out to the housebreaking community. I just waited it out until I was too tired to care. So this is what self-determination feels like – being a student, but less devil-may-care. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWhy is the hearing happening? In 2020 Azeem Rafiq went public with allegations of the racism he says he experienced while a player at Yorkshire during two spells from 2008 to 2014 and 2016 to 2018. This prompted a 12-month investigation by the club, with a summary of the resulting report released in September upholding seven of Rafiq’s 43 claims and confirming he was the victim of “racial harassment” in his first spell and bullying during the second. Despite a conclusion that the club failed to properly escalate his initial complaints in 2018 as per its own policies, the club announced on 28 October that no action would be taken against any current employee. This, plus a leaked element of the still unpublished report that showed the panel considered the use of the P-word towards Rafiq to be “in the spirit of friendly banter”, prompted a raft of MPs to voice their displeasure earlier this month and saw Julian Knight, chair of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, set up Tuesday’s hearing to get to the bottom of the issue. Who will give evidence and who will be listening to it? Rafiq will speak to the cross-party panel of 11 MPs – chaired by Knight, the Conservative MP for Solihull – at the first of three sittings starting at 9.30am. He will then be followed by Roger Hutton, chair of Yorkshire from April 2020 until last week. Mark Arthur, the Yorkshire chief executive who resigned on Thursday, was previously set to appear but his name is now missing from those currently listed, while Martyn Moxon, the club’s longstanding director of cricket, is signed off from work due to “stress-related” illness. Tom Harrison, chief executive of the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) will also give evidence alongside three ECB colleagues. The hearing will be streamed live on parliamentlive.tv. What will they discuss? The select committee has been called to “address concerns about the lack of action against individuals following the findings of the investigation by Yorkshire”. It is therefore likely to focus on Rafiq’s specific allegations, the club’s handling of these both at the time and subsequently, and Yorkshire’s overall record on equality and diversity. Harrison and O’Brien are set to be quizzed about the ECB’s involvement over the past 15 months, its process for dealing with complaints and the wider implications of the sport. What are those involved likely to say? Protected by parliamentary privilege, Rafiq is free to outline all of his complaints without fear of legal reprisal and has previously indicated he is ready to name names. His past allegations include the use of racist language at the club including the slurs “Pakis” and “elephant washers”, a drinking culture that excluded those from Asian backgrounds, and racist incidents involving supporters that the club failed to properly investigate. Hutton, who became chair of Yorkshire after the period in question, will likely explain the path chosen by the club after Rafiq first went public in 2020. He is also expected to expand on a resignation statement that bemoaned “a culture that refuses to accept change” and criticised the ECB for failing to help. Harrison and O’Brien will doubtless stress the ECB’s role as the sports regulator in this issue and, more broadly, look to defend the governing body’s record on inclusivity at a time when this is being seriously questioned. Who will be following events with close interest? Rafiq played with 65 different cricketers during his two spells in the Yorkshire first team – including a raft of household names – and worked with countless coaches and staff since he first turned out for the academy in 2004. As a result, the game at large will be following events closely. Gary Ballance has already admitted to using racist language towards Rafiq – he claims this was a feature of their previous friendship and that offensive things were said in both directions – while former England captain Michael Vaughan has vehemently denied telling a group of four Asian players “there’s too many of you lot” before a game in 2009. The question now is whether other players, past or present, or coaches are named at the hearing. Rafiq has previously stressed, however, that his motives are not about settling scores with individuals but rather a sport that failed to address his complaints. The ECB, the Professional Cricketers’ Association and the National Asian Cricket Council are all likely to be criticised here along with the senior management at Yorkshire. What will follow? After hearing the evidence, the DCMS committee will produce a report for the government on the situation that includes both conclusions and recommendations. The government typically then has 60 days to respond and decide what action, if any, needs to be taken. For Rafiq, who settled a long-running employment tribunal case with Yorkshire, the chance to speak freely about his experiences should provide some closure but the impact on the sport could be wide-ranging. Individuals connected to Yorkshire could see their careers irreparably damaged, while other counties are already braced for similar allegations from past or current players or staff. Both the ECB and the PCA could also come under significant pressure over their handling of the affair, while the personnel changes that are already under way at Yorkshire under its new chair, Kamlesh Patel, will likely continue. The Independent Commission for Equity in Cricket, set up by the ECB, has recently issued a call for evidence as it compiles a report on the sport’s culture and diversity. This is due to be published next summer and could throw up more uncomfortable truths.When KeiyaA dropped her debut album Forever, Ya Girl, on Bandcamp in March 2020, she didn’t have internet service on her phone, and had to go downstairs to connect to the local video store’s wifi to post about the release on her Instagram. “I just remember letting hours pass by and going back downstairs and seeing thousands of likes. I’ve never gotten thousands of likes ever in my life,” says the Brooklyn-based experimental instrumentalist, singer and producer. KeyiaA is touring Europe for the first time this week, including six gigs across the UK, but despite the success, releasing an album during the early days of a pandemic has been “bittersweet and hella confusing”, she says. “I’m still very much a regular person, like everyone else. So I’ve been dealing with the shock and confusion. The constant shifts. Not knowing what’s going to happen next. I’m already an anxious person,” she admits over Zoom. There’s a silver lining. “I’ve been a professional musician for the first time. I’ve been cutting my teeth and learning the ropes and I’m just so fucking grateful that this is my life.” Forever, Ya Girl is a silky yet knotty collection of rich, introspective R&amp;B songs. Her inspirations include Missy Elliot, Timbaland, Brandy, Darkchild; “I am really obsessed with In Utero by Nirvana and that style of writing,” she says. The first track on the album, I Thot There Was One Wound in This House, There’s Two, opens with the line “Why won’t you love me?”, and it sets the tone for a questioning album that loops around themes of despair, isolation and spirituality. “A lot of what I was feeling during the time that I wrote that music was feeling like I was broken and needed to be fixed. But also knowing that I really wasn’t broken. I’m in pain, and I feel despair. Some of it, I think, is my fault. Some of it, I think, is other people’s fault. Some of it, I think, is a systemic thing. Either way, we gotta figure it out.” When she first moved to New York, “black and relatively poor”, finding spirituality helped: “Maybe there’s a greater battle happening than what we’re experiencing in the physical present.” Those life experiences are the heart of the album. “I really love the idea of double entendres, multiple meanings to things. I feel like my romantic issues, or my issues with sex, are similar to my issues with money.” Those overlapping meanings have, in turn, meant that people have told her that her songs have synthesised their feelings in a way they couldn’t articulate before; that the album has healed them, helped them through the pandemic and kept them alive through hard times. KeiyaA was born Chakeiya Richmond in 1992 in Chicago, and lived with a grandmother who had a Casio keyboard: “I just remember being relentless in my pursuit to learn songs.” She recalls there being good funding for arts in Chicago and was always in a music class. “I was going through the motions, but I had a really passionate band director who was like: ‘You have potential.’ And my mom would appreciate it because it meant that I would be supervised for a long time when she was at work.” The real awakening came when she moved to New York six years ago and took a desk job at a start-up ticketing platform. “I was a professional. I was making a salary, but playing shows at night. That’s when I said: this is who I’m supposed to be.” Forever, Ya Girl showcases KeiyaA’s talents not just as a writer, but as a multi-instrumentalist: “The primary instrument that I’ve studied the most is saxophone. I play a couple of other woodwinds, a little bit of clarinet. I play piano, mainly as a function to write songs,” she says, modestly. For the album, she also sampled, played keys and synthesisers and some physical drums. Having such a hand in every aspect of her music, I ask when she knows a song is done. “A song is never finished. I love improvisation and I love performing music because it gives you an opportunity to rearrange. The song has space to change.” And on tour, “because there are other musicians, they’re having their own conversation with the song”. She wondered if she was making a bad decision going on tour amid a pandemic that hasn’t yet died down. “Thankfully, I’ve had friends that are artists to talk to – we’re all experiencing this. At first I was wrestling with a lot of guilt and stress. Now, I’m allowing myself to settle into the exciting parts.” After the tour, she will “take some time to work on new music and recentre and ground myself”. What else is in her future? “Sleep!” • Touring the UK until 18 November; tour details here.Professor Hoffman was the pen-name of Angelo Lewis, a Victorian barrister whose book Modern Magic, published in 1876, is considered one of the most important and influential magic books of all time. (I read about him recently in David Copperfield’s History of Magic, a stunning book he coauthored with psychologist Richard Wiseman and magician David Britland.) Hoffman was also a puzzle enthusiast, and earlier today I set you ten puzzles taken from his 1893 classic book Puzzles Old &amp; New. They are all classic lateral thinking problems. You may have heard some of them before, but I’m sure you can’t remember the solutions! 1. Required, to take one from nineteen and leave twenty. How is it to be done? Solution Write nineteen in Roman numerals: XIX. Remove the I., and you have XX. 2. Place three sixes together so as to make seven. Solution 6 6/6 [i.e 6 and six sixths] 3. How would you write in figures twelve thousand twelve hundred and twelve? Solution 13212. 4. Out of six chalk or pencil strokes—thus, | | | | | | to make three, without striking out or rubbing out any. Solution Add the necessary lines to complete the word “ three,” thus THREE. 5. You undertake to show another person something which you never saw before, which he never saw before, and which, after you both have seen it, no one else will ever see again. How is it to be done? Solution The puzzle is solved by cracking a nut, showing the kernel, and then eating it. 6. You undertake to put something into a person’s left hand which he cannot possibly take in his right. How is it to be done? Solution You place in the person’s left hand his own right elbow, which, obviously, he cannot take in his right hand. 7. You undertake to place a lighted candle in such a position that it shall be visible to every person save one; such person not to be blindfolded, or prevented from turning about in any manner he pleases. How is it to be done? Solution You place the candlestick upon the head of the person who is not to see it. 8. A window in a certain house has recently been made twice its original size, but without increasing either its height or width. How can that be? Solution The window was diamond-shaped. By enlarging it to a square its area is exactly doubled, without increasing either its height or width. A window shaped as an isosceles or right-angled triangle will equally answer the conditions of the puzzle. 9. A draper, dividing a piece of cloth into yard lengths, found that he cut off one yard per second. The piece of cloth was 60 yards in length. How long did it take him to cut up the whole? Solution It took him 59seconds. Most people are apt to say 60, forgetting that the 59th cut separates the last two lengths, and that, therefore, a 60th is unnecessary. 10. How many hard-boiled eggs can a hungry man eat on an empty stomach? Solution One only; for after eating one his stomach would be full David Copperfield’s History of Magic, by David Copperfield, Richard Wiseman and David Britland is out in the UK and the US. You can buy it at the Guardian Bookshop. Thanks to Richard Wiseman for helping me with today’s column. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m also the author of several books of popular science, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, out in paperback in the UK, and just out in the US. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch.Dear Sajid Javid, I am a paramedic working on the frontline for an NHS ambulance service in England. I have worked as a paramedic on the frontline throughout the Covid pandemic. It first occurred to me to write to you following your October speech in which you spoke of “doing what it takes to ensure that the pressure on the NHS does not become unsustainable, and we don’t allow the NHS to become overwhelmed”. Today, with new revelations of the plight of people who die in the back of ambulances and the up to 160,000 more a year who come to harm because they are stuck outside hospitals unable to be admitted to A&amp;E, we all see the extent to which the NHS is struggling in the face of extraordinary pressure. Let me share with you my perspective from the frontline. The NHS is running on empty. The staff are physically and mentally exhausted. And yet we are constantly asked for more. I recently worked 54 hours in four days. I had five hours of unplanned overruns at the end of my shifts. My 30-minute break, which I am entitled to in a 12-hour shift, was eight or nine hours into the shift every time. That is nine hours of work without a break. That is due to the sheer amount of calls we are receiving as an ambulance service. This is not a sustainable way of working. I finished my shifts physically and mentally drained, and considering resigning from my job. I love my job. I love working as a paramedic, but in recent times, I am starting to consider the physical strain that it is putting on my body, and the stress and tension I am carrying around with me even on my days off. My time away from work is not downtime any more, because I cannot relax from the strain of the job. We are being worked into the ground. This will lead to more resignations and more strain on an already stretched service. The patients that we are seeing are hugely suffering. I see it myself on a daily basis at work: people are waiting 12 hours or more for an ambulance. This may be an elderly person who has fallen and is still on the floor. The repercussions of this for the patient are enormous. They will develop pressure sores that may never heal. They will become severely dehydrated and their kidneys may begin to shut down, which will lead to multi-organ failure. Another example I have seen several times are patients who ring 999 late at night because they are struggling with suicidal thoughts and need help and support to prevent them from acting on those thoughts. We are not arriving at their house until eight hours later, at 6am, by which time we may be too late. I have been driving to a patient who had been waiting 16 hours for an ambulance. Unfortunately, we didn’t even get to their house because we got diverted to a more serious call. That patient waited even longer for an ambulance. Imagine if that had been your mother, one of your brothers or your son who had waited 16 hours for an ambulance. It is unacceptable. These patients are receiving a dangerous and unsatisfactory level of service from the NHS. This has a harmful effect on the overworked staff, too. It is very disheartening and wearying for the staff to see these situations on a daily basis, despite their hard work. Please do not tell us that you wish to prevent the pressure on NHS becoming unsustainable. It already is. Mr Javid, there is no quick and easy solution to this issue, but it should be recognised for what it is. Your blindness and complete aversion to acknowledging that the NHS is already overwhelmed does nothing to help the patients who are waiting 16 hours for an ambulance. Regards, An NHS paramedic The writer is an anonymous NHS England paramedicOn 7 July, the Conservative MP for Blackpool South, Scott Benton, took his seat at Wembley to watch England take on Denmark in the semi-final of Euro 2020, courtesy of the Ladbrokes Coral owner, Entain – a freebie worth £3,457. Less than four hours earlier, Benton had warned parliament that a review of betting laws, widely expected to result in tougher regulation, must not be driven by anti-gambling “ideology”. He called for casinos to be allowed more slot machines, adding that many people would be “concerned” about the Gambling Commission’s plans for affordability checks on people betting online and in person, a measure intended to prevent ruinous losses. Days earlier he had enjoyed another day out, at Ascot, courtesy of the Betting &amp; Gaming Council (BGC) trade body. In total, he accepted hospitality worth £7,495 during a gambling-funded summer of sport. All in all, according to a Guardian audit, 28s MPs – 19 Conservative and the rest Labour – have taken almost £225,000 in wages and freebies from the gambling industry since August 2020. During the same debate at which Benton spoke – one of his two speeches favourable to the gambling industry that month – Labour’s John Spellar interceded. He referred to the urgent need to “improve and continue Britain’s attractiveness” as a casino destination. He had recently been a guest of the Paddy Power owner, Flutter, at England’s match against Germany, and was due to attend the cricket at Lord’s the following month, at a cost of £874.80 to the BGC, whose members include major casino companies. For the gambling industry, it was a busy month for both hospitality and political fulmination about the future of regulation. On 13 July, the Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson expressed “grave concerns” about the prospect of the government imposing betting limits, in an article, sponsored by the BGC, for the Conservative Home website. The article appeared six days after he watched England play Denmark, courtesy of Entain, and less than a month after the BGC took him to Ascot, visits worth a combined £4,857. There is no suggestion that any of the trio broke parliamentary rules. But their actions have raised concerns about the gambling industry’s apparent attempts to curry favour with politicians and the system that allows it. The gambling sector’s charm offensive comes in the run-up to the publication of a white paper on gambling reform, expected early next year, that could significantly curb the profitability of bookmakers and online casinos. One peer described the industry’s charm offensive as a “pretty obvious” attempt to influence the outcome of the reforms. By far the biggest beneficiary of the gambling industry’s largesse over the past year was Philip Davies, the Conservative MP for Shipley. The Guardian revealed last year that he had accepted almost £50,000 to advise the Ladbrokes owner, Entain, on safer gambling and customer service. Davies has previously said that his work outside parliament is “a matter for me”, although in 2010 he did not extend the same forbearance towards firefighters with second jobs, who were resisting changes to their shift pattern. The firefighters, he said, “ought to start to live in the real world at a time when many people are grateful to hang on to their one job”. On top of his work for Entain, which employed two of his former political aides in senior roles at the time he took the job, Davies accepted hospitality worth a combined £8,695 from the company, fellow betting firms Flutter and Gamesys, and the Betting &amp; Gaming Council. In addition to what it paid Davies, Entain spent almost £41,000 on hospitality for 13 MPs over the summer. The BGC spent half that sum, £20,405, escorting lawmakers to events including three England matches at Euro 2020, horse racing at Ascot, cricket at Lord’s and the Ivor Novello awards. Of the 13 MPs who enjoyed the trade body’s hospitality, three spoke out in support of the industry within days of being entertained, two of them – Benton and Spellar – in the House of Commons. During that same debate, Laurence Robertson – a longtime advocate for the gambling industry – warned of the “great danger” of tighter regulation, backing the BGC’s view that it would drive people towards the black market. As he has pointed out, he correctly declared his interest, a £24,000-a-year role with the BGC, advising on sport and safer gambling. He also took £9,307 worth of tickets and hospitality at Ascot, York and Sandown racecourses, Lord’s and England’s match against Denmark. The gifts came from the BGC, SkyBet, Entain and Coral. In total, 28 MPs are either paid by the gambling industry or have accepted hospitality from the industry, with a total value of £224,281 since August 2020. All of the hospitality and salaries were declared to the register of members’ interests, in line with parliamentary rules. Beneficiaries include the Conservative MPs Caroline Dinenage, who is a minister within the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, which is overseeing the gambling review, and Aaron Bell, who used to work for Bet365. The BGC is led by Michael Dugher, a former Labour MP. Lord Foster of Bath, the chair of Peers for Gambling Reform, said it was “pretty obvious why the industry is giving largesse to parliamentarians”, calling the flurry of consultancy roles and hospitality freebies an attempt to “try and influence the outcome to the advantage of gambling companies. With millions of people impacted by problem gambling and more than one gambling-related suicide every day, I suspect [they] will find themselves on the wrong side of public opinion.” Matt Zarb-Cousin, a former aide to Jeremy Corbyn and director Clean Up Gambling, said: “Far too many MPs have had their snouts in the gambling trough. This is a sector that derives most of its profits from the harm it causes their constituents. The government has an opportunity in its gambling review to demonstrate our democracy is not for sale.” An Entain spokesperson said: “Any political engagement we conduct is always in line with the registers of members’ interest. As a sports betting and interactive entertainment company, we are proud of the role we play in supporting grassroots and elite sports both in the UK and internationally.” A BGC spokesperson said: “Any hospitality is consistent with the parliamentary rules and is fully declared and transparent.” Aaron Bell said: “I have declared all hospitality promptly and transparently in the register of member’s interests, and have always abided by the parliamentary code of conduct.” The other MPs did not respond to requests for comment. Six top beneficiaries (salaries and hospitality from casinos and bookmakers) Philip Davies (Con): £58,675 (£8,695 hospitality, £49,980 wages) Laurence Robertson (Con): £33,306.60 (£9,306.60 hospitality, £24,000 wages) Scott Benton (Con): £7,495 (hospitality) Nigel Adams (Con): £7,417.14 (hospitality) Aaron Bell (Con): £6,955.60 (hospitality) Esther McVey (Con): £6,094.60 (hospitality)The billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman will on Tuesday attempt to convince New York’s powerful Landmarks Preservation Commission to allow him to build a “flying saucer” penthouse on top of a historic apartment building in the Upper West Side overlooking Central Park. Ackman, a Harvard-educated activist investor who famously made $2.6bn (£2.2bn) profit betting on the financial impact of coronavirus during the early days of the pandemic, has been engaged in a years-long public relations battle with his merely millionaire neighbours to garner support for his planned Norman Foster-designed two-storey penthouse that has been described as a “temple to a titan”. He successfully won the backing of Manhattan Community Board 7 (CB7) for the plan atop the 120-year-old building last week, and will seek the approval of the Landmarks Preservation Commission on Tuesday. The penthouse at 6-16 West 77th Street, which is designed by Foster + Partners, would replace a pink stucco 17th-floor penthouse that Ackman and his partner the scientist Neri Oxman bought for $22.5m in 2017. The apartment was previously owned by feminist and gender politics author Nancy Friday. The author, who died in 2017, had over the years purchased four neighbouring units in the building and cobbled them together to create the unusual 13 room apartment. “We love the site. We love the Upper West Side,” Ackman said in his appeal to the CB7 members in a video meeting. “My wife and I wanted to raise our new family here, we have a two-and-a-half-year-old child. Our approach here was to build something that would be additive to the neighbourhood.” Ackman, 55, said the glass penthouse near the American Museum of Natural History would be “much less visible” and “less glaring” than the existing pink blocks penthouse, and would provide a “material enhancement” to the historic building. “Everything is as minimal as it could possibly be,” said Ackman, who has built up an estimated $3.3bn from his hedge fund Pershing Square Capital Management. “The bottom line is no one will take as much care as we to design something that will be beautiful [and] have a minimal impact. We want to live peacefully with our neighbours, we don’t want them to be upset with us.” However, one local resident told the community board that the planned penthouse would ruin famous views. “The immodesty of the penthouse apartment is disturbing, it uses the 6-16 building as a strap for a platform temple to a titan,” he said. “It stares at humanity and wildlife beneath. “New Yorkers, Americans, people all over the planet visiting the Museum of Natural History ... would find in their field of vision the Ackman eyrie and wonder who let this happen, what on earth possessed them.” Another local resident said the proposal looked like “a flying saucer landed on the roof”. However, the board voted to approve Ackman’s design, with 25 votes in favour, seven against and two abstentions. With approval granted by the committee Ackman’s plans will now be debated by the Landmarks Preservation Commission. Ackman currently lives at the luxury Beresford apartment building on the other side of the museum, from where he and his wife first saw the Friday’s pink penthouse. It is far from Ackman’s most expensive property. In 2015 he bought the penthouse of the 1,005ft skyscraper One57 for $91.5m as a “fun investment”. He uses the apartment on the 75th and 76th floors for occasional parties to entertain his business and celebrity friends. Ackman has said he planned to hold on to the six-bedroom, eight-bathroom penthouse with views of Central Park for a few years before “flipping it” – selling it at a huge profit in a few years. He also owns a three-house complex on the beach in Bridgehampton, the Hamptons. At the beginning of the pandemic in March 2020, Ackman, a regular TV news financial pundit, told millions of CNBC views that “hell is coming”. In a 28-minute near-hysterical TV, he said the US was underestimating the severity of the coronavirus crisis, and predicted it would kill millions of people and devastate the global economy. As he was speaking financial markets continued to tailspin. At the same time Ackman placed a bet that stock markets would tank. Those bets made his hedge fund $2.6bn (£2.2bn) – a near-10,000% return on his $27m stake.The EU has agreed on new sanctions against Belarus targeting “everyone involved” in facilitating the transport of people to Belarus’s border with Poland, where thousands are stuck in makeshift camps in freezing weather. The EU accuses Alexander Lukashenko’s regime of waging a “hybrid attack” against the bloc by allowing people from the Middle East who are desperate to reach the EU to fly into Minsk then head for the Polish border. Josep Borrell, the EU foreign policy chief, said the decision by 27 EU foreign ministers reflected “the determination by the European Union to stand up to the instrumentalisation of migrants for political purposes”. A list of people and entities to be hit by asset freezes and travel bans is expected to be finalised in the coming weeks. It will include “people, airlines, travel agencies and everyone involved in this illegal push of migrants against our borders”, Borrell said. Lukashenko has vowed to retaliate. “They’re scaring us with sanctions,” he told officials on Monday. “We will defend ourselves. We can not retreat.” He did not announce specific measures. Lukashenko had previously threatened to cut gas supplies to Europe via a pipeline from Russia. A Kremlin spokesperson on Monday said Vladimir Putin had expressed “confidence that this won’t affect the transport of gas”. The EU decision was announced as a column of people converged on the Polish border for the second week running. Video footage showed people walking out of a forest where they were encamped and making for the Kuźnica border crossing. The group was accompanied by Belarusian police in riot gear. When they reached the border, they were met by Polish riot police standing behind razor wire fencing. The standoff has continued into the evening with Poland deploying reinforcements to the border area. The EU has already imposed four rounds of sanctions on the Belarusian authorities and senior officials over last year’s disputed election and the brutal crackdown on peaceful protesters that followed. EU officials want to ensure the new sanctions list is legally watertight, to minimise the risk of being sued in the European court of justice. “We are all pushing to have this done yesterday, but the reality is that yesterday will probably come in two weeks,” said one diplomat ahead of the meeting. Diplomats are also discussing tightening economic sanctions against Belarus by extending restrictions that already target the tobacco and potash industries – both vital sources of revenue for Lukashenko. “We are far from the end of the spiral of sanctions,” said Germany’s foreign minister, Heiko Maas. The Belarus flag carrier, Belavia, is among the airlines likely to be targeted and Maas called on other companies to follow the example of Turkish Airlines by restricting flights to Belarus’s capital. “Those that don’t must expect tough sanctions. The situation is so dramatic that I can no longer rule out the denial of overflight rights or landing permission in the European area,” he said. The sanctions list is thought unlikely to feature the Russian airline Aeroflot, although Poland and Lithuania have said they hold the Russian president responsible for the border crisis. “He [Putin] is driving this crisis together with Mr Lukashenko politically, that’s for certain,” Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, told reporters. “Russia is using this crisis to destabilise the EU,” he added, describing migration as one of the most sensitive topics for the EU. “It’s an excellent weapon against us. And if we are unable to make a decision, then you can probably say ‘look, the EU is ineffective’ and that builds up new fires inside the EU.” With reports of Russian troops massing near Russia’s border with Ukraine, Landsbergis suggested the Kremlin could be preparing an attack. “It is very likely that Ukraine could be attacked while we are dealing with the situation on the Polish, Lithuanian and Belarusian border,” he said. Belarus could also be attacked and Belarusian border guards replaced with Russian FSB agents, under a pretext of deeper cooperation between the two countries, Landsbergis claimed. Landsbergis said Lithuania would be ready to help with any UN-organised repatriation of people to the Middle East, but ruled out return flights from his country. An Iraqi official on Sunday announced that the country would organise its first repatriation flight for people trapped on the border between Belarus and Poland. The flight would leave on Thursday from Minsk. The official did not say how many people the flight would transport to Iraq. According to an Iraqi government tally, 571 of its citizens have requested “voluntary” repatriation, the official said. The number of Iraqis on the Belarus-Poland border is believed to be far higher. One Iraqi Kurdish official last week estimated that there were as many as 8,000 people from just that region at the border. On Monday, Lukashenko said many of those camped out on the border with Poland would be unwilling to return to Iraq. “We’re ready … to put them on planes that will carry them back home,” said Lukashenko in televised remarks to government officials. “But these are people who, it must be said, are very stubborn: Nobody wants to go back. And it’s clear why: they have nowhere to go back to.” EU officials have held talks with countries in the Middle East to slow the flow of people, many from Iraq and Syria, to the border with Europe. But that will not solve the question of what to do with the thousands already trapped, in many cases denied entry to both Poland and back into Belarus. Diplomats estimate between 10,000 and 20,000 people face increasingly harsh conditions in the border area as temperatures plummet. In a highly unlikely scenario, Lukashenko also suggested that Belarus would be ready to transport people directly to Germany. “If the Poles don’t give us a humanitarian corridor, then we can take them to Munich on Belavia,” he said.Less than 24 hours before Ghislaine Maxwell will be in a courtroom with prospective jurors who will decide her fate in a Manhattan federal court sex trafficking case, the former British socialite appeared notably at ease during a proceeding on Monday morning. One woman, who identified herself as a family member to a court security officer, waved at Maxwell shortly before proceedings started. She carried a yellow legal pad and scribbled notes throughout the proceeding. Maxwell, her lawyers and prosecutors were appearing before Judge Alison Nathan to discuss the logistics of questioning potential jurors. Of the roughly 600 people who completed questionnaires earlier this month, Nathan said that Maxwell’s lawyers and prosecutors agreed on 231 who should be called back for further questioning. “I believe that’s a sufficient number,” Nathan said. Nathan also said she hoped that they would question 50 possible panelists a day, divided into morning and afternoon sessions. Virtually all questioning of potential jurors will be public, Nathan has said. Maxwell, an alleged accomplice in the late, disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sex trafficking of minor teens, appeared in good spirits when the proceeding ended around 10.30am, laughing as she spoke with her attorneys. Several of her lawyers rubbed her shoulders supportively. Maxwell sported a black turtleneck and gray slacks as she was escorted into courtroom 518 of the Thurgood Marshall US courthouse about 9.40am – the first time she has appeared in court wearing something other than shapeless jail scrubs. She wore black boot-like shoes rather than institutional slip-ons that appeared on her feet at prior court proceedings. She was neither handcuffed nor shackled, and carried a Poland Spring water bottle just like countless others do as they move around New York City. Epstein was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking of minor teens; he killed himself in jail while awaiting trial. Maxwell was arrested one year after Epstein’s arrest – for her alleged role in procuring teenage girls for him between 1994 and 2004. Audrey Strauss, acting Manhattan US attorney at the time, stated that Maxwell “played a critical role in helping Epstein to identify, befriend and groom minor victims” and that “in some cases, Maxwell participated in the abuse”. Maxwell maintains that she is innocent. Opening arguments in Maxwell’s trial are expected to take place on 29 November. If convicted, Maxwell faces up to 80 years in federal prison.Toto Wolff has described Lewis Hamilton’s victory at the Brazilian Grand Prix as one of the world champion’s best performances. But the Mercedes team principal also hit out, expressing anger at how he believed his team were harshly treated by some “laughable” decisions at Interlagos and that the gloves were now off as the Formula One world championship entered its final three, decisive races. Hamilton won from 10th on the grid in Brazil with a superb drive over a weekend during which he endured two penalties and a race in which Mercedes felt he had been let down by the stewards when they opted not to punish his title rival Max Verstappen. The Dutchman appeared to run him off the track as the two drivers fought for the lead. Hamilton nonetheless went on to win and reduce his deficit to Verstappen in the championship to 14 points. As well as the win Hamilton drove from 20th to fifth in the sprint qualifying on Saturday, after a DRS infringement penalty sent him to the back of the grid, both were extraordinary comebacks acknowledged by Wolff. “Overall, I definitely rate that among the best-ever performances I have ever seen from him,” he said. However the team principal was scathing at the decisions over the weekend that he deemed had been unfairly biased against Mercedes, especially the penalty for the DRS infringement which he believed was caused by damage that in previous circumstances had not justified a punishment. “I think we’ve just had many, many punches in the face this weekend,” he said. “Decisions that could have swung either side against us or for us. It’s something that I’m just angry about and I will defend my team, my drivers to what comes. I’ve always been very diplomatic in how I discuss things, but diplomacy has ended today.” Hamilton was attempting to pass Verstappen into turn four when the Dutchman squeezed him wide and forced him to take evasive action with both drivers going off track. The stewards classified it as acceptable, a decision that raised serious questions. In Austria early this year both Lando Norris and Sergio Pérez were given five-second penalties for squeezing opposing cars wide during attempted overtakes. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, believed it was the right decision, arguing it was simply hard but fair racing. Wolff also acknowledged that but was convinced the precedents meant Verstappen should have been punished. “That was just over the line – should have been a five-second penalty at least – and probably Max knew that,” he said. “Just brushing it under the carpet is just the tip of the iceberg. I mean, it’s laughable.” The next round is in Qatar next weekend with Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi to follow.A doctor was suspended by a Houston hospital for spreading misinformation about Covid-19. Houston Methodist hospital said Dr Mary Bowden, an ear, throat, and nose specialist, spread “dangerous misinformation” about Covid and shared personal and professional opinions the hospital deemed “harmful to the community”. Bowden, a recent hire, posted several tweets stating that she was against Covid-19 vaccine mandates. She also used Twitter to promote Ivermectin as a treatment for Covid-19, despite several public health officials having warned the public not to use the anti-parasitic drug, which has uses in humans and animals, as a coronavirus treatment. Resistance to vaccinations, mandates and other public health measures has spread, particularly in Republican-run states, despite a Covid death toll of nearly 763,000. Texas has the second-highest death toll of any state, with nearly 73,000, behind only California. Alternative treatments for Covid, some potentially dangerous, have also spread via social media. Patti Muck, a spokesperson for Houston Methodist, told the Washington Post that Bowden’s “privileges at Houston Methodist have been suspended”. Bowden’s lawyer, Steve Mitby, told the paper she was not against vaccines and had treated more than 2,000 Covid-19 patients. “Like many Americans, Dr Bowden believes that people should have a choice and believes that all people, regardless of vaccine status, should have access to the same high-quality healthcare,” Mitby said. Bowden is vaccinated, a requirement for all employees at Houston Methodist. In an interview on Monday with a local radio station, she said she was “surprised” and “disappointed” by her suspension, saying she found out about it when the Houston Chronicle contacted her for comment. She also said she would be sending Houston Methodist a letter of resignation, and planned to send patients to other hospitals. Like many hospitals in the US, Houston Methodist has dealt with medical practitioners and healthcare workers spreading Covid-19 misinformation or opposing vaccination mandates. More than 150 workers were either fired or resigned over a hospital-wide vaccine mandate, one of the first such requirements in a healthcare setting.Milk alternative maker Oatly has warned that production and distribution problems hit sales by $7m over the summer despite a surge in demand for its products. Shares in the Swedish oat milk producer plunged by nearly 20% on Monday after it said it expected further lost sales in Europe in the months ahead as it was “investigating a quality issue” which might force it to bin some products. Oatly said UK sales were $1m lower than hoped in its third quarter to the end of September because of driver shortages which delayed deliveries, while mechanical and technical issues at its US production plant in Utah had a $3m impact on sales, on top of $3m from Covid-related closures of hospitality businesses in Asia. It is the latest business to reveal problems from widespread supply chain issues as manufacturers try to keep pace with rising demand after the ending of coronavirus restrictions that have caused cost increases amid shortages of staff and raw materials while delivery infrastructure, from ports to delivery vans, have become congested. Oatly added that the pace of sales growth at new and existing retailers in Europe and the Middle East was “slower than we anticipated” because of the effects of the pandemic. Profit margins for the group, which attracted investment from Blackstone, Oprah Winfrey and Jay-Z last year ahead of flotation on the US stock market, were also affected by higher transport costs and expenses related to expanding its manufacturing site in the US. Oatly’s share price has dived almost 60% since its US stock market debut in May, amid concerns about its potential for growth amid heavy competition from big name brands such as Alpro and Danone. Oat milk is also just one of an array of milk alternatives which can win or lose favour depending on consumer interest. Toni Petersson, the chief executive of Oatly, said: “We’re pleased with our ability to continue to be a leader in driving growth and sales velocity for the plant-based milk category within our key markets. “This positive momentum was partially offset by temporary headwinds as we scale our global production capacity, particularly in Ogden, Utah, and as we manage through Covid-19 Delta-variant related restrictions and temporary foodservice closures in Asia. Despite this near-term variability, we remain very confident in our ability to meet the rapidly growing global demand for our products.” Despite the production issues, Oatly’s sales rose by almost 50% to $171m in the latest quarter but pretax losses widened to almost $41m from $9.8m in the same period a year before. Oatly said that amid growing demand for its drinks, it had produced 131m litres of oat milk, 77% more than the 74m litres produced in the same period a year before.We all know the feeling. You dig out one of your favourite jumpers only to find that the moths have had a field day and filled it with holes. Don’t panic. In the first of a new series on repairing and upcycling treasured items instead of throwing them away, we try out a woollens mending service to solve the problem. The Raf Simons jumper above belongs to one of our colleagues who carefully stores her knitwear at the end of the winter in vaccum-packed bags in her loft. But when she pulled this one out she discovered, despite her best efforts at prevention, that it had been ravaged by moths – four 10p-size holes across the front. After following advice from English Heritage to freeze the jumper for two weeks to kill the moth larvae we took the holy knit to our knitwear shoot where one of the Seam’s makers, Georgia de Castro Keeling breathed new life into the sweater. London-based entrepreneur Layla Sargent has created the Seam to help solve exactly this type of problem. Helping people to love their clothes, the Seam’s growing network of 700 ‘makers’ – comprising Savile Row tailors, theatre costumiers, fashion students and professional seamstresses among others – currently services thousands of customers, mending clothes, not only jumpers, that might have seen better days, as well as altering clothing for the perfect fit so as to increase the lifespan of a garment. After being thoroughly vetted, the maker goes to the customer’s home or in some cases the maker’s studio, to fix your prized possessions. Prices range from £3 to replace a button to £70 to replace the lining of a dress, with the majority of jobs – such as adjusting waistbands on trousers, re-hemming a dress, or mending a tear or hole – costing £15. Made-to-measure and bespoke projects have custom pricing agreed between the maker and the customer. Like most great business ideas, the Seam is the result of a lightbulb moment stemming from personal experience. Growing up in Birmingham, 32-year-old Sargent had her seamstress grandmother, Patricia Baxter, tailor her clothes to fit her 6ft frame and says she thought it was something that everyone had access to growing up – until she realised they didn’t. “Naively, I thought that was normal! But I started to realise that my friends had a very different relationship with fashion – they would wear stuff and throw it away very quickly,” Sargent tells the Observer. Such dissatisfaction combined with the rise of throwaway culture propelled the idea from brainwave to full-blown business model. “As I learned more about the ever-increasing climate crisis, I thought, ‘Why can’t we do this better? Why can’t more people have access to people who will help them love their clothes for longer?’” Statistics confirm the need for social enterprises like Sargent’s, who points to a 2017 report from WRAP that suggested clothing-repair models offer the potential to extend the average life of a garment from 3.3 years to 4.5 years, which if applied to just 5% of clothing in the UK would save an estimated 80,000 tonnes of CO2 and £5bn in resources used to supply, launder and dispose of clothing. She also has her own research to share. “We interviewed 200 women in London and found that 81% think their body shape is abnormal,” says Sargent. “That isn’t by mistake. We’ve grown up trying to squeeze and squash our bodies into clothes made with standardised sizing that are essentially made for everybody and nobody. What we’ve been left with is this really unhealthy mentality that the problem is with our bodies and not with our clothes.” Next year will see the Seam expand into yet-to-be-announced new areas of the UK, but before then it is partnering with rental fashion service By Rotation to help its users repair and restore clothes to keep them rentable for longer. It’s a part of the Seam’s ongoing mission to “close the loop on circularity” says Sargent. For more details and how to use the service, go to theseam.ukDavid Perry, a taxi driver, was working in Liverpool on Sunday morning when he was called at around 10am to collect a fare from Rutland Avenue – nothing remarkable. He arrived at the address shortly before 11am and collected the man from one of the looming Victorian properties on the leafy road near attractive Sefton Park. The fare requested to be taken to the Liverpool Women’s hospital, a centre of expertise for the health of women and their babies, less than a 10-minute drive away on the edge of the city’s Georgian quarter. Video footage shows the taxi – a black estate or people-carrier adorned with a cab firm logo – arriving on the roundabout outside the hospital reception entrance, and, just as it slows to a halt, an eruption of white smoke and debris explodes from the vehicle. The explosive device detonated at 10.59am and around 10 seconds later the driver is seen staggering from the car, stumbling at first before moving to the rear of the vehicle. An individual in a high-visibility vest who witnessed the explosion is then seen rushing to his aid. Shortly after, the car was a ball of flames. Emergency services attended the scene within minutes – the ambulance service arrived at 11.04am – and Merseyside fire and rescue put out the fire. Police have said it quickly became apparent that the passenger was still in the vehicle and was dead. Perry was taken to hospital where he was treated for serious but non-life-threatening injuries. He has since been discharged. Carl Bessant was inside the hospital, where his partner had just had a baby, at the time of the blast. He told the BBC: “We were so close and she was feeding the baby when it happened. We heard a loud bang and looked out of the window. We saw the car on fire and someone jump out … screaming, and there was someone inside the car.” Alex Rain, a student, witnessed the explosion. He told the Guardian: “I parked my car at the end of Mulgrave Street just off Upper Parliament Street, which is parallel to the women’s hospital. I got out the car and heard a really loud, deep bang, much louder than fireworks I heard on bonfire night. “I went into my car to get my backpack to walk to uni and when I turned back around to set off, I could see lots of dark smoke coming from above the hospital.” Armed officers went to two addresses in the city on Sunday afternoon. The first was the address in Rutland Avenue where Perry had picked up his fare. The road was closed off at both ends, residents were evacuated and police cars and vans parked bumper to bumper. The police later revealed that “significant” items were found in the property – understood to be evidence that led them to tentatively conclude that the explosion in the taxi was caused by an “improvised explosive device”. Meanwhile, another address in Sutcliffe Street, in the Kensington area of Liverpool, one of the more deprived districts of the city, was being raided. Three men were ultimately arrested at the property – aged 29, 26 and 21 – while a fourth was arrested in the same area on Monday. Sutcliffe Street resident Keith Ford witnessed the raid, which he said took place around 2.30pm. The 47-year-old production operative said: “A man came out of the property that they were pointing the guns at … He came to the front door, police shouted at him, saying, ‘Hands up in the air’ – then walked to the pub on the end of the corner.” Ford described the man as having dark hair, dark trousers and a blue T-shirt. Ford and some of his neighbours were evacuated from Sutcliffe Street and were allowed to return on Monday morning. The searches at Rutland Avenue continued overnight and several vehicles remain in place. Charlotte Pennington, who lives on a street neighbouring Rutland Avenue, said that she walked past with her dog around 2pm on Sunday and it was “ridiculous”, with a police cordon in place and ambulances lining the road. She said: “The whole street was just a line of police cars, back-to-back police cars. It was all blocked off. There were ambulances lining the road, police cars, Matrix vans flying down.” She left to stay at her mother’s house for a few hours, but when she returned around 8pm, there was still a heavy police presence. She later heard that some residents on Rutland Avenue were evacuated from their houses around 1am. On Monday morning, police officers formally declared a terrorist incident and revealed they knew the identity of the passenger and believed he built the explosive device. The four men arrested in the Kensington area of the city were “associates” of the passenger, police said. Speaking to journalists at Merseyside police headquarters on Monday morning, the assistant chief constable Russ Jackson, from Counter-Terrorism Policing North West said: “It is not clear what the motivation for this incident is. “Our inquiries indicate that an improvised explosive device has been manufactured and our assumption so far is that this was built by the passenger in the taxi. The reason why he then took it to the women’s hospital is unknown, as is the reason for its sudden explosion. “We are of course aware that there were remembrance events just a short distance away from the hospital and that the ignition occurred shortly before 11am. We cannot at this time draw any connection with this, but it is a line of inquiry we are pursuing.” He added: “Although the motivation for this incident is yet to be understood, given all the circumstances, it has been declared a terrorist incident, and counter-terrorism policing are continuing with the investigation.” He told journalists that police knew the identity of the attacker but would not confirm it at this stage. Later on Monday, the government confirmed that the terrorism threat level had been raised to severe from substantial. The home secretary, Priti Patel, said the threat level was in part raised because there had been two terrorist incidents in the space of a month – the other being the fatal attack on the MP David Amess. She told broadcasters she could not expand “for obvious reasons”, but added: “I should just conclude my remarks by saying that our security and intelligence services prevent all sorts of acts, day in, day out. And of course, they understand the landscape, they see context, they see all sorts of things that keep our country safe and secure every single day, and that work will continue.”Ministers are set to require three vaccinations from those eligible for booster jabs in order to qualify as being fully vaccinated in areas where people must prove their status, such as travel or avoiding mandatory isolation. Downing Street sources said the intention was to end up in a place where three jabs, rather than two, was the requirement to obtain a Covid pass showing full vaccination – though currently only over-40s are eligible for the booster. If the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) continues to recommend boosters for all adults six months after their second jab, then the requirement could be in place in England by the early spring. News of the plan came as England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, also warned there was “major concern” about vaccination rates among pregnant women – saying 98% of severely ill pregnant women in hospital had not been vaccinated. Speaking at a press conference on Monday, Boris Johnson said the concept of what constitutes “full vaccination” will need to be adjusted – and said that getting a third jab would become part of that. “It’s very clear that getting three jabs – getting your booster – will become an important fact and it will make life easier for you in all sorts of ways, and we will have to adjust our concept of what constitutes a full vaccination to take account of that,” he said. “And I think that is increasingly obvious. “The booster massively increases your protection – it takes it right back up to over 90%. As we can see from what’s happening, the two jabs sadly do start to wane, so we’ve got to be responsible and we’ve got to reflect that fact in the way we measure what constitutes full vaccination.” A Downing Street source said it was inevitable that requirements for the digital Covid pass would need to change for travel as more countries began requiring a third dose. Currently booster doses are not displayed on the Covid pass on the NHS app, which has caused some concern over the use of the pass for travel. In a number of European countries, third doses are set to be a requirement to prove vaccination status. In France, starting in mid-December, over-65s must have had the booster jab in order to access spaces such as restaurants and galleries or travel long distances. Other countries, including Austria, Switzerland and Croatia, have expiry dates on fully vaccination status – in effect enforcing booster jabs. Johnson said the government was “making plans to add the booster to the NHS Covid travel pass.” He added: “If you’re thinking about that, then this is yet another reason to get it done.” At the press conference, Whitty said there were “storm clouds” gathering over parts of Europe. He said the UK could soon feel the effects of the new wave in central and western Europe. “We don’t yet know the extent to which this new wave will sweep up on our shores but history shows that we cannot afford to be complacent,” he said. “Those countries with lower vaccination rates have tended to see bigger surges in infection and in turn been forced to respond with harsher measures while those countries with higher vaccination rates have so far fared better.” Whitty said the other major target for the vaccine roll-out was pregnant women who were more hesitant to have the vaccine. “I would just like to give you some fairly stark facts about this because this is a major concern,” he said. Whitty said that between 1 February and the end of September, 1,714 pregnant women were admitted to hospital with Covid, 98% of whom had not been vaccinated. And of 235 women admitted to intensive care units, over 98% had not been vaccinated. “These are preventable admissions to ICU and there have been deaths,” he said. “All the medical opinion is really clear that the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks in every area. “This is a universal view among doctors and among the midwife advisory groups and among the scientific advisory groups. So can I please encourage all women who are pregnant or wishing to become pregnant to get their vaccination.” On Monday, the government’s vaccines watchdog said Covid booster vaccines would be extended to those aged between 40 and 49 in the UK, as well as giving approval for teenagers aged 16 and 17 to receive second jabs. A study by the UK Health Security Agency found that boosters gave more than 90% protection in people over 50. The research showed that two weeks after receiving a booster dose, protection against symptomatic infection was 93.1% in those who had initially received Oxford/AstraZeneca and 94.0% for Pfizer/BioNTech. Prof Wei Shen Lim, the chair of the JCVI, said it was possible boosters might be extended further down the age range. “It may well be that adults who are under 40 years might require a booster dose or a third dose at some point. We don’t know whether that is definitely the case yet.Time to wrap up -- here’s today’s main stories. Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, has told MPs that he’s ‘very uneasy’ about the UK’s inflation situation, in comments that suggests he could vote for an interest rate rise soon. Testifying to the Treasury Committee, Bailey said this month’s vote to leave interest rates on hold was a ‘very close call’, He warned that the labour market looks ‘tight’, and pointed to anecdotal evidence that the end of the UK’s furlough scheme had generated little additional unemployment so far. He said: “The labour market looks tight, that’s the big issue at the moment.” Bailey explained that he wants to see the impact of ending the furlough scheme on unemployment before deciding to raise interest rates, but reminded MPs about its inflation mandate: We are in the price stability business. The governor, and colleagues, insisted we’re not facing a return to the inflation and wage-price spirals of the 1970s. But with Bailey insisting that all meetings are in play, could a pre-Christmas rate hike be looming?.... A Guardian audit has uncovered that 28s MPs – 19 Conservative and the rest Labour – have taken almost £225,000 in wages and freebies from the gambling industry since August 2020. Oil giant Shell has announced plans to shift its tax residency and its head office from the Netherlands to the UK. The move has royally irked the Dutch government -- and prompted a last-ditch push to scrap a dividend tax, that has been cited by energy group as reason for planned UK move. The price of diesel has hit an average price of £1.50 per litre at UK forecourts for the first time, pushing up driving costs for motorists, and transport costs for businesses. Low wind speeds have pushed UK peak hour power prices to the second highest level for at least three years today. Shares in Tesla have slid again, and are 20% off their peak last month after Elon Musk’s share sale plan spooked Wall Street. Japan’s economy has shrunk by more than expected in the last quarter, putting pressure on Tokyo to push through a major stimulus programme. China’s property market has cooled, with prices, construction activity and investment all falling. Manufacturing conditions in New York state have improved, although firms are less optimistic. Microflats, in which kitchen equipment, beds, tables, sofas and bookshelves are all crammed into a tiny space, are on the rise as Britons try to find a place of their own amid the property boom: Milk alternative maker Oatly has warned that production and distribution problems hit sales by $7m over the summer despite a surge in demand for its products. Shares have slumped over 20% after Oatly cut its revenue guidance for the year, citing Covid-19 sales disruption and the UK’s lorry driver shortages. More than 300,000 workers in the UK got a pay rise from Monday as the charity behind the voluntary real living wage raises the minimum hourly rate amid growing fears over a squeeze on household incomes this winter. The US private equity group Bain Capital has insisted that LV= customers will “receive significant financial benefits” as it tried to counter growing concerns over its proposed £530m takeover of the mutual insurer. The outsourcing company Serco said has profits will be higher than expected in 2021 owing to greater demand from the UK government for its Covid-19 services, including test and trace. Cineworld’s box office revenues surpassed pre-pandemic levels at its cinemas in the UK and Ireland last month as blockbusters such as No Time to Die, Dune and Venom draw film fans back to the big screen. Weak EU vehicle emissions targets could allow Europe’s biggest carmakers to produce millions more petrol and diesel cars than necessary up to 2030 in a “wasted decade” for cutting carbon pollution, a new report shows. And here’s a breakdown of how the UK’s food shortages may affect Christmas: Goodnight. GW The billionaire hedge fund manager Bill Ackman will today attempt to convince New York’s powerful Landmarks Preservation Commission to allow him to build a “flying saucer” penthouse on top of a historic apartment building in the Upper West Side overlooking Central Park. Ackman, a Harvard-educated activist investor who famously made $2.6bn (£2.2bn) profit in a single day betting on the financial impact of coronavirus during the early days of the pandemic, has been engaged in a years-long public relations battle with his merely millionaire neighbours to garner support for his planned Norman Foster-designed two-storey penthouse that has been described as a “temple to a titan”. He successfully won the backing of Manhattan Community Board 7 (CB7) for the plan atop the 120-year-old building last week, and will seek the approval of the Landmarks Preservation Commission on Tuesday. The penthouse at 6-16 West 77th Street, which is designed by Foster + Partners, would replace a pink stucco 17th-floor penthouse that Ackman and his partner the scientist Neri Oxman bought for $22.5m in 2017. The apartment was previously owned by feminist and gender politics author Nancy Friday. The author, who died in 2017, had over the years purchased four neighbouring units in the building and cobbled them together to create the unusual 13 room apartment. More here. Twenty eight MPs – 19 Conservative and the rest Labour – have taken almost £225,000 in wages and freebies from the gambling industry since August 2020, a Guardian audit has uncovered. My colleague Rob Davies has the story: On 7 July, the Conservative MP for Blackpool South, Scott Benton, took his seat at Wembley to watch England take on Denmark in the semi-final of Euro 2020, courtesy of the Ladbrokes Coral owner, Entain, a freebie worth £3,457. Less than four hours earlier, Benton had warned parliament that a review of betting laws, widely expected to result in tougher regulation, must not be driven by anti-gambling “ideology”. He called for casinos to be allowed more slot machines, adding that many people would be “concerned” about the Gambling Commission’s plans for affordability checks on people betting online and in person, a measure intended to prevent ruinous losses. Days earlier he had enjoyed another day out, at Ascot, courtesy of the Betting &amp; Gaming Council (BGC) trade body. In total, he accepted hospitality worth £7,495 during a gambling-funded summer of sport. More here. In the City, the FTSE 100 ended the day little changed, while European markets hit new record highs (again). The blue-chip index of London-listed shares finished just four points higher at 7352 points. Mining stocks were among the fallers, countering a rally in heavyweight members such as Royal Dutch Shell (up 2.1%) and AstraZeneca (+1.9%). France’s CAC, Germany’s DAX and the pan-European Stoxx 600 all hit new peaks. Investors were cheered that ECB president Christine Lagarde told MEPs that Europe’s inflation spike would face next year. So while it will be higher and longer than once thought, tightening monetary policy now would hit the economy just as price growth starts to moderate on its own, she explained: “At a time when purchasing power is already being squeezed by higher energy and fuel bills, an undue tightening of financing conditions is not desirable, and would represent an unwarranted headwind for the recovery,” Shares in Tesla are falling again, as the prospect of Elon Musk cutting his stake in the carmaker continues to unnerve Wall Street. Tesla’s stock is down around 4.4% at around $990 this session. That means its fallen around 20% from its record high last month - set just before Musk asked Twitter users whether he should sell 10% of his stake. That sale is now underway, with Musk having sold several billion worth of shares in the last week or so. Musk hasn’t yet sold 10% of his stock, but the billionaire faces a huge tax bill this year if he exercises stock options which would otherwise expire, so could need to keep selling. Musk appeared to hint over the weekend that he could be planning further sales, in an unedifying taunt at Democratic senator Bernie Sanders. My colleague in New York, Martin Pengelly, explains: Elon Musk waded into yet another Twitter controversy on Sunday, the Tesla owner and world’s richest person responding to a tweet about taxes from Senator Bernie Sanders by writing: “I keep forgetting that you’re still alive.” Sanders, 80, wrote: “We must demand that the extremely wealthy pay their fair share. Period.” Musk, 50, is also the owner of SpaceX and has a personal worth estimated at around $271bn, making him by some counts the richest person ever. He also tweeted: “Want me to sell more stock, Bernie? Just say the word …” Sanders did not immediately respond. Melissa Byrne, a progressive activist and former Sanders staffer, tweeted: “Folks, quit buying Tesla. Don’t reward abusive men.” Over in the US, manufacturing conditions in the New York region have strengthened, despite the ongoing supply chain problems and rising energy price. Manufacturing activity grew swiftly in New York State, according to November’s Empire State Manufacturing Survey - a closely-watched gauge of US factories. However, optimism dipped, with firms less optimistic about the six-month outlook than in October. The index rose sharply to 30.9 from 19.8 points, showing an improvement in general business conditions index. The New York Fed, which produces the report, explains. New orders and shipments posted substantial increases, and unfilled orders rose. Delivery times were significantly longer. Employment grew at its fastest pace on record, and the average workweek increased. The prices paid index held near its record high, and the prices received index reached a new peak. Firms planned significant increases in capital and technology spending. Looking ahead, firms remained optimistic that conditions would improve over the next six months, though optimism dipped. Back in the energy sector, low wind speeds have pushed peak hour power prices to the second highest level for at least three years today. This drop in wind speeds has forced Britain’s grid to increase its reliance on gas-fired power plants and draw on coal generation. The FT has the details: Calm weather this year has exacerbated the energy price crisis in the UK, as gas-fired power stations have had to pick up the slack from wind farms. Energy demand has surged as countries open up from pandemic restrictions, which together with lower supplies from Russia to western Europe, has sent wholesale gas prices soaring. Power prices in the UK for the peak evening period between 5pm and 6pm on Monday surpassed £2,000 per megawatt hour, only the second time they have exceeded that level in recent years. This was still below the levels reached at the height of the gas price crisis in mid-September, when they hit £2,500/MWh, according to the energy consultancy Cornwall Insight, whose records date back to 2018. Low wind speeds were the main driver behind Monday’s price spike, although expectations of a pick-up in wind generation on Tuesday should push them back down to similar levels seen in recent weeks, analysts said. More here: UK peak power prices rise to second highest level since 2018 The Treasury committee hearing has outlined the split between Bank of England policymakers, over when to start raising interest rates from their current record low of 0.1%. The hawkish Michael Saunders told MPs that if the Bank waits too long, it risks having to tighten policy more sharply. “The risk of delaying too long is that then, if and when interest rates do have to rise, they go up a little faster and potentially a little further... and also that inflation expectations, particularly among households and businesses, might drift up a little further.” But the Bank’s new chief economist, Huw Pill, points out that hiking too soon risks damaging the economy (which still hasn’t recovered all the output lost to Covid-19). “I recognise, on the one hand, some of Michael’s arguments that if we don’t act there is a danger that inflation achieves some self-sustaining momentum that we will have to resist down the road. But equally I think that if we act prematurely there is a danger that we derail some of the recovery which is still in some respects quite fragile.” Pill was one of seven MPC members who voted to leave interest rates on hold this month. More from the governor: Onto the ‘unreliable boyfriend’ question -- did BoE governor Andrew Bailey lead investors astray with hawkish talk ahead of November’s meeting? Bailey say he never gave an unconditional pledge to raise interest rates, when he talked about the need to act if the Bank saw a risk to medium-term inflation expectations. He explains that he was concerned about the perception that the bank wasn’t focused on inflation, and wanted to remind people about its framework. Bailey also adds that all MPC meetings are in play. Bailey says the vast majority of market participants took the view that November’s decision was a very close call -- citing a poll of 45 market economists who were split 23-22. But there were some institutions who took very big positions in the lead-up to the meeting, and through the autumn. Some of them have lost out. Some of them have gained, I think. Some feel better than others. Bailey adds that there is a very high level of uncertainty in the economy, so it would be hazardous to commit to the timing of any rate rises. The point I was making in October was about our framework. Don’t forget what our framework is, it’s about inflation. We are in the price stability business. MPC member Michael Saunders weighs in too - insisting there is no risk of a wage-price spiral in the UK. Saunders, who voted to raise interest rates this month (but was outvoted), is asked where he disagrees with BoE governor Andrew Bailey, Saunders politically replies that he agrees with the governor (sat to his left) on several points. Talk of a return to the 70s is completely misplaced. The economy has changed materially since then - and another fundamental change is that the UK now has an independent central bank with a clear remit and effective policy tools, Saunders says. But... the labour market is tight, with widespread skill shortages. Average underlying pay growth is slightly above pre-pandemic pace, and pay growth for new hires is picking up. So Saunders thought the chances of further generalised pick-up in pay growth is sufficiently high that the Bank should start withdrawing some of its stimulus now. Monetary Policy Committee member Catherine Mann makes an important point too - will firms see strong sales growth next year which allows them to pass on costs, such as wages, through higher prices? Mann explains that consumers will spend more of their disposable income on energy and food next year. That could limit their ability to continue spending on goods (which has been an important factor driving up inflation), and services. And that would make it harder for firms to fully pass on any cost increases themselves, Mann explains to the Treasury Committee. So she sees a potential softness in firms’ pricing power, which “puts a damper” on medium-term inflation prospects. Andrew Bailey also plays down comparisons with the 1970s. He points out that structure of the labour market is very different than the 70s, and that inflation was a persistent problem throughout that decade. Bailey tells the Treasury Committee that companies are finding it very hard to recruit, and are having to pay higher wages to fill vacancies - though this isn’t feeding through to the rest of the workforce. Bailey says: Companies are having to pay up to recruit people. That doesn’t necessarily translate at the moment into paying their existing staff more. The BoE governor warns, though, that while employers can live with different pay levels for a while, eventually staff start to realise what’s going on. They can work these thing out, so you get that pressure. We’re not seeing that at the moment, but we could do. Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, has told MPs that he’s ‘very uneasy’ about the UK’s inflation situation, as supply chain bottlenecks hit the recovery. Bailey is testifying to the Treasury Committee about this month’s interest rate decision, where the BoE left borrowing cost unchanged. Asked how uneasy he feels about the MPC’s decision to leave Bank Rate at 0.1%, Bailey replies: I am very uneasy about the inflation situation. It is not, of course, where we want it to be, to have inflation above target. Inflation was 3.1% in September, above the Bank’s 2% target. It is expected to keep climbing and hit 5% by next April. But on the decision itself, Bailey says it was a very close call for him personally to vote to leave rates on hold (it was a 7-2 split, despite many investors expecting a hike). The UK economy faces much more “two-sided risks” than before, Bailey explains - with weaker growth on one side, and rising inflation on the other. Growth has started to flatten out -- partly because the UK is approaching the point where it has recovered the output lost in the pandemic. But there are also supply-side effects. We are now seeing supply bottlenecks really weighing on growth, and have been seeing that since the summer, Bailey explains, adding: Against that, inflation has picked up further, and the largest single reason why....is in the energy price sector. But it’s also evidently coming from traded global goods prices as well. These bottlenecks are in there as well. Bailey explains that the rebalancing of demand, from goods back to services, following pandemic lockdowns has not happened as rapidly as expected, which is putting strain on supply chains and pushing inflation higher. Those things ought to be temporary, and indeed look to be temporary, Bailey adds, pointing out that monetary policy can’t fix such problems (raising interest rates doesn’t create more natural gas or computer chips). Bailey also points out that the “big issue at the moment” is that the labour market looks tight, with a risk that it leads to wage inflation, and higher medium-term inflation expectations. But the real puzzle is what happened when the furlough scheme wrapped up at the end of September. There were more people using the scheme at the end than the Bank expected, Bailey says. The anecdotes suggest that the transition out of furlough hasn’t lifted unemployment, but we don’t know yet, Bailey explains. So while it was a “finely balanced decision”, Bailey favoured keeping rates on hold this month. By December’s meeting, the Bank will have seen two unemployment reports (starting tomorrow) which should show how the labour market has fared after furlough. Bailey is appearing with chief economist Huw Pill, and external Monetary Policy Committee members Catherine Mann and Michael Saunders. The UK’s stock market has been lagging the rest of Europe today. The FTSE 100 has gained just 2 points, or 0.04%, to 7350 points. Discount retailer B&amp;M are the top fallers, down over 4% after being downgraded by RBC and Goldman Sachs today. Mining companies are also among the fallers, with Glencore down 2%. Reuters points out that last weekend’s international agreement to reduce coal use dragged miners’ shares lower, even though the language was watered down at the last minute -- from “phasing out” coal to merely “phasing down”. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has hit a fresh record high. Investors may be reassured by data showing that China’s retail sales and industrial output growth beat forecasts - even though its property sector continued to slow. Ouch. Alt-milk producer Oatly has cut its sales forecasts after a slew of problems, sending its shares sliding in pre-market trading. The plant-based dairy company warned that revenues would be lower than previously expected this financial year, due to supply chain problems and the impact of the pandemic. It blamed slower European sales, the UK’s lorry driver shortages, a ‘quality issue’ at a production site, logistical problems in the US and pandemic restrictions in Asia. Oatly reported a 49.2% increase in revenues in the last quarter, to $171.1m - missing forecasts. It lost approximately $3m in revenue through “temporary mechanical and automation issues” at its production facility in Ogden, Utah, and another $3m through foodservice location closures in Asia. The truck driver shortage in the United Kingdom, which delayed distribution of Oatly’s products, knocked an estimated $1m off revenues, it adds. It now expects to revenue this financial year to exceed $635m, down from the $690m+ it had forecast in August. Toni Petersson, Oatly’s CEO, explains: In EMEA, we are starting to build supply to meet consumer demand, but the pace at which we expected to increase revenue in new and existing retailers and to open new markets is slower than we anticipated as we navigate a dynamic COVID operating environment. We believe this is primarily a timing issue and in the first half of 2022, we expect to have an increased share of shelf space at retail given our strong velocities and current supply levels. In the Americas, we are pleased with the weekly production output improvements at our Ogden, Utah facility to-date in the fourth quarter, as we navigate a challenging supply chain environment. Finally, in Asia strict public health measures remain in effect due to an increase in cases of the COVID-19 Delta-variant. Oatly also flags that it is currently investigating a quality issue at one of its production facilities that will probably result in the destruction of inventory and corresponding lost sales in the EMEA region. Shares in Oatly have sunk 14% in pre-market trading, to around $10.20. They floated on the Nasdaq stock exchange at $17 per share back in May, and quickly jumped to $28 by June. But shareholders have already taken a bath since, as the stock has fallen back, even before today. Although UK fuel prices are at record levels, crude oil prices have dipped to their lowest in over a week. Brent crude has slid by 1.5% to $80.91 per barrel, away from the three-year high over $86/barrel set last month. US crude is also at its lowest since 5th November, at $79.57 per barrel, as pressure mounts on president Joe Biden to tap America’s emergency petroleum reserves to lower rising gasoline prices. On Saturday, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer told reporters that America needs “immediate relief at the gas pump and the place to look is the Strategic Petroleum Reserve”. The White House has also been pushing the OPEC+ group to speed up its production increases (they’re currently adding 400,000 barrels per day more each month). Bjarne Schieldrop, chief commodities analyst at Nordic corporate bank SEB, predicts that reviving OPEC+ and US oil production will shift the global market balance into surplus in 2022, sending Brent crude oil back down towards $60/barrel. “The current oil price weakness is due to rising Covid-19 infection rates and the associated concerns for global oil demand on the back of lockdowns or restrictions. Another bearish element is the slowdown in China, where steel production, as well as steel, iron ore and coal prices have fallen like a rock over recent weeks. Several OPEC+ countries are struggling to lift production along with the rising cap. “Possible releases of oil from US strategic petroleum reserves (SPR) are blamed for the price decline. However, we are not convinced that this the key reason for crude oil’s recent weaknesses. While the year-on-year (YoY) rise in the oil price is huge, it comes from a very low level when Brent crude traded at $37/barrel on 30 October 2020. The long-term ‘normal’ price of Brent crude is $60/barrel with a typical standard deviation of $20/barrel. The current oil price is not much more than one standard deviation out from its ‘normal’ level. As such, it sounds almost ridiculous to dig into US SPR reserves at this level. Back in the energy sector, diesel has hit an average price of £1.50 per litre at UK forecourts for the first time. Motoring body the AA reports that diesel rose as high as 150.50p a litre on Saturday, on average. Petrol also hit a new record, touching 146.53p. That takes prices further above the previous highs set in April 2012, when diesel had peaked at 147.93p while petrol had topped out at 142.48p. Luke Bosdet, the AA’s fuel price spokesman, warns that the increase could push up prices for consumers, as well as hitting diesel drivers directly. “Diesel setting a record of £1.50 a litre isn’t just yet another milestone along a bleak road of pump price increases this year. As the workhorse fuel for deliveries and craftspeople who drive to customers, it will likely usher in even higher costs for goods and services. Many bigger businesses have insulated themselves against higher fuel costs with a system of surcharges on deliveries. If pump prices go up, their customers pay a percentage more for deliveries, and that gets passed on to the consumer.” “However, smaller businesses, particularly in rural areas, have little choice but to charge shoppers and clients directly. That strains customer relations and potentially puts jobs and contracts in jeopardy.” The AA attributes the increase to the surge in crude oil prices (which hit multi-year highs this autumn) Increased demand for heating oil (which comes from the same part of the barrel as diesel) has also pushed up forecourt prices, following the surge in gas prices. Other factors that have made the diesel price even worse are the rising cost of biofuel, which makes up 10% of the fuel, and a weaker £1, they add. Poultry bosses have sought to reassure shoppers that there will “definitely” be enough turkeys for Christmas despite industry pressures meaning less variety than usual. The British Poultry Council (BPC) has pledged that Christmas dinners will be able to go ahead as planned as staffing pressures have eased, PA Media reports. The trade body told the BBC that the release of 5,500 visas in September for the sector to recruit more foreign workers has helped ease production problems caused by a shortage of staff. It said it believes that between 2,500 and 3,000 of these visas have so far been issued and thinks this will be enough to avoid disruption. Richard Griffiths, chief executive of the BPC, said: “It’ll get us over the line. “We’ve been able to streamline products and reduce the variety, so that helps with the overall volume. “There will be a focus on whole birds and very simple crowns and roasts.” He added that there will be a bird for “everyone who wants one” despite the reductions in choice. Last Saturday my colleague Joanna Partridge wrote about the struggle that faced the turkey industry this year - and the push for visas for seasonal poultry workers. This weekend, 15 temporary staff are flying to the UK from Poland to spend six weeks at the processing plant run by Michael Bailey and his brother David, which is gearing up to process 2,000 birds a day. But the firm will have to make do with five fewer workers than usual. Bailey, who not only processes poultry but farms turkeys too, and is chair of the National Farmers’ Union’s turkey group, reported receiving his first inquiries from local butchers in September. “I have never known it like this,” he said of the business he has worked in all his life. “It’s quite weird to have people ringing up, saying: ‘You’ve got my birds, haven’t you?’ Last week, frozen turkeys topped the list of food items in short supply at UK shops, after a surge of demand from worried shoppers. The outsourcing company Serco said has profits will be higher than expected in 2021 owing to greater demand from the UK government for its Covid-19 services, including test and trace. Serco raised its full-year revenue guidance from £4.3bn to £4.4bn on Monday, helping underlying profits rise to at least £225m, up from previous forecasts of £200m. The Hampshire-based company said the uplift could be explained by the fact the volume of its Covid-related work in the UK and Australia “has been higher and continued for longer than we anticipated”. Serco runs large parts of the UK’s largely privatised test-and-trace service, which is labelled NHS test and trace. The firm runs a fifth of Covid-19 testing sites and half the tier 3 contact tracers, who are mostly required to phone the contacts of people who have tested positive. That work was extended in June, when the company won a £322m contract to keep Covid-19 test centres running in England and Northern Ireland for another 12 months, with an option to add another six more. In an update on Monday, Serco said immigration-related contracts, particularly in the UK and Australia, had performed better than expected, as had healthcare insurance services in the US after Joe Biden’s administration extended the enrolment period for registering for subsidised health insurance coverage until mid-August.... More here. Cineworld’s revenues surged past pre-pandemic levels at its cinemas in the UK and Ireland last month, as blockbusters from James Bond: No Time to Die to Venom draw film fans back to the big screen. The world’s second-largest cinema operator, which owns the Cineworld and Picturehouse chains in the UK and Regal Theatres in the US, said that box office and concession revenues at its UK and Irish operation in October were 27% higher than in the same month in pre-pandemic 2019. Shares in Cineworld climbed more than 13% in early trading on Monday, making the company the biggest riser among FTSE 250 stocks, as investors cheered the news of a recovery in the Covid-battered cinema industry. Cineworld said that the recovery has been fuelled by the return of Hollywood blockbusters to the big screen including Black Widow, James Bond: No Time to Die, Dune, Venom and SHang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. Over the weekend NTTD, Daniel Craig’s final outing as super spy 007, passed £90m at the UK &amp; Irish box office, only the fifth film to ever pass that mark. “There are real grounds for optimism in our industry,” said Mooky Greidinger, chief executive of Cineworld. “We are thrilled to see audiences returning in significant numbers. Our partnerships with studios are as strong as ever and [there is] an incredible movie slate to come.” The chain said that upcoming major film releases it expects to perform well at the box office, assuming there is no “deterioration in the Covid-19 situation”, include Spider-Man: No Way Home, Sing 2, Ghostbusters: Afterlife and The Matrix Resurrections. Across its global operations, which encompass 752 sites in 10 countries, total group revenues in October hit 90% of pre-pandemic levels. Cineworld, which reported a record $3bn loss in 2020, said that last month it managed to return to positive cashflow in “an important milestone in the company’s recovery”. However, analysts at AJ Bell that warned that Cineworld should be cautious about seeking to raise ticket prices to try and bolster their battered finances. “We know the company has been trying to strip out costs, but it also has inflationary pressures and oodles of debt that needs repaying,” said Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell. “Now is not the time to push through big ticket price hikes. Not only are family finances under pressure from higher energy, fuel and food bills, but cinema operators also need to use cheaper prices as a way of attracting anyone still on the fence about wanting to spend two hours in a confined space with a load of strangers.” Shell is planning to scrap its dual share system and strike “Royal Dutch” from its name as it prepares to move its tax residence from the Netherlands to the UK, my colleague Kalyeena Makortoff reports: The move, which was welcomed by the UK government, will mean relocating its chief executive, Ben van Beurden, and its chief financial officer, Jessica Uhl, to London, where the company’s board meetings will be held. Shell will no longer meet the Dutch conditions to qualify for the “royal” designation as a result of the shift in tax home, resulting in a name change that will be put to a shareholder vote next month, alongside the broader plans to simplify the company’s structure. The firm also intends to scrap a dual share structure that divides stock into A and B classes, though it will continue to trade in the Amsterdam, London and New York markets. The energy company said the decision would “increase the speed and flexibility of capital and portfolio actions”. However, the Dutch economic affairs and climate minister, Stef Blok, said he was “unpleasantly surprised” by the move, adding that officials were in talks with Shell about the consequences this would pose for the company’s sustainability strategy. The move comes months after a court in the Netherlands ruled in May that Shell had to reduce its emissions by 45% by 2030, compared with 2019 levels. The landmark case, which was brought by environmental groups and more than 17,000 Dutch citizens, applies only in the Netherlands. Shell confirmed in July it would appeal against the ruling. More here. Stuart Joyner, specialist sales at finance brokers Redburn, says Shell’s move is a ‘clear post Brexit win’ for the UK: “Royal Dutch Shell has this morning announced a welcome proposal to unify the company’s A and B share structure. The company plans a shareholder vote on December 10 to approve its plan. It will allow faster buybacks and bring Shell’s tax residency into line with its country of incorporation in the United Kingdom, where it will hold board and executive committee meetings, and base senior management. This is a clear post Brexit win for the UK. It is unclear what leaving the Netherlands will mean for the Dutch litigation process given sizeable operations will remain. Furthermore activist investor Third Point has reportedly built a large position in Shell and is pushing for the breakup of the company, both to unlock shareholder value and to accelerate investment in renewables and other carbon reduction technologies.” The environmental group that won the landmark Dutch lawsuit against Royal Dutch Shell, which ordered the oil major to reduce its CO2 emissions, says shifting the company’s HQ to the UK will not impact its case. Milieudefensie, or Friends of the Earth Netherlands, said in a statement that it could allow further cases to be brought against Shell: “This news has no negative consequences for Milieudefensie’s climate case against Shell. Rather, moving to the United Kingdom opens up a new front, including for future cases.” (thanks to Reuters for the quote). Shell’s move to the UK could help it fight the landmark court ruling that it must almost halve its carbon emissions by 2030, according to analysts at investment bank Jefferies. They say: Dutch Court case. We believe that a clearer separation from the Netherlands could also have positive implications for the Milieudefensie case on Shell’s carbon emissions as it would make it harder to claim that the Dutch Court has jurisdiction. At its 3Q results [last month], Shell introduced a new Scope 1 &amp; 2 target of -50% emissions by 2030, greater than the 45% Scope 1 &amp; 2 reduction called for by Milieudefensie, but the group also is pressuring Shell to reduce Scope 3 emissions by 45% by 2030. Scope 3 emissions cover activities from assets not owned or controlled by the reporting organization. In Shell’s case, that make up 90% of its total emissions, from the energy products it sells. Shell’s plan is to reduce the carbon intensity of the energy products it sells by 20% by 2030, by 45% by 2035, and by 100% by 2050. Jefferies also argue that restructuring Shell’s share structure will increase its ability to buy back shares. Shell’s A-class shares are up 2% this morning, while its B-class are 1.6% higher, among the top risers on the FTSE 100. Shell’s plan has not gone down well in the Netherlands, though, as Reuters reports: The Dutch government said on Monday it was “unpleasantly surprised” by news that Royal Dutch Shell PLC is planning to move its headquarters to London from The Hague. “The Cabinet regrets to the utmost that Shell wants to move its head office to the United Kingdom,” Economic Affairs and Climate Minister Stef Blok said. “We are in a dialogue with the management of Shell over the consequences of this plan for jobs, crucial investment decisions and sustainability.” They also explain why Shell wants to simplify its dual-class share structure: While the Netherlands withholds a 15% tax on dividends for Dutch-domiciled companies, Britain does not have such a tax. Under Shell’s dual class share system, holders of the “A” shares receive normal dividends and are subject to the tax. However payments for “B” shares are distributed through a “Dividend Access Mechanism” that essentially sees them streamed through a trust registered on the Channel Island Jersey, avoiding the Dutch withholding tax. Though the arrangement was approved by Dutch tax authorities in a confidential deal, its legality under European Union law was doubted by some tax experts. The UK’s business and energy secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has welcomed Shell’s plan: Royal Dutch Shell is planning to shift its tax residency from the Netherlands to the UK as part of a significant shake-up. The oil giant is also planning to move its headquarters to the UK, relocating its CEO, Ben van Beurden, and CFO, Jessica Uhl, along with its board meetings. Under the plan it will also ditch its dual share structure, and rename itself Shell plc, dropping its ‘Royal Dutch’ identity as part of the shift. Shell says the move will strengthen its competitiveness. It also claims it will help it achieve its climate goals --- although it lost a landmark Dutch court case over its emissions earlier this year. Announcing the plan this morning, Shell’s chair, Sir Andrew Mackenzie, said: “At a time of unprecedented change for the industry, it’s even more important that we have an increased ability to accelerate the transition to a lower-carbon global energy system. A simpler structure will enable Shell to speed up the delivery of its Powering Progress strategy, while creating value for our shareholders, customers and wider society.” The proposal, which needs shareholder approval at a meeting next month, would: Establish a single line of shares to eliminate the complexity of Shell’s A/B share structure. Move Shell’s tax residence from the Netherlands to the UK, to align its tax residence with its country of incorporation Relocate its chief executive and chief financial officer from the Netherlands to the UK, and also shift its Board and Executive Committee meetings. The plan comes just a few weeks after activist hedge fund Third Point called for Shell to split itself into “multiple standalone companies”, including a “legacy” arm focused on oil and gas. It also follows a landmark court ruling in the Netherlands earlier this year, which said that Shell must cut its CO2 emissions by 45% by 2030 compared to 2019 levels. A court in the Hague ruled in May that Shell has an obligation to cut its carbon emissions under both Dutch law and the European convention on human rights, and that the company had known for “a long time” about the damage caused by carbon emissions. Shell said in July it would appeal the ruling: On the name change, Shell says it probably won’t qualify to called ‘Royal Dutch’ once the shift takes place: Carrying the Royal designation has been a source of immense pride and honour for Shell for more than 130 years. However, the company anticipates it will no longer meet the conditions for using the designation following the proposed change. In a video message today, Mackenzie insists the simplification will have “no impact” on legal proceedings related to the Dutch court ruling, and that Shell is ‘rising to meet the court’s challenge’, with a new absolute emission-reduction target. Last month Shell set a target of halving its carbon emissions by the end of the decade. However, climate campaigners said it was “tokenism” because it only applied to Shell own operations, such as extracting oil and transporting fuel to forecourts, not the use of its oil and gas by transport, homes and industry. China’s deepening home slump piled pressure on authorities to stabilize the market, argues Bloomberg, which says: The figures may add to speculation that regulators will consider easing their clampdown on leverage in the real estate industry as the property downturn risks derailing China’s economic recovery. A liquidity crisis at industry giant China Evergrande Group is spreading to its competitors, which are struggling to refinance their debts, particularly in the offshore junk dollar bond market. Falling prices may dissuade homebuyers concerned about the value of their assets, making it harder for developers to sell properties and generate much-needed cash, they add: Last month’s drop in prices, which excludes state-subsidized housing, deepened from 0.08% in September. Home values in the secondary market fell 0.32%, the largest decline since February 2015. The FT is concerned that the property slowdown and mounting distress at real estate developers is threatening China’s economic outlook They say: Tommy Wu, an economist at Oxford Economics, a research group, pointed to a 24 per cent decline in residential sales in October year-on-year, and suggested the real estate downturn was “weighing on industry” at a time when economic momentum remained weak. “We think that China’s property downturn will be significant but contained, due to a low stock of unsold housing, room for policy easing, continuing urbanisation and significant income growth,” he said. Reuters points out that tougher regulations on new borrowing since the summer of last year have squeezed developers financially, and made it harder to push through new projects Prices of new homes dropped 0.2% on average last month from September, according to Reuters calculations of data released by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) on Monday, the first decline since March 2015. In the resale market, prices slumped in all but six of the 70 major cities tracked by the bureau. China’s home slump has accelerated, with prices falling in October, sales down, construction output weaker and investment in new properties dropping. New-home prices in 70 of China’s biggest cities slid by 0.25% during October, having already dropped in September for the first time in six years, casting a shadow over the country’s economic outlook. Sales of new homes fell by over 22%, Reuters calculations showed, as demand weakened. That’s the fourth straight decline and the lowest this year. That’s a blow to developers, who have already been hurt by Beijing’s efforts to cool the housing market. New construction starts plunged around 33% year-on-year in October, extending the 13.5% fall in September. Overall investment by developers in projects dropped 5.4%, worse than the 3.5% a month earlier, analysis of data from the National Bureau of Statistics shows. The figures show the impact of the recent efforts to rein in property speculation, including tougher regulations on new borrowing by developers to fund construction. The crisis at China’s indebted property giant Evergrande has also hit sentiment in the sector, as it has wobbled on the edge of default. Other developers are also struggling, with a recent reports suggesting that one in three will struggle to repay their debts in the next 12 month. Zhiwei Zhang, chief economist at Pinpoint Asset Management, wrote in a note Monday (via Bloomberg). “The slowdown in the property sector is the key risk for the macro outlook in the next few quarters,” The news hit shares of Chinese developers, with the CSI Real Estate Index sliding 4% today. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The Covid-19 pandemic and supply chain disruption is continuing to hamper the global economic recovery, with Japan and Thailand’s economies both contracting in the last quarter. Japan’s economy shrank by 0.8% in the third quarter of this year, new figures show, a deeper fall than expected as global supply disruptions hit exports and business spending plans. The rise in Covid-19 cases this summer, which led to emergency soft lockdown measures in Tokyo and other regions, also hurt the recovery. Private consumption fell 1.1% during the quarter. Capital expenditure by companies slumped by 3.8%, with some manufacturers such as carmakers struggling to obtain raw materials and parts. The contraction suggests that the world’s third-largest economy is being hit harder than expected by production bottlenecks, which continue to grip the global economy. Economists had only expected Japan’s GDP to fall by 0.2% during the quarter. As Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute, put it “The contraction was far bigger than expected due to supply-chain constraints, which hit car output and capital spending hard.” Economists predict that Japan’s economy will return to growth this quarter. But the sharp fall in Q3 GDP could also spur prime minister Fumio Kishida to unveil a significant stimulus package soon. Alvin Tan of RBC Capital Markets says: Japan’s Q3 GDP was weaker-than-expected at -3% q/q annualised, which should provide added impetus for the proposed fiscal stimulus package. A package of over ¥40 trillion is reportedly being considered. Thailand’s economy has also been hit by Covid-19 curbs this summer, which hit its tourism sector. Thailand’s GDP shrank by 1.1% during the third quarter of the year - which is actually rather better than the 2.5% contraction which economists were bracing for. It left the economy 0.3% smaller than a year ago. Exports in the third quarter grew 15.7% from a year earlier, but private consumption fall by 3.2%, hit by pandemic restrictions. Again, there are hopes of a recovery in Q4, as Covid-19 cases fall, restrictions are being lifted and the vaccine rollout speeds up. Danucha Pichayanan, the head of Thailand’s National Economic and Social Development Council, told a news conference that economic indicators pointed to improving conditions - and that domestic consumption, public spending and tourism will drive growth in 2022. “If there are no more outbreaks, the fourth quarter will definitely be better than the third. Also coming up today The Bank of England governor, Andrew Bailey, is testifying to MPs on the Treasury Committee this afternoon, along with chief economist Huw Pill,and external MPC members Michael Saunders and Dr Catherine Mann. They’ll discuss the Bank’s decision to leave interest rates on hold this month, and its forecast for inflation to hit 5% next year, and are likely to also cover the UK’s labour market, price and wage rises, and the outlook for the economy. We’ll also hear from European Central Bank chief Christine Lagarde, when she appears before MEPs on the economic and monetary affairs committee this morning European markets are expected to open slightly lower, with anxiety over inflation weighing on stocks after US consumer confidence hit a 10-year low on Friday. The agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone trade balance for September 10am GMT: ECB president Christine Lagarde testifies to the European Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. 2.30pm GMT: Bank of England policymakers testify to the Treasury CommitteeThe Greek prime minister will make the Parthenon marbles the key issue in upcoming talks with Boris Johnson in London, arguing the reunification of the “stolen” sculptures is an intergovernmental matter that lies outside the remit of the British Museum. Determined to raise the issue in his first Downing Street visit, Kyriakos Mitsotakis is also expected to emphasise the leaky roof in the London museum’s Duveen Gallery, where the 5th century BC antiquities are displayed, the Guardian has learned. “It’s of great importance to him,” said a well-placed source, refusing to be drawn on whether the treasures, also known as the Elgin marbles, will be the first or last item on Tuesday’s agenda. “Our arguments are very strong. Now is the time to have a dialogue in good faith.” Ongoing maintenance work at the British Museum has, with the coronavirus outbreak, prevented the pieces from being publicly viewed for almost a year. The Acropolis Museum, which was purpose-built to house the classical carvings at the foot of the monument, reopened in May. Sawn off from the Parthenon in 1802 on the order of Lord Elgin, Britain’s then ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, about 80 metres of the monumental frieze is exhibited in London; 50 metres in Athens. Other parts of the 115-block artwork are in museums across Europe. Few Greek leaders have given such priority to the sculptures’ repatriation as Mitsotakis, who has described the UK’s refusal to engage in talks as a “losing battle”. Within weeks of his centre-right government winning office, the politician told the Observer he was prepared to swap priceless artefacts that had never before left Greece in return for the marbles being brought back in time for the nation’s bicentennial independence celebrations this year. Addressing Unesco late on Friday, he said there was “no better time than now” to return the antiquities, long seen as the most significant link, symbolically, between the modern Greeks and their ancestors. “The UK should move to a bona fide dialogue with Greece. And I urge them to do so. After all, this year marks the 200th anniversary of Greece’s war of independence. There could be no better time than now in which to reunite the missing section of the Parthenon sculptures – in their birthplace – in Greece.” The UN agency announced in September that the nation’s decades-long demand for the marbles’ return was of an “intergovernmental character” and not, as successive British governments have claimed, a matter for the British Museum to decide. Campaigners have long complained of London moving the goalposts and hiding behind museum trustees. Tuesday’s talks are the first official face-to-face meeting between the two leaders and the first since Britain’s exit from the EU. Mitsotakis, a Harvard-trained banker whose background is as privileged as Johnson’s, has already signalled he will invoke “what Boris calls Global Britain” when he raises the issue of the marbles. Surveys have repeatedly shown the vast majority of Britons endorsing the return of the sculptures. Athens has been emboldened by changing attitudes to the return of cultural property. In 2019 France responded with unexpected enthusiasm to a Greek request for the repatriation of part of the frieze from the Louvre. But it is very likely the Greek delegation will also appeal to the British prime minister’s sensitivity as a classicist. An admirer of Pericles, Johnson has famously adorned his office with a bust of the soldier-statesman whose building programme, not least the construction of the Acropolis temples, is most associated with the golden age of Athens. Earlier this year, the UK prime minister acknowledged the intensity of feeling on the issue but said repatriation was not in the offing. Speaking to the Greek daily Ta Nea, he said: “The UK government has a firm, longstanding position on the sculptures, which is that they were legally acquired by Lord Elgin under the appropriate laws of the time and have been legally owned by the British Museum’s trustees since their acquisition.” Anglo-Greek relations have been described as excellent, with British diplomats hailing a strategic framework agreement recently signed between two countries as one of the very first post-Brexit deals with an EU member state. But precisely because that is the case, Greek officials say Mitsotakis feels confident that now is the time to roll up his sleeves, put Johnson on the spot and inject new impetus into the west’s longest running cultural row.Boris Johnson has used a press conference in Downing Street to warn that rising Covid cases on continental Europe are like “storm clouds” posing a threat to the UK. (See 3.48pm.) Johnson has urged people to get their booster vaccines, saying that it would be an “utter tragedy” for anyone to die because the protection provided by two doses had waned. At his press conference he said: Many more people who are eligible [for a booster] have not yet come forward. And so, if you are one of those people, please go and get that third jab because it would be an utter tragedy if, after everything we’ve been through, people who had done the right thing by getting double vaccinated ended up becoming seriously ill or even losing their lives because they allowed their immunity to wane by not getting their booster. He spoke as the government extended the booster programme to cover people aged 40 to 49. Johnson said the concept of what constituted “full vaccination” would need to be adjusted to take booster jabs into account. He said: On boosters, it’s very clear that getting three jabs - getting your booster - will become an important fact and it will make life easier for you in all sorts of ways, and we will have to adjust our concept of what constitutes a full vaccination to take account of that. And I think that is increasingly obvious. Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, said it was particularly important for pregnant women to get vaccinated. (See 3.12pm.) Keir Starmer has claimed Johnson’s “guileless boosterism” undermined Cop26. (See 4.42pm.) In a statement to MPs Johnson accused the opposition of being unwilling to accept that the summit had been a success, and he said it has succeeded “by uniting the world in calling time on coal”. (See 5.04pm.) Labour is to force a Commons vote later this week on whether MPs should be barred from holding paid directorships or business consultancies, as Keir Starmer argued there should be a wider ban on almost all second jobs for MPs. The cabinet secretary, Simon Case, has been asked to investigate officials’ communication with four Conservative MPs with lobbying jobs with firms that secured multimillion government contracts or significant beneficial rule changes. Downing Street has called on the French government to do more to stem the number of people travelling across the Channel in small boats amid a growing diplomatic row over who bears greater responsibility. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has apologised to a Muslim man after the government falsely described him as an extremist hate preacher. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, has apologised to Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, for suggesting in an interview she should resign. He also suggests his comment may have broken the ministerial code. In the Commons Jeremy Corbyn, the former Labour leader, asked Boris Johnson earlier what he would do to convince China, Russia and Australia to end their coal production. Corbyn said: New Delhi is now getting into a pollution lockdown because of the emissions that have affected the people there. The poorest people in the poorest places all around the world suffer the worst from pollution. Can he tell us what he is going to seriously do to bring China, Russia and Australia and others on board to get rid of their coal production? As PA Media reports, Johnson said the UK would help the Indian government in “any way that we can” to move beyond coal. He added: Of course it was disappointing to see the language changed from phase out to phase down, but we never had any commitments on coal at Cop before. What will now happen, the global peer pressure on countries to move away from coal will intensify very rapidly and the change will happen much faster than people think. Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, has told MPs that he’s “very uneasy” about the UK’s inflation situation. My colleague Graeme Wearden has the details on his business live blog here. Back in the Commons, Boris Johnson is still taking questions on Cop26. He claims, despite what opposition MPs are saying, even they can see that Cop26 was a “considerable success”. Stormont’s health minister has called for the phased introduction of mandatory vaccine passports in Northern Ireland, PA Media reports. PA says: Robin Swann’s proposal comes after escalating pressures on the region’s beleaguered health system saw ambulances diverted away from a main hospital on Sunday night. The powersharing administration currently recommends that nightclubs and other entertainment venues use Covid status checks on entry, but it has stopped short of making it a legal requirement. The issue has sharply divided the five-party coalition in Belfast, with the SDLP and Alliance having called for a mandatory certification system as a way to make venues safer and drive up vaccination uptake rates. The two main parties in the executive - the DUP and Sinn Fein - have resisted calls for compulsory passports, instead expressing a preference for a “partnership approach” with the hospitality industry. Swann is a Ulster Unionist party minister. Boris Johnson has pledged to “stand behind” Jersey if the French return to threats to impede British and Channel Island fishers in the wake of the wider row between the EU and the UK over Brexit. The prime minister met the Jersey chief minister John Le Fondré and the island’s external affairs minister Ian Gorst earlier today. In a statement a government spokesperson said the PM was told Jersey’s approach to fishing licences, which is the subject of ongoing negotiations, was “reasonable and fully in the line” with last December’s trade deal. The spokesperson went on: The prime minister said that France’s recent threats were unjustified and would have breached the TCA. He reiterated that the UK would continue to stand behind Jersey in the event that they were carried through, although he welcomed their deferral and said he hoped that they would be taken off the table permanently. Both sides agreed that they would continue to assess new evidence in support of the remaining license applications and that technical discussions with the EU Commission and France would continue. And this is what Keir Starmer told MPs about why he thought the PM’s “boosterism” had undermined Cop26. The task of Glasgow was to set out credible plans for delivering that and whilst the summit has made modest progress, we cannot kid ourselves. Plans to cut emissions still fall way short. The pledges made at Glasgow for 2030 - even if fully implemented - represent less than 25% of the ambition required. Rather than the manageable 1.5 degrees, they put us on track for a devastating 2.4 degrees. That’s why - according to the UN secretary ggeneral - the goal of 1.5 degrees is now left on “life support.” So now we need to deliver intensive care. That starts by being honest about what has gone wrong. The summit was held back by guileless boosterism which only served to embolden the big emitters. The prime minister praised inadequate net zero plans. Australia was called heroic, even though their plan was so slow that it was in line with 4 degrees of global warming. By providing this cover we had little chance of exerting influence on other big emitters and we saw many more disappointing national plans. The prime minister dressed up modest sectoral commitments as transformational. Earlier in Cop, the Government claimed that “190 countries and organisations” had agreed to end coal. On closer inspection: only 46 of them were countries, of that only 23 were new signatories, of those 23, 10 do not even use coal! And the 13 that remained did not include the biggest coal users – China, the US, India, and Australia. With no public pressure, the big emitters were emboldened and they clubbed together to gut the main deal’s wording on coal. Only someone who thinks words are meaningless could now argue that an agreement to phase down coal is the same as an agreement to phase it out. And there was the long-overdue $100 billion in climate finance. It has still not been delivered even though this money was promised to developing countries over a decade ago. Failure to deliver has damaged trust and created a huge obstacle to building the coalition that can drive climate action between the most vulnerable developing countries and ambitious developed countries. This is what Boris Johnson said in his opening statement to MPs summing up what he thought Cop26 achieved. It was a summit that many people predicted would fail. A summit that I fear some quietly wanted to fail. Yet it was a summit that proved the doubters and the cynics wrong. Because Cop26 did not just succeed in keeping 1.5 alive. It succeeded in doing something no UN climate conference has ever done before by uniting the world in calling time on coal. In 25 previous Cops, all the way back to Berlin in 1995, not one delivered a mandate to remove so much as a single lump of coal from one power station boiler. For decades, tackling the single biggest cause of carbon emissions proved as challenging as eating the proverbial elephant. It was just so big that no one knew quite where to start. But in Glasgow we took the first bite. Because we have secured a global commitment to phasing down coal – and as John Kerry has pointed out, you can’t phase out coal without first phasing it down as we transition to other, cleaner energy sources – and we have, for the first time, a worldwide recognition that we’ll not get climate change under control as long as our power stations are consuming vast quantities of the sedimentary super-polluter that is coal. That alone is a great achievement, but we haven’t just signalled the beginning of the end for coal. We’ve ticked our boxes on cars, cash and trees as well. The companies that build a quarter of the world’s automobiles have agreed to stop building carbon emission vehicles by 2035 – and cities from Sao Paulo to Seattle have pledged to ban them from their streets. We’ve pioneered a whole new model, an intellectual breakthrough, that sees billions in climate finance, development bank investment and so forth,being used to trigger trillions from the private sector to drive the big decarbonisation programmes in countries like South Africa. And we’ve done something that absolutely none of the commentators saw coming by building a coalition of more than 130 countries to protect up to 90 per cent of our forests, those great natural soakers of carbon. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says he is glad Johnson today remembered Cop26 was in Glasgow. Last night he said it was Edinburgh, Blackford says. He says the Scottish government led on climate justice at Cop26. The UK should contribute to a loss and damage facility, he says. In response to the point about where Cop26 took place, Johnson says it would never have been in Scotland at all if Scotland had not been part of the UK. Theresa May, the former PM, says there were “significant achievements” at Cop26. Johnson welcomes her comment. He says Alok Sharma remains as Cop26 president for a year, and he will use that time to hold countries to the commitments they made. Johnson is responding to Starmer. He says Starmer’s response was “pathetic”, and he accuses the Labour leader of “trying to suck and blow at the same time” - to criticise it, whilst also commending what it achieved. Keir Starmer starts by paying tribute to Alok Sharma, the Cop26 president, saying “his diligence, his integrity and his commitment to the climate” have been clear for all to see. He says the world is on track for global warming of 2.4c. The 1.5C target is “on life support”, he says. The summit was held back by the PM’s “guileless boosterism”, he says. As an example, he cites the PM describing the Australian plan as “heroic”, when it was inadequate. He says the agreement announced on coal was misleading, because only half of the countries featured were new names. Only someone who thinks that promises are meaningless could now argue that an agreement to phase down coal is the same as the agreement to phase it out. [See 12.09pm.] Johnson says the UK has slashed its use of coal so much that the last two coal-fired power stations will go offline for good in 2024. He says the UK has also doubled its climate finance and made a legally binding commitment to net zero. He pays tribute to Alok Sharma, the Cop26 president, saying he was “absolutely tireless”. And he thanks others involved in the summit too, including the people of Glasgow. He thanks them for putting up with so much disruption, and for welcoming people from around the world. He says this does not mean they can close the book on the climate job. They are not saying the job is done. It is not enough to set out on the road to net zero; they must arrive, he says. He says Cop26 has filled him with optimism they will get to net zero. But he is not certain they will get there. He says some countries appear to be dragging their feet. He says the predicted rise in global temperatures is now around 2C. That is still excessive, he says, but he says they are closer than ever to the relative safety of 1.5C. That means 1.5C is still alive. He says that is something the UK should take pride in. Boris Johnson, who seems to be losing his voice, says Cop26 was the biggest political gathering in the UK. He says some people thought it would fail, or even wanted it to fail. But it achieved something no other Cop has done - “by calling time on coal”. No previous Cop gave a mandate to remove as much as a single lump of coal. But this one did, he says. With reference to how the agreement was watered down at the last moment, he quotes John Kerry, the US climate envoy, as saying you cannot phase out coal without phasing it down first. In the blog he published last week Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former chief adviser, recalled a conversation with the PM in January 2020 in which the PM complained the job was “like getting up every morning pulling a 747 down the runway”. According to Cummings’s account, Johnson wanted to know what people would think if he devoted more time to finishing his book on Shakespeare. Cummings claims he told Johnson people would be expecting him to be focusing on his day job. Today it’s as if Johnson is making a point about how fully engaged he really is. After holding a press conference earlier, on Covid, he is just about to address MPs on Cop26. Later he will be giving a speech at the Guildhall in London on foreign policy. This is what Boris Johnson said in his opening statement about the risk that rising Covid cases on the continent could “wash up on our shores”. Turning to Covid, I want to update you on our progress,and, in particular, on these storm clouds that are gathering over the continent. A new wave of Covid has steadily swept through central Europe and is now affecting our nearest neighbours in western Europe. Our friends on the continent have been forced to respond with various degrees of new restrictions, from full lockdowns, to lockdowns for the unvaccinated, to restrictions on business opening hours and restrictions on social gatherings. We don’t yet know the extent to which this new wave will wash up on our shores, but history shows we cannot afford to be complacent. Indeed in recent days cases there have been rising here in the UK, so we must remain vigilant. Because there is one lesson we can draw from the current situation in Europe. Those countries with lower vaccination rates have tended to see bigger surges in infection, and in turn been forced to respond with harsher measures. While those countries with higher vaccination rates have, so far, fared better. This shows us once again that if we want to control the epidemic here in the UK,and if we want to avoid new restrictions on our daily lives, we must all get vaccinated as soon as we are eligible. To what extent Johnson is genuinely alarmed about rising cases in Europe, and to what extent he is talking this up intentionally so as to persuade more people to get vaccinated, was not clear. As Robin McKie reported in the Observer at the weekend, leading scientists are doubtful whether the UK will end up following Europe, and toughening restrictions in response to rising cases, because this time they believe the UK is ahead of continental Europe, not behind. Q: How resilient is the NHS? Whitty says it is resilient. But he says we have not yet got to the point where the flu season normally starts, the end of December. And the ambulance system is under particular pressure at the moment, he says. He urges people to get all their vaccines. And that’s it. The press conference is over. I’ll post a summary shortly. Q: Do you accept you should wear masks more often? Johnson says he wears a mask wherever the rules say he has to. And he says he has been wearing one more often in recent weeks, as cases have been ticking up. I wear a mask wherever the rules say I should and I urge everyone else to do the same. People have actually seen me wearing face coverings quite a bit more regularly as we have seen the numbers (of infections) ticking up in the UK. I think that is the responsible thing to do and I am going to continue to do it. Q: Are you letting down voters in the north over rail? Johnson says his integrated rail plan is going to be “absolutely fantastic”. He urges people to wait until it is out. Q: Are you going to vaccinate children aged five to 11? Whitty says vaccines have not even been licensed in the UK for that yet, and so, he says, “let’s not rush our fences on this”. We haven’t yet even got a licence with MHRA so let’s not rush our fences on this. It will depend entirely on the data that are presented to the independent regulator and the independent scientific advisory committee. Q: Do you agree with the head of the armed forces that we must be ready for conflict with Russia? Johnson says the UK stands in solidarity with its friends in Poland. He says he would encourage everyone to work for peace and stability. We are showing solidarity with our friends in Poland as you would expect. We would encourage everyone to work for peace and stability in the European region. We stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our friends across the whole region - Estonia, Poland. We are there. Johnson says the problem with boosters, in so far as there has been one, has been with demand, not supply. He says the mood in GPs’ surgeries is optimistic and committed. Q: Will uptake in the over-40s be any higher than uptake in the over-50s? Johnson says the numbers are climbing. People are coming forward at greater speed. Whitty says he sees no evidencee that demand for booster jabs is levelling off. This is something people want, he says. Q: Can you rule out a lockdown at Christmas? Johnson says he cannot see any reason why the government would need to move to plan B (which does not amount to a lockdown anyway). But he says he “cannot rule anything out”. Q: Will the booster dose be added to the NHS Covid travel pass, and when? Johnson says this will happen. He says, getting fully vaccinated with a booster, will make travel easier. This is yet another reason to get this done. Whitty ends with a slide comparing case rates in the UK with case rates in other European countries. He stresses the need to be cautious with these figures, saying countries compile their data in different ways. But he says there have been a “very significant increase” in eastern Europe. Whitty is now showing a slide about vaccination rates. He urges people to get vaccinated if they have not done so already. This is particularly important for pregnant women, he says. He says of the 1,714 pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid between February and September, 98% of them had not been vaccinated. Whitty says more people are getting booster vaccines. UPDATE: PA Media has filed this, with the quotes from Whitty on Covid and pregnant women. Whitty told a Downing Street press conference: “I would just like to give you some fairly stark facts about this because this is a major concern.” He explained that, based on academic data from February 1 to September 30, some 1,714 pregnant women were admitted to hospital with Covid. He added: “Of those, 1,681, which is to say 98%, had not been vaccinated. “And if you go to those who are very severely ill in intensive care, of 235 women admitted to ICU, 232 of them - over 98% - had not been vaccinated. “These are preventable admissions to ICU and there have been deaths. “All the medical opinion is really clear that the benefits of vaccination far outweigh the risks in every area. This is a universal view among doctors and among the midwife advisory groups and among the scientific advisory groups. “So can I please encourage all women who are pregnant or wishing to become pregnant to get their vaccination.” Prof Chris Whitty is showing the slides. He says cases have been broadly flat at a relatively high level for some weeks now. Hospital numbers are also broadly flat, but “significant”, he says. And deaths are currently averaging 156 per day, he says. Johnson sums up the measures announced today. And he quotes figures he quoted earlier about the effectiveness of boosters. (See 11.29am.) Boris Johnson is speaking at the press conference now. After opening remarks about Liverpool, he turns to Covid, and says he wants to update people on the “storm clouds gathering over parts of the continent”. Some European countries are introducing new restrictions, he says. He says we do not know the extent to which this new wave will wash up on our shores. But we “cannot afford to be complacent”, he says. Cases are rising in the UK and we “must remain vigilant”, he says. He says countries with lower vaccination rates have seen higher surges, and have had to respond with harsher measures. Boris Johnson will be starting his press conference shortly. He will be appearing with Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser. They will be talking primarily about the decission to extend Covid booster vaccines to those aged between 40 and 49. My colleague Peter Walker has the details in a story here. Johnson may also talk about the UK threat level and the explosion in Liverpool, but I won’t be covering those aspects here because we will be covering them on our separate live blog. Due to the nature of that story, we cannot allow discussion on it below the line, and any comments on the incident will be removed. Some of the reporting this morning suggested MPs will get a chance later to debate the motion saying the standards committee report that found that Owen Paterson broke lobbying rules should be approved. But they won’t. That is because the government is seeking to pass the motion using what Commons officials call the “nod or nothing” procedure. It is a mechanism they use for passing relatively minor motions after 10pm without a debate. If all MPs approve (“nod”), the motion goes through. But if an MP shouts an objection, it falls (“nothing”), but it can be brought back again. If the government is determined to pass the motion, and MPs keep objecting verbally, it will eventually timetable a debate. The UK terrorism threat level has increased to severe. There is full coverage on our separate live blog covering the aftermath of the explosion in Liverpool. Due to the nature of the incident in Liverpool, we cannot allow discussion on it below the line, and any comments on the incident will be removed. And here are some more lines from the Downing Street lobby briefing. Downing Street refused to deny reports that the planned HS2 link to Leeds will be shelved when the government publishes its integrated rail plan on Thursday. The prime minister’s spokesman said he could not comment ahead of the announcement. He also refused to say whether Boris Johnson still stood by the commitment he gave three days after be became PM when he backed Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), a new trans-Pennine railway line from Liverpool to Leeds via Bradford. Asked if the PM was still committed to this, the spokesman said he could not comment ahead of the announcement. But he said the rail being being unveiled would involve “a significant investment”. The spokesman said the government would not be setting a time limit for when the talks with the EU over reforms to the Northern Ireland protocol should end. “Intensified” talks were continuing, he said. He told journalists: There are significant gaps between our positions and as we set out in the July command paper, we believe the conditions for article 16 have been met. But again, we are going to be continuing talks, intensified talks, between the two teams to try and find a consensual solution ... I wouldn’t seek to put a time limit on it. I think the most important thing is to not place a time limit on it which could hinder potential progress. This is significant because, at the Conservative party conference in early October, Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, set a three-week deadline for talks. Last week Frost effectively admitted he has abandoned that deadline. The spokesman played down the prospect of the UK triggering article 16. He said the Northern Ireland protocol was creating “significant challenges”, but he went on: “I want to emphasise that our approach remains that we want to find a consensual solution.” He said this in response to a question about whether the PM agreed with Dominic Cummings, his former chief adviser who is now one of his most trenchant critics, who published a blog last week saying that if Johnson did trigger article 16, “it’s bound to be a debacle that damages the economy and relations with allies”. The spokesman condemned what he described as the “abhorrent attempts” by Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, “to engineer a migrant crisis to undermine Poland and others in the region”. The spokesman said there were “no plans” for Johnson to set up new government department, to be headed by the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, to take charge of implementing net zero plans. It was reported yesterday that this has been considered an option for Sharma, who remains Cop26 president until next year but who in practice may be looking for a new challenge now the conference is over. The spokesman said the Home Office will today table amendments to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill to help the authorities deal with Insulate Britain-type motorway protests. “These include a new offence of interfering with the operation of key infrastructure, such as motorways, and tougher sentences for obstructing highways,” No 10 said The spokesman said that Priti Patel, the home secretary, would be holding talks with her French counterpart to discuss what more could be done to stop migrants crossing the Channel. The spokesman said: It is clear that we need to keep working with our French counterparts to do more to prevent these crossings, which are putting lives at risk. That is why the home secretary is looking to speak to her counterpart to make those points and address this unexpected rise in illegal migrants arriving from France which we are seeing playing out in front of us. At the Downing Street lobby briefing No 10 refused to back the Labour proposal for MPs to be banned from having paid consultancies or directorships. Asked about the proposal for a vote on this plan on Wednesday (see 9.37am and 10.32am), the spokesman said this was a matter for the House of Commons, and that it would be for the government whips to decide what the whipping arrangements would be for government MPs. But asked if the PM personally backed the Labour proposed, his spokesman implied that he didn’t. He replied: The PM was asked about this just last week, about second jobs ... That’s been a long-standing position which can bring benefits to constituents. Obviously there are rules in place which guide those and anyone that’s found to have broken them should face the requisite punishment. Asked if the PM thought the current rules governing MPs’ second jobs were adequate, the spokesman said: “The rules are clear, and there are clear punishments for those that break them. The rules are set by the house, and it’s for them to consider.” The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and we’ve been told that Boris Johnson is chairing a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee at 12.45pm, and that he will be holding a press conference at 3pm, with Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser, on Covid and vaccines. Those engagements are on top of the statement to MPs, starting around 4.15pm, on Cop26, and the foreign policy speech this evening at the Lord Mayor’s banquet in London, that we already knew about. I will post a full summary from the briefing shortly. Fresh concerns have been raised about the spread of Covid in parliament, after it was revealed the number of infections detected on the estate was four times the London average. A memo sent by parliamentary authorities and seen by the Guardian also says some people are still coming into work despite displaying coronavirus symptoms. Tory MPs and ministers have come under fire in recent months for refusing to wear face coverings in the Commons chamber when they sat packed together on the government green benches. Although Boris Johnson and many other frontbenchers began donning a mask again from 27 October, it has now been revealed that Covid transmission was already high by that point. The memo said: In late October, case rates on the estate were four times the London rate; while our rates have come down since then, they are still double the London rate, so the need to stay vigilant has not gone away. Parliamentary workers had to be reminded that they “must not in any circumstances come on to the estate” if they had any Covid symptoms and had not yet taken and received a negative result from a PCR test. The memo said there had been a “small number” of people who “continued to attend the estate despite displaying Covid-related symptoms”. In his LBC phone-in this morning Keir Starmer criticised the way Boris Johnson offered a particularly positive spin on the outcome of the Cop26 summit. Despite the wording in the agreement relating to the phasing out of coal being watered down at the last minute, Johnson implied at a press conference yesterday that this did not matter much. He said: “Whether the language is phase down or phase out doesn’t seem to me as a speaker of English to make that much of a difference. The direction of travel is pretty much the same.” Starmer said this morning he disagreed. He told LBC: The prime minister’s seeming to be saying, yesterday, that phasing down coal and phasing out coal are basically the same thing. I don’t agree. I think if you phase down you are reducing, but you are not eliminating. If you phase out you are eliminating. I don’t think the prime minister helps either the global effort or himself to sort of pretend or to over-pretend that this is all fine and on track, because it isn’t. In his Today interview this morning Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party co-chair, also said Britain was an “exceptionally long way” from being a “corrupt country”. Asked about the claim from Lord Evans, chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, that the UK will be in danger of becoming a corrupt country if standards are not maintained, Dowden said: I think we are an exceptionally long way from that. Of course we have to learn lessons and of course we have to uphold the high standards in public life. But the fact that you are subjecting me at a little after 8 o’clock in the morning to a forensic going over in terms of what the government has done - in a corrupt country you don’t find this kind of level of free press scrutiny and accountability. We introduced as a government the register of lobbyists in 2014. We are constantly improving standards. Back to Oliver Dowden, and here is some comment from journalists on his claim the government is not rigging the Ofcom chair selection process in favour of Paul Dacre. (See 9.19am.) From Raymond Snoddy, the former FT media editor From Rory Cellan-Jones, the former BBC technology correspondent From Tom Peck, the Independent’s sketch writer From Piers Morgan, the former Good Morning Britain presenter From my colleague Jim Waterson, the Guardian’s media editor Boris Johnson has been on a visit to a vaccination centre in east London this morning. He was there to talk about the booster vaccines, but he recorded a pooled clip and took questions on a series of topics. Here are the main points. Johnson again refused to apologise for his handling of the original Owen Paterson vote. Asked about this, he replied: I just want to salute you and the media for keeping going on this. I’m here to talk about boosters and urge people to come forward and get their boosters. When asked a second time if he would apologise, Johnson said he “something about that last night”. That was a reference to what he said at his press conference last night, when he went further than he has before in terms of expressing a measure of contribution. Yesterday his words were: “Of course, I think things could certainly have been handled better, let me put it that way, by me.” Johnson said he had “nothing to add” to the story about Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, letting his department fund a group lobbying against government plans to build housing on airfields. Labour has demanded an investigation, claiming this is an inappropriate use of public money (not least because Shapps has a light aircraft himself, and has used some of the airfields in question). Asked about the story, Johnson said: “I’ve got nothing to add on that. If there are things to be investigated, then of course, that should take place. He urged people to get booster vaccines. He said: I think it’s very good news that the JCVI has today authorised the booster programme to be rolled out to everybody 40-plus, and when you look at what’s happening in the pandemic at the moment, just hearing in Newham sadly there are people in ITU, in intensive care, who are suffering badly from Covid, but they’re all the unvaccinated. And what’s happening is if you can get your booster then your immunity goes right back up to 95%. So far we’ve got 75% of everybody over 70 getting a booster, there’s a huge number of people, but it’s that further 25% that will make all the difference to winter, to Christmas, to our plans going forward, because it’s that extra level of protection that we really need. So the message is, anybody over 70 come forward, get your booster, anybody over 50 comparable and get your booster now, in the next week or so anybody over 40 as well, come forward and get your booster. And we’re also doing a second dose for the 16-and 17-year-olds. He said that, although there was “a storm of infection” in parts of Europe, he saw no reason why the UK would have to move to its Covid plan B. He said: We don’t see anything in the data at the moment to suggest that we need to go to plan B, we’re sticking with plan A. But what we certainly have got to recognise is there is a storm of infection out there in parts of Europe, you can see those numbers ticking up very sharply in some of our continental friends. And we’ve just got to recognise that there is always a risk that a blizzard could come from the east again, as the months get colder. The best protection for our country is for everybody to go forward and get that booster. Polling suggests that, if Conservative MPs vote against the Labour motion banning them from having paid directorships and consultancies on Wednesday (see 9.37am and 10.32am), they will be defying public opinion. A YouGov poll earlier this month suggests that, by a factor of three to one (63% to 20%), people are more likely to think that MPs should not be allowed a paid extra job than that they should. A recent poll for Savanta ComRes also found only around one in five (21%) of people saying they favoured MPs being allowed paid second jobs. In this poll 46% of people were opposed, and the rest had no view. And an Opinium poll published in the Observer at the weekend produced very similar figures. It found 45% of respondents in favour of a ban on MPs having paid second jobs, and 25% of people in favour. A Labour source tells me that, if MPs do vote in favour of the motion the party is tabling for Wednesday to ban MPs having paid directorships and consultancies, its understanding is that this would be binding. This places Boris Johnson in an exquisite dilemma. The government has the numbers to vote down the motion banning MPs from having paid directorships and consultancies, but this would look like a vote to defend sleaze (even though both parties happily accepted the current rules as appropriate for much of the past quarter century). Alternatively, the government could give its MPs a free vote, or advise them to abstain - both options that would probably led to the motion being passed. This would neutralise the issue as PR problem, but instead it would become a party management nightmare. As LabourList reported last week, 50 Tory MPs have between them earned more than £1.7m in consultancy fees since the beginning of 2021 alone. Another analysis for the Times (paywall) found that almost one in four Tory MPs spend at least 100 hours a year on second jobs (many of which would not be covered by the Labour ban). There are Labour MPs too with paid directorships and consultancies, but this is predominantly an issue for the Conservative party. We don’t know the terms of the motion yet - the party is due to publish it later today, or tomorrow - and so it is not yet clear when the proposed ban would take effect. Depending on what Labour proposes, the government could try to amend the motion to delay the ban until after the election. According to a report last week, Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was telling Tory MPs that the government wanted a period of “sober reflection” before it changed any rules relating to the MPs’ code of conduct. Critics would see this evidence that ministers just want to delay reform for as long as possible - a tactic Downing Street has deployed repeatedly in response to calls for tougher standards rules. But even the proposed ban were deferred until the next parliament, some Tories would probably still be infuriated because of the likely hit to their future income. Johnson will face a similar dilemma over the vote on releasing the Randox papers, although telling Tory MPs to vote down this would not look as awful as voting down the ban on paid directorships and consultancies because ministers could argue there is precedent for papers of this kind not being disclosed. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has announced that booster vaccines will be offered to people aged between 40 and 49. My colleague Martin Belam has the details on our coronavirus live blog. Starmer’s LBC interview is now over. I will post a summary shortly. Labour has announced that, as well as scheduling a vote on Wednesday saying MPs should be banned from having paid directorships and consultancies, it will also have a vote on a motion calling for “the publication of the papers relating to Owen Paterson’s advocacy for Randox and all government contracts they received”. This second motion could turn out to be more problematic for the government than the first. The government routinely ignores Commons votes in favour of opposition day motions, and Labour has not been able to clarify yet whether a vote in favour would change Commons rules. But the opposition can use humble address motions when it has an opposition day debate to pass a binding motion forcing the government to release documents. In a press statement announcing the two votes, Starmer said: While the prime minister has failed to act, Labour is taking the lead by giving MPs the chance to end the sort of dodgy lobbying that Owen Paterson was guilty of. It should be a point of consensus that paid directorships and commercial lobbying are not jobs for MPs. The only people MPs should be lobbying for is their constituents. The prime minister has admitted the Paterson motion ‘could have been handled better’; Wednesday is a chance to show he means it. Boris Johnson should call on his MPs to do the right thing and vote to publish the Randox papers, end dodgy lobbying and show that standards in public life still matter. It was the prime minister’s decisions which has led to this scandal, he has repeatedly failed in his leadership over this issue, and Boris Johnson now has a choice: support Labour’s plan to fix this or whip his MPs to vote against a ban on dodgy second jobs for MPs and a cover-up on the Owen Paterson scandal. Starmer says he thinks Claudia Webbe should stand down as MP in Leicester East following her conviction for harassment. He says many people have gone to jail for offences like this. Q: Should Webbe have been sent to jail? (Webbe was given a 10-week jail term, suspended for two years, plus 200 hours’ community service.) Starmer says he did not hear all the evidence, and he suggests he does not approve of politicians’ telling judges what sentences should have been. But it was a serious offence, he says. He says Webbe has been expelled from Labour. Q: What about Lord Falconer doing legal work as well as being shadow attorney general? Starmer says Falconer is not an MP. He is in the Lords, where they get a daily allowance. And he says Falconer has assured him he has never lobbied government. Q: And what about the legal work you have done? Starmer says he gave up legal work almost two years ago. Before then, he did do some legal work as an MP. He says client confidentiality means he cannot disclose who he was working for. That principle is important, he says. Q: It has been claimed you broke Commons rules by using your office for a “Call Keir” event. Starmer says this is “complete nonsense”. He did a Zoom call during lockdown, when he could not travel around the country. As leader of the opposition, he has to talk to the public. The idea that he shouldn’t is “ridiculous”. Q: What is your view on MPs having second jobs? Starmer says paid consultancies and directorships should be banned. And he says there is a “strong case” for banning second jobs generally, with some exceptions. For example, he says the Labour MP Rosena Allin-Khan does shifts as a hospital doctor. That should be allowed. And if MPs serve as army or police reservists, that should be allowed, because it is public service. But generally second jobs should go, he says. He says on Wednesday Labour is going to use its opposition day debate to schedule a vote on stopping MPs having paid directorships and consultancies. He says he is not proposing that the rules are changed retrospectively. Keir Starmer is starting his LBC phone-in now. Nick Ferrari is interviewing him. Starmer says he got his positive Covid test 20 minutes before PMQs. Q: How was Covid for you? Starmer says it was “tougher than I thought it was going to be”. He is double vaccinated, he says. He says it was “not pleasant”. Good morning. Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party co-chair, has been touring the studios for the government today. He has had various exchanges on sleaze/corruption issues, but perhaps the most interesting came on the Today programme, where Nick Robinson asked Dowden about a process that Dowden initiated in his previous job, as culture secretary. Boris Johnson wants Paul Dacre, the former Daily Mail editor, to be the next chairman of Ofcom. This has been widely reported (and not denied), but Dacre was rejected by the interview board. At that point Dowden, rather than appoint someone else, took the highly unusual step of reopening the process and re-writing the job requirements to allow Dacre to apply again. Robinson cited this as one of several examples of how the government appears not to take standards seriously, and asked how this could be right. In his response, Dowden argued that this was actually proof of how proper the process was. He said: Well ... you’re actually proving the point that it is a proper, independent process. Because had it not been a proper, independent process, if it was the case that Paul Dacre was our preferred candidate, he would currently be chair of Ofcom. From the tone of his voice, Dowden seemed to be saying this with what you might call a wry smile - although without being able to see his face it was hard, to be sure. Robinson said the government was just changing the rules for its own convenience. Dowden replied: There were various issues with that process which led me to re-running, not least we had a very, very small field of people that were were found eligible, a small number of people that applied for it. So I thought it was appropriate to run the process again. But if this had been this this corrupt process, you would be looking at this individual, that you allege was preferred by the government currently in that role. The fact that we have an independent process, the fact that ministers - in this case and indeed in all public appointments - appoint people independently to assess the validity of applicants, and then from those who are deemed appointable can choose who is appointed, is in practice an open process. In fact, one reason why so few people applied was that government briefings saying Dacre was going to get the job made people feel there was no point. (Peter Riddell, the former public appointments commissioner, has been highly critical of the government over this.) Dowden also omitted to say that the appointments panel is perhaps not quite as independent as he implied. I will post more from his interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 9am: Keir Starmer holds his regular LBC phone-in. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 2.30pm: Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee. After 3.30pm: Boris Johnson makes a statement to MPs about Cop26. Later MPs will get the chance to approve the motion approving the standards committee report saying Owen Paterson broke the rules on lobbying. But it is scheduled for after 10pm, and there will be no debate. And, according to the Times’ Steven Swinford, the government is today due to announce that the vaccine booster programme will be extended to the under-50s. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comBeto O’Rourke, a former congressman, Senate candidate and contender for the Democratic presidential nomination, will run for governor in Texas next year. O’Rourke, 49, is seeking to take on Greg Abbott, the Republican governor who is pursuing a third term. Abbott is seen as more vulnerable than previously, given demographic changes and events including the failure of much of the Texas power grid in very cold weather in February this year, which led to numerous deaths. “I’m running for governor,” O’Rourke announced on Monday. “Together, we can push past the small and divisive politics that we see in Texas today – and get back to the big, bold vision that used to define Texas. A Texas big enough for all of us.” Possible rivals include Matthew McConaughey, a Hollywood star who has flirted with a switch to politics. A recent poll by the University of Texas and the Austin American-Statesman gave Abbott 46% of the vote to 37% for O’Rourke but also put Abbott’s job disapproval rating at 48%. In September, Quinnipiac University found that 50% of Texas voters did not think O’Rourke would do a good job as governor; 49% said the same for McConaughey. In a statement, the Texas Democratic chair, Gilberto Hinojosa, said the party “welcomes Beto O’Rourke to the race for Texas governor. He has been a longtime champion for hard-working Texans and his announcement is another step towards driving out our failed governor.” Juan Carlos Huerta, a professor of political science at Texas A&amp;M University, Corpus Christi, told the Guardian Abbott was “a formidable candidate” who had already “shown he can win statewide office” and “knows how to wield power”. But Abbott has been criticised on both sides of the political divide over his management of Covid-19. Facing protests over public health measures from the right of his own party, he course-corrected by throwing Texas open to business and trying to ban mask mandates in schools – even though young children could not then be vaccinated. Abbott has also used the legislature to shore up his conservative bona fides on issues like voting rights and abortion – a political calculation that may isolate some voters, Huerta said. “Can he win?” Huerta said, of O’Rourke. “I think there are some issues that are out there that he can capitalise on.” O’Rourke, from the border city of El Paso, can also call on a proven ground game to get out younger voters who trend Democratic but often have low turnout. “Beto O’Rourke has shown he has an ability to mobilise voters and get people engaged in politics,” Huerta said. “That’s why I’m wondering, would he be able to find examples of things that Abbott did, actions he took, things he advocated for that he can make issues in the 2022 gubernatorial election?” Democratic hopes of turning Texas blue, or at least purple, based on demographic changes involving increased Latino representation and liberals moving into the state, have repeatedly run up against hard political reality. The 2022 midterm elections may represent an even tougher task than usual, as Democrats face pushback against the Biden administration‘s first two years in office. “If you go back, election after election, newspapers always write the headline, ‘Will this be the election that Texas turns blue?’ said Emily M Farris, an associate professor of political science at Texas Christian University. “And it hasn’t happened yet.” O’Rourke’s 2018 Senate run, against Ted Cruz, was a case in point. The former congressman ran strongly but still fell short against a relatively unpopular Republican. O’Rourke then ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2020, starting brightly but flaming out amid missteps over media coverage and, some analysts said, a strong position on gun control that was at odds with voters in his home state. O’Rourke’s presidential bid left questions about whether he still wanted to run in Texas, Farris said. But O’Rourke has re-established himself in Lone Star politics through work for voter registration and activism amid the winter storm. More recently, O’Rourke stood alongside Texas Democrats to oppose a restrictive voting law introduced by state Republicans. Speaking to the Texas Tribune in an interview to accompany his announcement for governor, O’Rourke also highlighted Texas Republicans’ introduction of one of the strictest and most controversial anti-abortion laws. O’Rourke is also a strong fundraiser, one of few Democrats who may be able to compete with Abbott’s massive war chest, which stood at $55m earlier this year. Hinojosa pointed to the Senate campaign in 2018, when he said “Beto rallied Texans by the millions – and showed the entire world that the roots of change run through Texas”. Abbott and O’Rourke have effectively been campaigning against each other already, Farris said. From here, Farris said, Abbott would probably try to draw attention to O’Rourke’s controversial comments on guns while O’Rourke was likely to zero in on the power grid failure last February. “I think those are gonna be at least what the two campaigns try to focus on,” she said. In his announcement video, O’Rourke said Abbott “doesn’t trust women to make their healthcare decisions, doesn’t trust police chiefs when they tell him not to sign the permit-less carry bill into law, he doesn’t trust voters so he changes the rules of our elections, and he doesn’t trust local communities” to make their own rules on Covid. Speaking to the Tribune, he said: “I’m running to serve the people of Texas and I want to make sure that we have a governor that serves everyone, helps to bring this state together to do the really big things before us and get past the small, divisive politics and policies of Greg Abbott. It is time for change.”The UN has called for talks about the implications of the Houthis’ complete takeover of the long-contested strategic port of Hodeidah in Yemen, amid reports that the withdrawal of the government forces had led to as many as 6,000 people being displaced. The Houthi takeover of the port, the scene of on and off fighting for more than 5 years, marks a significant breakthrough in a conflict that has seen territorial stalemate through much of this year, but hundreds killed in fierce fighting. In a brief statement, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA) said: “The withdrawal of the Joint Forces from Hudaydah City, Al Durayhimi, Bayt al Faqih and parts of At Tuhayta districts and the subsequent takeover by Ansar Allah (Houthi) forces represents a major shift of the frontlines in the Hodeidah governorate. These events warrant discussions between the parties of the agreement first signed in 2018.” The UN said it was “ready to facilitate such discussions”. The UN special envoy Hans Grundberg expressed his concern at the fighting, and called for de-escalation. The 2018 Hodeidah agreement, negotiated in Stockholm, was at the time seen as the first step to a wider peace in Yemen, but no detailed agreement was ever made on the mutual withdrawal of Houthi and UN backed Yemen government troops in the port leading to an impasse. 700 families (approximately 4,900 people) were displaced to Khokha, over 100 kilometres (60 miles) south of Hodeidah, “while 184 other families (about 1,300 people) were displaced further south to the Red Sea coastal town of Mokha”, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said, citing Yemeni government sources. The Emirati-backed commander of Yemeni National Resistance forces, Tareq Saleh, had initiated the withdrawal in the middle of last week, saying it had been a mistake to expend troops on maintaining a defensive frontline with no ability to fight due to previously signed peace agreements. Amid anger at the retreat in some quarters considering the previous sacrifices that had been made to hold the port, the Saudi-led coalition of military forces in Yemen insisted the withdrawal was orderly and part of a considered military strategy. The withdrawal means the road is now open between the port and the Houthi held Yemen capital Sana’a, potentially facilitating the flow of aid. It is not clear if the withdrawal is a precursor to a wider Saudi withdrawal designed to bring about a wider ceasefire and peace talks.A police officer was filmed saying “chill out or I’ll choke you out” while arresting a suspect who responded by saying “I can’t breathe” and “I give up, I give up,” a misconduct hearing has heard. Footage of the arrest in Halifax, West Yorkshire, was recorded by bystanders and posted on social media. It came three months after the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Opening the case against PC Graham Kanes, barrister George Thomas, representing West Yorkshire police, said: “He accepts the language he used may have been insensitive and he regrets using it. But he understands he can say anything in order to gain control and that is what he did.” Kanes denies using unreasonable, unnecessary and disproportionate force while arresting Hassan Ahmed in August 2020. The panel was shown footage from a number of sources, including mobile phone shots posted on social media that have not been traced. It was also shown body-worn camera footage from another officer, PC Andy Bell, who arrived as Kanes and Ahmed were on the floor. That includes a bystander confronting Kanes asking: “Haven’t you seen what happened in America?” The footage also captured Ahmed being transported to the police station in a van. During the journey Ahmed says “He had me in a choke,” and “He was strangling me and I could not fucking breathe.” Earlier in the incident Bell’s camera recorded Kanes saying: “He lunged himself at me and, as he’s lunged at me, he’s caught me in the face with his fist.” Thomas said it was not disputed that the arrest of Ahmed was lawful, as the officer had witnessed Ahmed punching another man as he arrived at the scene on 16 August. He said that chokeholds were the only form of restraint explicitly discouraged during police training due to the potentially fatal risks involved. Kanes’ use of language showed that he was deliberately using a chokehold, he said. “He was deliberately applying pressure to Mr Ahmed’s neck and he was deliberately preventing him from breathing,” Thomas said. “He was using the one technique he is trained not to use, even for a person violently resisting the police.” Thomas said the use of the neck hold was “potentially lethal” and “plainly excessive”. He added: “It was an utterly inappropriate and dangerous use of force and abuse of authority.” He called Kanes’ language “completely indefensible” and “likely to cause a degree of terror to someone who was, at the time, having pressure applied for their neck”. Thomas said that it was accepted that it was a chaotic situation and Kanes was dealing with an uncooperative, large and muscular man. There was no allegation that race was factor in Kanes’ treatment of Ahmed, the panel heard. Kanes denies all the charges including that a statement provided describing how he was punched by Ahmed “was not an accurate or truthful account of what had happened”. The misconduct hearing, expected to last five days, continues.One early complaint made by British Eurosceptics about EU membership was the undue influence of “unelected bureaucrats”. So there is some irony, or perhaps just hypocrisy, about the power wielded by Lord Frost over a vital area of national interest. Lord Frost sits in the cabinet as Boris Johnson’s Brexit minister by virtue of a peerage. He has never faced election. He has been a bureaucrat (at the Foreign Office) and an industry lobbyist (for scotch whisky). In the latter role, he was unimpressed by the economic case for Brexit. “Even the best-case outcome can’t be as good as what we have now,” he wrote in 2016. Lord Frost’s current position is different, but it unintentionally vindicates his old view. He is upset by the barriers to trade raised by Brexit, especially as they affect Northern Ireland. Last week, he repeated a warning that the government was prepared to trigger article 16 – an emergency brake clause in the Brexit deal – if British objections to the Northern Ireland protocol are not satisfied. The EU responds that significant concessions have already been offered with no reciprocal engagement and that UK demands regarding European court jurisdiction are unreasonable, being peripheral to the practical matter of trade flows. The treaty envisages article 16 as a remedy for specific problems with the operation of the protocol. But Lord Frost’s complaint is the “imposition of EU law” as adjudicated by the European court of justice. That is a function of Northern Ireland remaining in the single market for goods – a choice agreed by all sides to avoid imposing a land border on the island of Ireland. If the UK is now rejecting that compromise, it is, in effect, repudiating the whole deal. Article 16 triggered on that basis would be seen as a hostile act and met with robust counter-measures. A trade war is not inevitable. A landing zone for agreement is discernible through the rhetorical fog. Ending European court involvement is a non-starter, since it means rejecting the unique regulatory status carved out for Northern Ireland in deference to the Good Friday agreement, which is at the core of any Brexit agreement. But governance structures could be tweaked to filter the court’s judgments through bilateral arrangements that allow Downing Street a face-saving new sliver of sovereignty. If that ideological itch is scratched, technical solutions on customs follow. It is plainly in Northern Ireland’s interests for the UK government to focus on the implementation of the protocol and stop raising doubts about its legitimacy. The UK economy, struggling to bounce back from Covid, does not need any more uncertainty or trade disruption. Those imperatives are understood in Whitehall, where not everyone shares Lord Frost’s fundamentalism. The Brexit minister himself has said he prefers a “consensual way forward”, easing the government’s finger from the article 16 trigger as the hazards loom larger. But a deal requires a change in direction from Downing Street and Mr Johnson does not like to be seen to compromise with Brussels. Nor does he engage with Brexit detail before a crisis forces his hand. That crisis is imminent. If the prime minister thinks article 16 is a lever for strengthening the UK’s position, he is badly mistaken. If escalation is the route advised to him by Lord Frost, he needs new counsel.The prospect of a pre-Christmas increase in interest rates has loomed larger after the Bank of England governor told MPs he was troubled by the UK’s rising inflation rate. Giving evidence to the Commons Treasury select committee, Andrew Bailey said he was “very uneasy” about the rising cost of living and had come close to voting for an increase in borrowing costs when Threadneedle Street last met to decide on interest rates earlier this month. The governor sided with the majority when the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) voted 7-2 to keep rates on hold at 0.1%, but made it clear he could change his mind at the next meeting in December. “All meetings are in play,” he said, referring to the possibility that the Bank could start to tighten policy for the first time since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. “We are in the price stability business.” The Bank currently expects inflation to peak at 5% next spring, well above the 2% target set by the government for the Bank to achieve, but Bailey said he had held back from voting for a rise in borrowing costs this month because he wanted more evidence on the post-furlough jobs market. “I’m very uneasy about the inflation situation,” he said. “I want to be very clear on that. It is not, of course, where we wanted to be, to have inflation above target. On the decision itself, however, it was a very close call in my view,” Bailey added. The governor said anecdotal evidence suggested the closure of the furlough scheme at the end of September had not led to a significant rise in unemployment. There will be two more official job market updates from the Office for National Statistics before the MPC’s next meeting, with the first on Tuesday. Financial markets were taken unawares by the MPC’s November decision to leave rates unchanged, which followed comments from Bailey widely seen as suggesting an increase was imminent. Bailey said neither he nor any other Bank policymaker had ever promised a November rate rise but added that he wanted to make clear the MPC took the need to hit the inflation target seriously. “I thought it was critical that we put our foot down at that point,” he said in comments likely to reinforce current City sentiment that borrowing costs will increase on 16 December. Michael Saunders, one of the two MPC members who voted for a November increase, said delaying action might lead to interest rates rising faster and further in the future, but said talk of a return to a 1970s-style inflationary wage-price spiral was misplaced.In the woods that line Poland’s border with Belarus, the body of a young Syrian man was found at the weekend. This was the ninth recorded death in the area since Alexander Lukashenko began to cynically exploit the desperation of migrants in his ongoing confrontation with the European Union. There will surely be more. Close by, trapped in a narrow strip of no man’s land between opposing lines of Polish and Belarusian soldiers, thousands more men, women and children are enduring plunging sub-zero temperatures with no shelter. Mostly from Syria and northern Iraq, they are famished, frightened and inadequately dressed. Driven to the barbed wire border fences by Mr Lukashenko’s troops, they risk a beating if they try to turn back. Those who find a way to make a run for it into Poland are ruthlessly pursued by border guards and soldiers in what is in effect a militarised zone. When caught they are returned to the Belarusian side of the freezing forest. Humanitarian workers are unable to administer aid, having been excluded from emergency zones set up on the Polish side of the border. Journalists are forbidden from reporting there. There is no doubt where the primary responsibility for this appallingly grim state of affairs lies. Mr Lukashenko is carrying out a threat first made in May to create a migrant crisis on European borders. The Belarusian state has waived tourist visa requirements, facilitated overnight stays in Minsk hotels and ferried migrants to the Polish border. This appears to be an ill-conceived attempt to pressure the EU to relax sanctions imposed following the fraudulent elections of 2020 that kept Mr Lukashenko in power. It isn’t working. On Monday, the EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, announced preliminary moves towards a fifth round of sanctions, aimed at those organising the despicable exercise. Airlines and travel agencies involved in transporting migrants to Minsk will also be targeted. This is, of course, a reasonable response to Mr Lukashenko’s provocation. Europe must, as Mr Borrell put it, “stand up to the instrumentalisation of migrants for political purposes”. But this is exactly what is happening on the EU side of the divide, as well as in Minsk. Poland’s rightwing nationalist government – which has notoriously obstructed all attempts to establish a humane EU-wide asylum system – used the current crisis to pass a law allowing the pushback of migrants without consideration of asylum applications. Such refoulement is in contravention of the Geneva convention on human rights, but there has not been a murmur of dissent from Brussels. Warsaw has also committed to building a Trump-style border wall. The president of the European council, Charles Michel, visiting the Polish capital last week, declared that EU funding could legally be made available for such barriers. After an autumn of bitter argument over Poland’s illiberal disregard for EU laws and norms, Brussels and Warsaw are suddenly joined at the hip on the need to keep a few thousand frozen migrants out of the EU at any cost. Britain, keen to signal its own Fortress Europe credentials, has sent a small team of soldiers to show solidarity with the sentiment. Since the migrant crisis of 2015, Europe has collectively hardened its heart against vulnerable outsiders. The stand-off in the forest has become a litmus test of just how callous it is prepared to be. Urgent humanitarian aid and assistance is required if greater loss of life is to be avoided. Mr Lukashenko will not provide it. The EU must.Wholesale energy prices hit the second highest level in at least three years on Monday, adding pressure on suppliers struggling to secure electricity and gas at competitive rates. Low wind speeds were to blame for pushing wholesale energy prices for the peak period between 5pm and 6pm over £2,000 per megawatt hour, only the second time they have surpassed this level since 2018. The UK’s power grid was forced to turn to gas-fired power plants and coal to make up for the lack of wind power generation, a problem that has exacerbated the energy price crisis that started in August. The price surge on Monday was still below the levels reached in mid-September, when they hit £2,500 per MWh. The record wholesale prices have forced almost 20 energy suppliers to go bust since the start of September, , with more failures expected in the coming weeks. “The very high wholesale prices have caused significant distress even before winter begins,” said Anna Moss, head of consumer markets at Cornwall Insight, which compiled the data. “How suppliers fare is in the hands of wholesale trading parties, and how suppliers can manage their costs through the winter months ahead.” On Monday, gas-fired power plants were producing nearly 55% of electricity needs, up from a more typical level of 40%, while the rapidly disappearing coal sector accounted for about 3%. Wind farms accounted for just 4%, a fraction of the average of 21% supplied over the last year, according to data from the Drax Electric Insights website. Demand for energy has rocketed as economies reopen following the coronavirus pandemic, with wholesale prices also under pressure due to lower supplies from Russia to western Europe. While natural gas prices have climbed steeply, the UK’s price cap on energy bills stops companies from immediately passing those costs on to their customers. Last month, Cornwall Insight released a report estimating that energy bills could rise by as much as 30% from 1 April, when industry regulator Ofgem is set to raise the price cap to contain the crisis engulfing suppliers. • This article was amended on 16 November 2021 to remove mention of a 55-day run of coal-free power generation. That was in August 2020 rather than 2021.NHS chiefs are advising all hospitals to review their security arrangements in the wake of Sunday’s terrorist incident at Liverpool Women’s hospital, the Guardian can reveal. NHS England is finalising new guidance to send to all 213 health trusts in England, which between them provide services at more than 500 hospital sites. It will tell them to check that their security measures are adequate and also to ensure that their staff know what to do and how to stay safe if their hospital is targeted by terrorists. It is being finalised and will be sent imminently to hospital bosses, who are still taking in the implications of the taxi explosion outside Europe’s largest maternity hospital. Many hospitals have beefed up their security over the last year in response to numerous incursions by Covid deniers and anti-lockdown activists and the growing abuse of frontline staff. But Sunday’s incident has prompted NHS England to write to all trusts urging them to take any steps needed to ensure they are protected. NHS sources said they decided to act on Monday after the terror threat level in the country was upgraded to “severe”, which means that an attack is considered highly likely. However, sources stressed that security systems already in place, which include security guards and closed circuit television, were thought to be adequate already. “The point of the guidance is not [for hospitals] to go to the point of having massive security,” said one. There is no suggestion that there is a threat to hospitals in general. Another senior NHS official said: “The thought of what could have happened if the bomber had got into the hospital is frightening. It’s absolutely horrific.” Liverpool Women’s hospital has already increased its security after the incident, in which one man – a passenger in the car that exploded outside about 11am – died. It has also restricted visiting until further notice and has a cordon around it while the investigation continues. Staff at the hospital are “in a state of shock and quite scared”, one source disclosed. Another source, a doctor at the hospital, said Sunday was “a very shocking and difficult day”. Staff are also perplexed about why their hospital maycould have been targettedtargeted. “They’re not aware of any reason why the bomber would want to detonate their bomb at the hospital’s front door. Why anyone would target them isn’t clear,” a source said. Any drive to beef up security after the attack will give hospitals a dilemma. One figure in the hospital sector said: “Hospitals aren’t fortresses and shouldn’t become fortresses either. That would put people off. “They’re quite open places. You can just drive up to them. You don’t have to pass through a security gate and tell the guard why you’re there, for example. But maybe every hospital could have a front gate and people would go through that and have to be cleared to drive in. That would be a disaster for the NHS, though.” One official involved in Liverpool’s response to the attack said: “People here are stunned, shocked and appalled that a hospital would be targeted, particularly because it’s a maternity hospital.”Bringing countries back to the negotiating table with updated national plans on greenhouse gas emissions will now be the hardest task for the UK and the UN for the next year, say developing countries and climate experts. The Cop26 summit ended at the weekend with a resolution for governments to revise their targets for next year. Current national plans, called nationally determined contributions (NDCs), would result in a disastrous 2.4C of heating, according to analysis published during the Glasgow talks, which would be far above the 1.5C nations agreed to aim for. However, the Paris agreement and the Glasgow pact contain no “policing mechanisms” for ensuring that countries make pledges that are commensurate with the scale of the climate crisis. Already, Australia has said it will not update its NDC. The country is widely regarded as a laggard on climate action, though its officials in Glasgow did not publicly oppose the resolutions reached there, which included a “phase-out” of coal until it was downgraded by China and India to a “phase-down”. One developing world official told the Guardian: “[Ensuring countries increase their ambition on emissions cuts] is the challenge and in my view it’ll be just as difficult as [achieving] the Glasgow pact. It could raise the stakes for laggards.” The Paris agreement is built on “an honour system”, the official said, which makes any enforcement mechanism impossible. However, countries must publish their NDCs for scrutiny, and under the deal reached in Glasgow the UN will publish regular “synthesis reports” assessing countries’ plans against the Paris temperature goals. This will help to ensure pressure can be applied based on what countries have committed to, said the official. “We now know precisely where the onus to lead is, and countries will be called out routinely. The G20 will be in the spotlight – and a few in particular – the US, India, Brazil, China, Australia, Japan and Mexico. Civil society’s role has never been more important in the process,” they said. John Kerry, the US climate envoy, acknowledged the problem after the talks ended at the weekend. He said the US did not need to update its NDC, setting out 50% cuts in emissions by 2030, but that other countries – he did not specify which – must update theirs. He said the best way of doing so was to apply public pressure, including through the internet and social media. “This is the next big challenge,” he said. But countries that failed to engage could face “being pilloried for setting it up so people are going to die”. He added: “Countries that do not step up will be come the subject of significant focus, on the internet, social media, newspapers and TV. Everything is a matter of peer pressure. This [UN climate negotiations] process does not establish and cannot establish a police force.” To those who feel that may be too weak, he pointed to the deal reached in Glasgow, and the Paris agreement. “That [pressure] can be effective – that is what brought us to Glasgow,” he said. An EU official present at the talks added that carbon border tax adjustments could also be part of the answer, as well as political pressure. Carbon border tax adjustments would penalise high-carbon imports from countries without stringent climate targets. The official said: “You need an international political process and a push to get them to feel it’s absolutely necessary. Part of that can be countries [such as the EU member states] going ahead with policies showing how deadly serious they are, and also saying to laggards that they will need to transform to keep selling their products on the world market.” Public pressure will also play a strong role. “Part of [the answer] will be the global climate movement that’ll continue pushing leaders for more and chastising them over too little action, and part of that will be an international diplomatic effort, pushing for strong climate paragraphs in G7 and G20 [communiques], having ministerial conferences that revolve around NDCs in the run-up to Cop27. “We’ve seen this year that when leaders feel a need to commit, even China will move, and even India will set a climate neutrality date.” The UK’s presidency of Cop26 continues throughout this year, until the next conference of the parties meeting next November in Egypt. That means the government will need to play a crucial role, added Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics. “It will be difficult [to ensure countries update their NDCs as needed], given that the emissions pledges should be based on detailed analysis of what countries plan to achieve. The onus will be on the UK, which will continue to hold the presidency of the Cop, to work with all countries to make further progress,” he said. No country should think themselves exempt, he added: “As the current shortfall is a collective failure, all countries will be expected to offer more ambitious pledges. It is hoped that if the rich countries next year honour their commitment to mobilise $100bn a year for developing countries, they [poor countries] will be able to offer stronger emissions cuts. But as ever, the rich countries must lead by example and accelerate their efforts to reduce emissions.” Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said the government must show leadership by cancelling plans for new oilfields and a potential new coalmine, and reverse the cuts to overseas aid that many observers said had damaged the UK’s standing at Cop26. A key pledge by developed countries to provide $100bn a year of climate finance to the poor world was not met. Starmer said: “Britain has particular responsibility as Cop president. First, we need to reassemble the Paris climate coalition and build trust with the developing world. But cutting overseas aid does not build trust, it destroys it. “So, will the prime minister immediately reverse the cuts? Second, there can be no free passes for major emitters. Including our friends. We are doing a trade deal with Australia, where we have allowed them to drop Paris temperature commitments. That was a mistake. Will the prime minister put it right?”Whether documenting the crackling raw energy of Auckland’s fledgling punk rock scene in the 1970s or the hedonistic glamour of Karangahape Road’s queer culture, renowned New Zealand photographer Fiona Clark’s vibrant photos evocatively capture people and personalities in subcultures many people wouldn’t even know existed. Seen as too confronting and radical by the New Zealand art world in the 1970s, Clark’s work was met with resistance from major art dealers who told her “we’re not handling your work”, and some of her images mysteriously disappeared from the Auckland art gallery. But Clark has never let this distract her from her singular vision. Tāmaki Makaurau Auckland filmmaker Lula Cucchiara was fascinated by Clark’s exquisitely produced photo book, Living with Aids, which documents the devastating and quiet journey of four of her friends, and wondered: “Why is Fiona not famous for her images? Why is it that not many people know about her photos?” She decided to make a documentary examining Clark’s remarkable life and work and the result, Fiona Clark: Unafraid, screens as part of this year’s Whānau Mārama New Zealand International Film Festival. Using photography to capture her friends and community in ravishing colour, Clark’s images capture Auckland’s burgeoning gay liberation movement and the dynamic queer, homosexual and transgender scene. The common thread in her work is the documentation of hidden cultures. There’s a strong sense, though, that instead of photographing her subjects from a distance, she is documenting from the inside. Clark has maintained close friendships with her subjects decades after photographing them, and in Unafraid, some of them affirm what an ally she was during a time of hostility, when men were still being arrested for being homosexual. Born in 1954, Clark grew up in a farming family in the small rural Taranaki town of Inglewood. She says her time there taught her about survival as a young woman. “It was very violent. We had two murders at high school when I was there. It’s not a nice place. “But it did teach me about survival. I learned to run pretty fast!” At Auckland’s Elam School of Fine Arts in the early 1970s, Clark found that colour photography was frowned upon and associated with commercial studio and wedding photography, not contemporary art. “But I didn’t see the world in black and white. We were flaming creatures who needed to be seen in colour,” she says. “Showing a colour image in 1975, people were outraged and they thought they were garish.” Clark learned to develop her own colour film after friends who had summer jobs at Kodak informed her that in a form of censorship, the company covertly destroyed any images they saw as subversive. “We knew that if we sent off colour film [to be developed] it would be very rare to get it back.” In 1977, when Clarke was 23, she was involved in a horrific motor vehicle accident. All the bones in her face were shattered and her jaw was broken. In Unafraid, a friend bluntly describes the facial impact as being “like a teaspoon hitting an egg”. One of Clark’s eyes was fully inverted and she required bypass work on her arteries and brain. “I don’t underestimate that. I’m lucky to be alive,” she says. “When people at the hospital spend that much time looking after you and you realise the amount of resources that are used to keep you alive, it’s extraordinary.” But in her staunch manner, it wasn’t unusual for Clark to catch the train immediately after treatment in the plastic surgery unit at Middlemore hospital to take photos capturing the nervous energy of legendary central Auckland nightclub Zwines, the heady hotbed of Auckland’s punk scene, where groups like the Idle Idols (fronted by fellow Elam student and Clark’s friend Paul Gibbs) played. Since 1975, Clark has lived in a former dairy factory in the small Taranaki town of Tikorangi. Inviting the viewer into her home in Unafraid, we see Clark surrounded by boxes and piles of ephemera and archival material that must have been a goldmine for Cucchiara as a documentary filmmaker. While she says the documentary took her only eight days to film, editing it took two-and-a-half years. She was meticulous about finding the right images and footage, right down to making sure the colours were right. Cucchiara navigates the perfect balance between showing Clark’s images, home and personality in a way that is unobtrusive but still gives an intimate sense of the woman behind the work. Cucchiara says she was wary of the film being too “archival”. “I just wanted to make it very earnest. It’s about showing a part of New Zealand history that has been erased.” Clark says the only thing frustrating her is the increasingly failing sight in her one good eye, in which she developed a macular hole five years ago. Despite that, she has never stopped taking photographs. “It sort of changes your depth of field, you don’t have straight lines any more. But it doesn’t matter, I know they’re there. It just means I see slightly differently now.”West Ham are urgently seeking clarification from Uefa after their supporters were banned from attending their team’s Europa League away tie against Rapid Vienna next week. The east London club have been left “surprised and disappointed” after Uefa punished them for the crowd trouble that marred their 2-2 draw at Genk on 4 November. European football’s governing body accused West Ham’s supporters of crowd disturbances and throwing objects during the match in Belgium. The charge has been upheld and West Ham, who are top of Group H, are not happy with the lack of notice from Uefa. They have sold out their allocation of 1,700 tickets for the trip to Vienna on 25 November, but supporters who have already made travel arrangements will now be banned from attending the game. West Ham, who have also been fined just under £25,500 (€30,000) for the disturbances and another £3,817 (€4,500) for the throwing of objects, said: “The club are urgently seeking clarification from Uefa, particularly given the extremely short notice of the sanction, which will impact our supporters who have already bought tickets and made arrangements to travel to Austria for our match at Rapid Vienna in just over a week. “We are surprised to receive these sanctions and disappointed for the fans who have behaved impeccably and supported the team throughout and will now be unable to travel to the next away Europa League fixture. The club has requested the full written reasons from Uefa regarding these sanctions and have asked them to expedite our request given that further delay could impact supporters once again. “The club fully appreciates that supporters will have booked return travel and accommodation in Austria and are stressing this in our dialogue with Uefa. We will update supporters as soon as we are able to with further information.” Uefa said: “The Uefa Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body (CEDB) has announced today the following decision for the group stage match KRC Genk vs West Ham United FC (2:2), played on 4 November in Belgium. “Charges against West Ham United FC: Crowd disturbances, Art. 16(2)(h) of the Uefa Disciplinary Regulations (DR), throwing of objects, Art. 16(2)(b) DR. Decision: The CEDB has decided to fine West Ham United FC €30,000 and ban the sale of tickets to its away supporters for the next one (1) Uefa competition match, for crowd disturbances, (and) to fine West Ham United FC €4,500 for throwing of objects.” West Ham are in a commanding position in their group with two matches left. They will secure their place in the last 16 if they earn a point in Vienna.A Labour MP has been warned by parliamentary clerks not to make reference in parliament of the UK government’s £400m debt to Iran for fear of prejudicing court proceedings, the MP representing Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and her husband has been told by the parliamentary clerks. Tulip Siddiq, Labour MP for Hampstead and Kilburn, has a debate scheduled for Westminster Hall in parliament on Tuesday concerning the continued detention of her constituent Zaghari-Ratcliffe. It is widely assumed that the UK’s non-payment of the debt has contributed to her continued detention in Tehran for five and a half years. Siddiq was shocked to be told for the first time that the issue of the government debt was sub judice. She has raised the issue numerous times before in the Commons and never been given this restriction on what she is entitled to say in a case that has been deferred numerous times. The high court is due to hear whether a former UK government arms trading subsidiary, International Military Services (IMS), is required to pay a £400m debt to the Iranian ministry of defence (Modsaf) as ordered previously by an international arbitration tribunal. No date has been set for a fresh hearing. British ministers in letters to the lawyers of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe have acknowledged that the debt is owed. The clerks wrote to Siddiq saying: “We are aware that there are legal proceedings between Modsaf and IMS Ltd and have ascertained that the case is still before the high court. Under the House’s sub judice resolution (the purpose of which, as you may know, is to avoid any risk of prejudice to matters that are before the courts), civil proceedings are active and sub judice from the point at hearing date has been set down, until judgment or discontinuance. This means that they should not be referenced in questions, motions or debates.” The clerks said she was entitled to discuss only whether interest was payable on the debt since that issue had been settled in court. The clerks added: “Please note that the separate appeal by Modsaf for entitlement to interest is not sub judice (having been rejected by the supreme court in November 2020) and therefore may be raised.” The clerks then demanded to know what she intended to say. “Please could you confirm whether you are planning to reference the above case in your debate? If you are planning to do so, please let us know as soon as possible so we can provide further advice.” A copy of the clerks’ note was given to the husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Richard Ratcliffe, who said: “I find it staggering that even now the government is trying to block debate in parliament about its debt to Iran, and is still hiding behind the fig leaf of a moribund court case that hasn’t happened for two years, which ministers told parliament is now settled. The preference of this government to hide its policies and choices from scrutiny, and to leave innocent people to suffer their consequences, remains remarkable, and ominous. “It is time the government starting explaining itself, and stopped hiding away: why do Nazanin’s and the others lives matter so little that they can be left hostage for years over the government’s debt? Why is parliament not allowed to ask the government to explain? What really is the blockage here?” Ratcliffe was speaking from hospital where he is being treated after 21 days on hunger strike in a bid to secure his wife’s release. He ended his hunger on Saturday. He said he had no doubt that the government was behind the warning letter from the clerks. Siddiq was likely to raise why the debt had not been paid and ask whether US sanctions were a problem for UK banks and what efforts had been to ensure the debt was paid by other means such as humanitarian aid. Conversations were under way to see if she could be given a waiver to discuss the debt. The clerks’ letter came despite peers discussing the debt for more than a half an hour on Monday. The Foreign Office minister, Lord Goldsmith, drew gasps when he told peers payment of the £400m debt owed by the UK to Iran would undoubtedly be seen as payment for a hostage, something that would not be in the government’s short- or long-term interest. Goldsmith also repeatedly said the undisputed UK debt was owed to pre-revolutionary Iran, leaving it open that the government did not believe the debt was owed to the current regime. Goldsmith was confronted by senior legal figures who challenged him to accept that the payment of the debt was not to pay a ransom, but to pay a debt that the UK government had been ordered to pay by an international court of arbitration. He was in greatest difficulty when the former lord chief justice Lord Judge asked: “Do we owe money to Iran? If we do, why is it not being paid?” Goldsmith said the UK was continuing to explore options to resolve the case.Counter-terror police have named the man they believe to have died in the blast as Emad al Swealmeen. He was 32. Detective chief inspector Andrew Meeks said: “Our inquiries are very much ongoing but at this stage we strongly believe that the deceased is 32-year-old Emad al Swealmeen. Al Swealmeen is connected to both the Rutland Avenue and Sutcliffe Street addresses where searches are still ongoing. “We believe he lived at the Sutcliffe Street address for some time and had recently rented the Rutland Avenue address. “Our focus is the Rutland Avenue address where we have continued to recover significant items. “We continue to appeal for any information about this incident and now that we have released his name any information that the public may have about Al Swealmeen no matter how small may be of great assistance to us.’’ Anyone who has any information should call on 0161 856 1027 quoting Liverpool Women’s hospital incident. Details can be passed to the independent charity Crimestoppers anonymously on 0800 555 111. Officers investigating the explosion at Liverpool Women’s hospital have said they carried out a controlled explosion at Sefton Park in Liverpool as part of their counter-terrorism policing investigation. The statement from Greater Manchester police added: “There is believed to be no wider risk to the public and the investigation continues.” Here are the main things we’ve learned today about the Liverpool attack. Police this morning declared the hospital blast a terrorist incident. A fourth 20-year-old man was arrested in addition to the three men aged 18, 26 and 29 arrested on Sunday. They are all being interviewed by police today. Police believe they know the identity of the deceased passenger but have not yet revealed it. They think he built the explosive device in the taxi, but they are uncertain as to a motive or why the Liverpool Women’s hospital was chosen. The arrested men are believed to be “associates” of the taxi passenger. The UK terrorism threat level was increased to severe, meaning an attack is “highly likely”. Government sources say this should not be taken as an indication of any further specific live threat. The taxi driver was named as David Perry. He has now been released from hospital. His wife, Rachel Perry, said he is “doing OK but is extremely sore”. Official sources have told the PA Media news agency the decision to raise the terror threat level should not be taken as an indication of any further specific live threat. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, paid tribute to NHS staff at Liverpool Women’s hospital who were affected by the explosion outside the building. PA reported that Javid said in the House of Commons: “This is an ongoing investigation into what has now been declared a terrorist incident by police so it wouldn’t be appropriate for me to comment in any detail. “But I would like to take a moment to express my thanks to all of the NHS staff and emergency serves who have responded to the incident. “They have shown the utmost professionalism in the most difficult of circumstances, and my thoughts, and I know the thoughts of the whole house, are with them and anyone that has been affected.” Here’s the full text of Johnson’s brief comments on the terrorist incident in Liverpool at the coronavirus press conference, which has now ended: I have just chaired a meeting of the government’s emergency COBR committee following the sickening attack outside Liverpool Women’s hospital yesterday. My thoughts remain with all those affected, and, on behalf of the whole country, I want to pay tribute to the emergency services who responded as always with such speed and professionalism. The police have now confirmed this is being treated as a terrorist attack and while the investigation continues at pace, you will understand that I can’t comment on the details of the case or its motivation. But it is a stark reminder of the need for us all to remain utterly vigilant, and the independent Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre are today raising the UK’s threat level from substantial to severe, meaning an attack is highly likely. But what yesterday showed above all is that the British people will never be cowed by terrorism. We will never give in to those who seek to divide us with senseless acts of violence, and our freedoms and our way of life will always prevail. In a statement, the home secretary, Priti Patel, said: “First and foremost, my thoughts are with the people of Liverpool following yesterday’s terrible incident, which clearly has had a very significant impact across the community. “Alongside that, I want to give my personal thanks and the thanks of the government to our emergency services, and the police in particular. “I’ve been in touch with the chief constable and other emergency service workers and our armed forces who have been part of the operational work that is on the ground. “The prime minister has this afternoon just chaired a COBR meeting, which I attended. “First of all, the incident has been declared as a terrorist incident. The police have now declared that. Secondly, the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre (Jtac) are now increasing the United Kingdom’s threat level from substantial to severe, and that is because what we saw yesterday is the second incident in a month. “Now, of course, that means we continue to work with our world class security, intelligence and policing services and representatives from those agencies. “There is a live investigation taking place right now. They will need the time and the space to do the work that they are doing in terms of investigating the incident. But, of course, we as a government, I as home secretary, continue to work with everyone when it comes to the security of our country and making sure that we are taking all the necessary steps required.” Asked at the press conference how concerned the public should be about the elevated terror threat level, Boris Johnson said “that simply reflects the number of attacks we’ve seen in the last few weeks and months”. He added: “Those gradations bump around and what we’re really saying to the public as a result of what happened in Liverpool is that they always have to be vigilant.” The wife of David Perry, the taxi driver who escaped the explosion, has said her husband is “doing OK but is extremely sore”, adding that it was an “utter miracle” that he managed to escape. The Telegraph reports the comments from Rachel Perry, who said: “I would just like to thank each and every one of you who have messaged asking how David is. “He is doing OK but is extremely sore and just trying to process what’s happened. “There are a lot of rumours flying around about him being a hero and locking the passenger inside the car, but the truth of the matter is, he is without doubt lucky to be alive. “The explosion happened whilst he was in the car and how he managed to escape is an utter miracle. “He certainly had some guardian angels looking over him. “I would like to thank the amazing staff, doctors and nurses at the hospital, you were all amazing and also the police officers and detectives who have been looking after us. “We’re so thankful.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, said the attack had had a “very significant impact across the community” in Liverpool and her thoughts were with people in the city. PA reported that Patel told broadcasters: “Alongside that, I want to give my personal thanks, and the thanks of the government, to our emergency services, the police in particular. I’ve been in touch with the chief constable, other emergency service workers as well, and our armed forces who’ve been part of the operational work that’s on the ground. “Now, of course, that means we continue to work with our world-class security, intelligence and policing services. “There’s a live investigation taking place right now. They will need the time, the space, to do the work that they are doing in terms of investigating the incident. “But of course, we as a government, I as home secretary, continue to work with everyone when it comes to the security of our country and making sure that we’re taking all the necessary steps required.” The “context” of there being two terrorist incidents in the space of a month was “really important”, she added. She said: “I should just conclude my remarks by saying that our security and intelligence services prevent all sorts of acts, day in, day out. “And of course, they understand the landscape, they see context, they see all sorts of things that keep our country safe and secure every single day and that work will continue.” An update from PA reporters on the ground at the house raided in Liverpool where the suspects were arrested: A police cordon remains in place on Rutland Avenue near Sefton Park in Liverpool. A crime scene investigator wearing a white suit was seen going in and out of a property in the street and a number of police vehicles were at the scene. Police helped to carry shopping deliveries to properties within the cordon. Speaking briefly on the terrorist incident in Liverpool at the start of a televised press conference on the Covid, Johnson said: “My thoughts are with them all”. He added: “I can’t comment on the details of the case or its motivation but it’s a stark reminder of the need for us all to remain utterly vigilant. “What yesterday showed above all is that the British people will never be cowed by terrorism. “Our way of life will always prevail.” Here’s some analysis from the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, on the decision to raise the threat level to terrorism to severe: The threat to Britain from terrorism has been raised to severe – meaning that an attack is now deemed highly likely – in the aftermath of the explosion outside Liverpool Women’s Hospital. The decision was taken by the Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre on Monday, Whitehall sources said, and it represents an upgrade of one notch from the previous threat level, substantial. The threat level had been at the lower level since 4 February following a “significant reduction” in the momentum of attacks in Europe, including those seen in Austria and France between September and November 2020. The decision reflects the fact that two terror attacks have taken place in the past month; the other being the killing of the Conservative MP Sir David Amess at his constituency surgery in Leigh-on-sea, Essex. The Muslim Council of Britain has shared a statement praising the bravery of David Perry, the Liverpool taxi driver whose swift response is thought to have possibly prevented a wider atrocity in the city. Zara Mohammed, the secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, said: “Nothing justifies this reprehensible act, and we praise the quick action of David Perry who prevented a terrorist attack. The explosion took place outside Liverpool Women’s hospital, which holds a special place for the people of Liverpool. Many Muslims work at the hospital and the institution is a neighbour to one of the city’s largest mosques. This is an attack on all of us and the values we all hold dear. We thank the emergency services for their swift and ongoing response to the attack. “Liverpool has a special place in the history of the British Muslims, being home to one of the earliest Muslim communities in Victorian England. We join Liverpool’s mosques and Islamic centres as they pray for peace and calm in the city.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, said the terrorism threat level had been raised because there had been two attacks in the space of a month. Speaking to broadcasters, she said: “The Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre, Jtac, are now increasing the United Kingdom’s threat level from substantial to severe. And there’s a reason for that, and that reason is because what we saw yesterday is the second incident in a month.” The UK terrorism threat level has increased to severe following the Liverpool Women’s hospital blast on Sunday, meaning an attack is “highly likely”, a government source said. Severe is the second highest threat level. PA Media has provided a useful summary of everything we know so far: The explosion happened inside a taxi outside the hospital moments before 11am on Remembrance Sunday. Emergency services were on the scene within minutes and one man, the passenger in the taxi, was pronounced dead. The driver of the taxi, named locally as David Perry, was injured but managed to escape and has since been released from hospital. He picked up the passenger in the Rutland Avenue area of Liverpool, roughly a 10-minute drive from Liverpool Women’s hospital, said Russ Jackson, the assistant chief constable from counter-terrorism policing north-west. Officers said an explosion came from within the car as it approached the drop-off point. Police have declared the event a “terrorist incident” and said the proximity in location and time to Remembrance services was a “line of inquiry”, though officers cannot draw a connection “at this time”. Officers say “inquiries indicate that an improvised explosive device has been manufactured” and are working under the assumption the passenger built it in the taxi. They believe they know the identity of the passenger but have not confirmed it publicly. Detectives are unsure what the motivation behind the attack was, the reason for the device’s “sudden explosion” or why the passenger asked to be taken to the hospital. Three men aged 21, 26 and 29 were detained on Sunday in Sutcliffe Street in the nearby Kensington area of the city. A fourth man, aged 20, was arrested on Monday, also in the Kensington area. All were arrested under section 41 of the Terrorism Act, under which officers can detain terror suspects without a warrant, and will be interviewed on Monday. Two addresses, one in Sutcliffe Street and another in Rutland Avenue, have been searched, with the second address yielding “significant items”, Jackson said. Eight families were evacuated from near the Rutland Avenue address and a cordon is in place. Boris Johnson praised the taxi driver for acting with “incredible presence of mind and bravery”, while the mayor of Liverpool, Joanne Anderson, lauded the driver for his “heroic efforts”. Liverpool Women’s hospital said visiting access had been restricted “until further notice” and there was an increased security and police presence on the site. More from the neighbours interviewed by PA reporters: Matthew Heightman, 26, who lives opposite the raided house in Sutcliffe Street, Liverpool, said: “Two of the men were marched out at gunpoint and they had them up against the wall. “There wasn’t any kind of struggle, they just walked out of the front. “The people living there had not long moved in, maybe weeks or months.” More from the Guardian’s Manchester-based reporter Maya Wolfe-Robinson: Assistant Chief Constable Russ Jackson said the taxi driver, David Perry, who was “understandably very shook up” when interviewed by counter terror officers, has now been released from hospital after he was treated for his injuries. There is no suggestion that he told police he had any indication that anything was amiss during the 10-minute journey. He picked up the passenger from Rutland Avenue, who asked to be taken to Liverpool Women’s hospital, according to police. Jackson said police had “attributed” the taxi passenger to both the addresses where officers were currently searching but were uncertain which address he lived at. “We have got significant items in one of the addresses,” Jackson said. The Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, has spoken to an intelligence expert about Sunday’s incident: A former military intelligence officer told the Guardian he believes Liverpool Women’s hospital “had an extremely lucky escape” because the explosive device in the taxi “clearly didn’t go off as the terrorist intended”. Philip Ingram, a former colonel, has studied CCTV videos of the blast circulating on line and concluded that, if fully detonated, a bomb that close to the hospital would have “would have blown the windows out, bowed the roof [of the car] and the glass wave would likely have killed both and put hospital windows out”. The most likely explosives, the former intelligence expert added, are hard to make work because “unless you know what you are doing then they don’t go bang”. The film appears to show some initial pressure build up in the car, but it was not significant, as the driver of the taxi was able to open the door and escape a few seconds later. Police believe the explosive device was built by the male passenger in the taxi, who was killed in the blast. “Our enquiries indicate that an improvised explosive device has been manufactured and our assumption so far is that this was built by the passenger in the taxi,” said Assistant Chief Constable Russ Jackson. Improvised homemade explosives, such as TATP, can often be unstable, and it is possible that it could have been set off by a knock or extra heat, Ingram added. It is not clear if the hospital was the intended target of the bomb, but police have said the passenger asked to be driven there. Army ordinance disposal officers were on the scene of the incident to assist police. Ingram said they will already have been able to determine using chemical residue testing what the nature of the explosive was. The last terrorist bombing incident in the UK was in 2017. An improvised explosive device was detonated in September that year on a packed tube train at Parsons Green during the morning rush hour. It misfired but nevertheless injured 22 people. Reporters from PA have been speaking to neighbours of the arrested suspects. Neighbour Sharon Cullen said she thought four men aged about in their 20s lived at the address in Sutcliffe Street. She said: “I don’t know any of them but one them always seemed to be on a PC in his bedroom.” Cullen said she and her husband, 22-year-old daughter and two-year-old grandson were evacuated from their home at about 9.45pm on Sunday. She said: “The police pounded on my door and an officer said ‘we need to get you out of the house as soon as possible’. “They said ‘whatever is going on at the back of the house, it could blow the block’. “It was really frightening.” Boris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting on Monday afternoon in response to the terrorist attack at Liverpool Women’shospital, Downing Street has said. Asked on BBC News about the risk of people producing homemade bombs, Aldworth said the police “have become very good at reporting suspicious purchases of flammable materials”. He said it is now much more difficult to make large explosive devices, such as those made in the past by the IRA, since “there are now rules around the sales and storage” of chemicals such as farms fertilisers. Instead, increasingly terrorists use a large number of people to buy lots of small purchases to circumvent the rules, he said. Nick Aldworth, the UK’s former counter-terrorism national co-ordinator, is analysing what police and security investigators will be focusing on that moment. He told BBC News that what he had seen suggested it was either a “a low yield explosive” or “an intentionally incendiary advice or a much greater explosive that has failed to detonate”. He added that lots of these devices are unstable and can cause fires without being detonated. He added that “despite the intense fire that followed on from that explosion there are likely to be residual items of evidence” for example shrapnel or nuts and bolts. There is also likely to be evidence to the addresses where the suspects were based. After the Manchester Arena bombing, investigators found chemicals used to make the device, which enabled them to determine the size of device and whether there may be any other devices circulating, he said. He added that people should be especially vigilant in the move to wards Christmas, and that he hoped that this incident had reminded people of the threat of terrorism, which is currently at the “substantial” level in the UK. More from PA on the arrest of the fourth suspect: A cordon remains in place outside a terraced house in Sutcliffe Street, Kensington. A grey Mondeo car parked adjacent is also taped off as uniformed officers continue to guard the front and side alley of the property. Shortly after 9.10am a young man was put into the back of a police car outside the address. Assistant Chief Constable Russ Jackson, from counter-terrorism policing north-west, said the arrested men were believed to be “associates” of the taxi passenger, PA Media reports. He said officers were looking at his associates, his telephone records and purchases he may have made. He said police had “attributed” the taxi passenger to both the addresses where officers were currently searching but were uncertain which address he lived at. “We have got significant items in one of the addresses,” Jackson said. Here’s the full report on what we know about the situation so far, from three Guardian reporters, Jamie Grierson, Vikram Dodd and Maya Wolfe-Robinson. The piece will continue to be updated throughout the day. Here’s the response so far from Boris Johnson, reported by the Guardian political correspondent Aubrey Allegretti: The prime minister praised the “incredible presence of mind and bravery” of a taxi driver injured in the blast at Liverpool Women’s, hospital which has been declared a terrorist incident by police. Speaking during a visit to a vaccine centre in east London on Monday, he told journalists: “This is an ongoing investigation so I can’t comment on the details or exactly what type of incident it was, what type of crime it may have been. “But it does look as though the taxi driver in question did behave with incredible presence of mind and bravery. “I’ve got to say this is something that is an ongoing investigation. I think it would be premature to say much more than that.” Speaking to BBC News, the Liverpool mayor, Joanne Anderson, said she had driven past the Liverpool women’s hospital this morning, where the incident took place yesterday, and saw “plenty of police presence”. She said: “I’m pretty sure they’re there to reassure the community, the police are doing everything they can to make sure we’re all safe.” She added “most people are able to get about their business in the city”, but noted “we must remain calm but vigilant after this incident”. She also praised the quick response from emergency services. “I can’t thank our emergency services enough, fire and police on the scene within minutes, arrests made quickly yesterday, people working through the night and everyone’s on standby ready to take action.” Asked about the taxi driver, she said: “What an awful experience and jumping out of the taxi he’s lucky to have escaped in the way he did. it doesn’t bear thinking about what could have happened. “I think it’s really important that we support him in recovering. It’s really important this man is able to recover from what must have been a horrific shock yesterday.” Here’s some extra detail on the incident from the Guardian’s crime correspondent, Vikram Dodd: Police investigating the explosion and fireball outside a Liverpool hospital believe they have found materials linked to the explosive device used, after a series of dramatic raids and searches. Investigators believe a suspected improvised explosive device caused the fireball and explosion shortly after the taxi pulled up outside the entrance of the Liverpool women’s hospital. The explosion at around 11am on Sunday led to a series of armed raids and searches, during which materials consistent with the production of an IED were discovered in Liverpool. Some residents were evacuated. The cab driver is believed to have been in the vehicle at the time of the explosion and runs away after the device is set off. The UK terrorism threat level remains at substantial, meaning an attack is likely. Jackson added that emergency services quickly attended the scene and army ordinance disposal had since confirmed the area was safe. “It quickly remained apparent the passenger remained in the vehicle and was deceased,” he said, adding: “We believe we know the identity of passenger but cannot confirm at this time.” He said: “Following discussions with ordinance disposal officers, we are able to confirm that this is being treated as the ignition of an explosive device. Our enquiries also indicate that the device was brought into the cab by the passenger. The assumption at present is the explosive device was built by passenger in taxi, but that the reason it was taken to the women’s hospital was unknown, as is reason for sudden explosion. He said: “We’re aware remembrance events were a short while away from hospital when the ignition occurred. We cannot draw connection but it’s a line of inquiry we are pursuing. Our inquiries will seek to understand how device was built, motivation for incident and to understand if anyone else was involved in it.” Kennedy said: “I completely understood communities are concerned, I can assure officers are on ground providing high visibility support. Incidents such as this are very rare but I’d ask people to remain calm but also be vigilant and alert. “There is no specific threat to the area, but I have asked for patrols to be increased right across Merseyside. “There’s been lots of speculation on social media and false reports of further incidents. I’d urge members of public to rely on official information that will be released on our Twitter feed and website. “Officers from counter terrorism north west are leading the investigation supported by Merseyside police.” Jackson has also said that MI5 is involved. Kennedy urged people to contact 999 with any concerns. Police have declared the explosion at Liverpool Women’s hospital a terrorist incident in a news conference. We heard from Merseyside’s chief constable, Serena Kennedy, and Russ Jackson from counter-terrorism policing north west. Jackson said a fourth 20-year-old man has been arrested following the incident yesterday. This follows the arrest of three men aged 18, 26 and 29 who were arrested in Sutcliffe Street, in the central area of Kensington in Liverpool under the Terrorism Act. They will all be interviewed later today by counter-terrorism detectives. He confirmed that this was now a terrorism incident. Jackson also confirmed that the taxi driver picked up a passenger at 11am on Sunday, who asked to be taken to Liverpool women’s hospital, 10 minutes away. At drop-off, an explosion occurred within the car. He said: “Remarkably, the taxi driver escaped from the cab. He’s being treated for injuries he sustained and is now released from hospital.” The Liverpool mayor, Joanne Anderson, has praised the taxi driver for minimising the impact of the disaster in an interview on BBC news. She said: “The taxi driver in his heroic efforts has managed to divert what could have been an absolutely awful disaster. “We knew the taxi driver had stood out; the taxi driver locked the doors. “Our thanks go to him.” She also thanked the emergency services for supporting residents following the incidents on Twitter. The police are expected to give a press conference shortly on their investigation into the blast in the taxi in Liverpool on Sunday. In the meantime, Kim Johnson, the MP for Liverpool Riverside, is speaking to BBC News. She said she understood that “counsellors and police will update us on what’s happening because it’s an ongoing investigation, there hasn’t been a declaration it was a terrorist attack.” She added: “The local authorities need to be commended for responding so quickly and professionally to the explosion that took place yesterday “It was a shocking incident and things could have been a lot worse but the car did receive a lot of fire damage but there’s little evidence to suggest there was a lot of bomb damage. “It was a very concerning and very scary incident, coinciding with the remembrance event today, but there’s lots of speculation about what happened and we need to allow the services to conduct their investigations and not get involved with misinformation.” Rachel Hall here leading the blog for today to keep you updated with all developments related to the Liverpool taxi fire as they happen. If I’ve missed anything, please do drop me a line at rachel.hall@theguardian.com, or you can reach me on Twitter. A taxi exploded outside Liverpool Women’s hospital in the UK on Sunday morning, killing one and injuring another. Here’s what we know so far: A taxi exploded in flames outside Liverpool Women’s hospital in Liverpool city centre shortly before 11am on Sunday. A male passenger inside the vehicle was killed in the blast and declared dead at the scene, Merseyside police confirmed. Police are working to establish his identity. The driver managed to escape before the flames spread and is in hospital in a stable condition. Following police raids, three men – aged 29, 26 and 21 – have been arrested in the Kensington area of the city under the Terrorism Act, police said in a statement on Sunday night. In the hours after the blast, a heavy police presence was reported at three streets in the city – Sutcliffe and Boaler streets in Kensington, and Rutland Avenue in Sefton Park. Fire crews and police officers wearing vests marked “negotiator” were seen at Rutland Avenue and cordons remain in place. Police said they were “keeping an open mind” as to what caused the explosion. Investigators believe it is unlikely it was a fault with the vehicle and are investigating whether the timing of the explosion, when the Remembrance Sunday silence was due to begin at the cathedral nearby, was deliberate. The investigation is being led by counter-terrorism police who are being assisted by Merseyside police and MI5.England are preparing for Saturday’s World Cup final rematch against South Africa without their captain Owen Farrell and facing a front-row crisis after Eddie Jones was dealt a huge double injury blow on Monday. Both Farrell and Jamie George have been ruled out with ankle and knee injuries respectively, leaving Jones without his chief lieutenant and severely depleted front-row ranks with South Africa, by contrast, bringing their infamous “Bomb Squad” to Twickenham. Both players are due to see specialists this week after suffering their injuries during last weekend’s 32-15 win over Australia, with Farrell limping off in considerable pain in the second half. Having had to isolate and miss the victory over Tonga earlier this month, the latest blow rounds off a miserable autumn for the 30-year-old. His absence suggests Jones will revert to a centre pairing of Manu Tuilagi and Henry Slade, with Marcus Smith continuing at fly-half, but Farrell’s influence on the side will be sorely missed. It will be only the 10th match in Jones’s reign in which Farrell has not appeared and without him Courtney Lawes is the favourite for the captaincy, having assumed the role against Tonga. George’s absence, meanwhile, makes Jones’s front-row problem all the more acute. Jamie Blamire, who has scored six tries in his four England appearances, is now in line for the No 2 jersey but the 23-year-old has made just three Premiership starts. Jack Singleton, who has three replacement appearances for England, has been called into the squad while the uncapped Nic Dolly could also provide hooker cover against the Springboks. Jones also has problems at loosehead prop after Ellis Genge and Joe Marler contracted Covid-19 last week, forcing both players into isolation and out of the Australia match. Genge cannot face South Africa but Marler is due to resume training on Friday just 24 hours before England host the Springboks. The 21-year-old Bevan Rodd, who made his debut against the Wallabies, is standing by for another start while Jones has added the uncapped Harry Elrington of Gloucester to his squad to provide cover along with Trevor Davison. Tellingly, however, Mako Vunipola, who has 67 England caps and a further nine Test appearances for the British &amp; Irish Lions, has not been called upon. The 30-year-old, along with brother Billy, has been omitted from the squad this season and Jones made clear last week that he was taking the side in a different direction with the 2023 World Cup in mind. The upshot is that Jones must select an understrength front row against one of the most powerful scrummaging sides in the world. England were outgunned in that department in the 2019 World Cup final, after losing Kyle Sinckler to a head injury in the third minute, and ultimately succumbed 32-12 in Yokohama. Highlighting the difference in experience, South Africa have started Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi and Trevor Nyakane in their two autumn victories against Wales and Scotland before replacing all three simultaneously with the equally formidable Steven Kitshoff, Malcolm Marx and Vincent Koch either at half-time or soon after. The tactic has led to the Springboks reinforcements earning their “Bomb Squad” nickname. “We work as two front rows, we work hard in training,” said Kitshoff. “They are a great fun, they bring a lot of intensity in that first half, they go flat out every scrum, it’s do or die, every scrum is a massive battle. For us it’s about trying to stay on a par with them and even try and lift the intensity a little bit if we can. “Being part of the Bomb Squad, there’s a lot of pride but it’s the team’s plan and we’re willing to just execute whatever is best for the team because the Springboks team comes first. We know our role, we know what we need to do, everything is planned out during the week and we understand our job and responsibility and we give it everything we can.” Meanwhile, England’s Maro Itoje has been named as one of the four nominees for World Rugby’s player of the year but the Springboks are conspicuously absent from the shortlist. Itoje is joined by the Australian duo Samu Kerevi and Michael Hooper as well as France’s scrum-half Antoine Dupont despite South Africa’s series win over the Lions and victory over the All Blacks in the Rugby Championship. Jacques Nienaber is also missing from the coach of the year shortlist. Elsewhere, Ireland will face Argentina this weekend without their captain Johnny Sexton who suffered an ankle and knee injury against New Zealand and is set to be sidelined for up to six weeks.It’s now 3-0 to the UK in terms of Anglo-Dutch members of the FTSE 100 index picking a single location in which to unify their corporate structures and tax domiciles. Shell is following publisher Relx, the old Reed Elsevier, which simplified in London so quietly, almost nobody noticed, and Unilever, where there was an almighty fuss because a Dutch-dominated board initially wanted to go wholly Dutch. The equivalent of a pitch invasion by UK shareholders, and then a replay, was required for the consumer goods giant to give the nod to the UK. So is Shell’s decision a “clear vote of confidence in the British economy,” as Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, claimed? Not really. One doubts Shell’s directors spent any time pondering the state of the UK economy. It’s really a question of Anglo-Dutch multinationals’ frustration with the Dutch system of applying a 15% withholding tax on dividends. Back in 2005, the last time Shell tweaked its structure by incorporating in the UK with Dutch tax residency and two classes of share, it was probably assumed that the Dutch divi tax would eventually be abolished. If it had been, Shell’s A shares, which are liable and mostly held by Dutch investors, and the B shares, which are free of charges, could have been unified long before now. But the withholding tax still stands and has become a more pressing complication given the sums Shell is currently throwing at buying in B shares, the preferred target for the same tax reason. On top of its regular distributions, the company will have $7bn (£5.2bn) to return next year from the proceeds of disposals. If half the pool of capital is effectively off limits, there is an effective speed limit of $2.5bn a quarter, which Shell could conceivably wish to exceed in future in an age of corporate demergers and disposals. Having one class of share makes life less clunky. Unilever made a parallel point about freedom of manoeuvre in deal-making, but so, Kwarteng should note, did giant FTSE 100 miner BHP Billiton when it concluded that Australia is the place for it to be. It’s horses for courses, and London doesn’t always win these technical stand-offs. None of which will do much to soothe anger in the Netherlands. The political noise will be intense, not least because of the symbolism of Shell shedding the “Royal Dutch” part of its name after 114 years. Chairman Sir Andrew Mackenzie, a Scot (and ex-BHP as it happens), will have to do more than post gentle videos on the corporate website explaining how only a handful of top jobs are affected. In the end, though, he should succeed. Choosing the UK is logical, even if it’s not for the reason UK politicians may claim. The loose end that may yet cause trouble is the idea that Shell is fleeing litigation in Dutch courts, where a remarkable case last year ruled, in effect, that the company’s emissions-reduction targets weren’t merely inadequate but also illegal. The case itself is unaffected, and Shell says the latest iteration of its strategy is compliant (although it is appealing anyway). But might the company have had an eye on future legal challenges? It’s not allowed to say so, but one suspects the answer is yes. But the divi complication is clearly the primary driver and, viewed from Shell’s boardroom, any last-minute attempt by the Dutch coalition government to abolish the tax will surely feel too late by about a decade. This issue is not new. Boss of leveraged Cineworld ‘thrilled’ at return of audiences It’s been a while since Mooky Greidinger, headline act at cinema group Cineworld, has been able to engage his default mode of ra-ra optimism, so you can’t blame him for seizing the current opportunity. He’s “thrilled” that audiences are returning in significant numbers, says partnerships with the major studios, which looked wobbly at moments during lockdown, are “as strong as ever”, and describes the slate of upcoming film releases as “incredible”. Jolly good, but the uncomfortable fact remains that Cineworld, rarely under-borrowed before Covid, is now extremely leveraged. At the last count, borrowings, including lease liabilities, were $8bn, which is a lot even when you’re the world’s second largest cinema operator and have a larger presence in the US. The cliffhanger is whether Cineworld expects to get through without tapping shareholders (of which he and his family are the largest) for fresh equity. Free cashflow was positive in October, reports Cineworld, but that is not a definitive answer to the capital-raise question. The suspense can’t last for ever.The oil giant Shell has sparked a political tussle over the location of its headquarters after announcing it would relocate to London and lose “Royal Dutch” from its name amid a corporate overhaul that has angered the Netherlands. In a move seized by the UK government as a post-Brexit vote of confidence in the City of London, Europe’s largest oil firm said it would drop a complex dual share structure and move its headquarters and tax residence to the UK. However, the plans were greeted with dismay in the Netherlands, where politicians said they were “unpleasantly surprised” by the firm’s decision to abandon its headquarters in The Hague – a move that would come at a heavy cost to Dutch taxpayers. Shell will no longer meet the Dutch conditions to qualify for its “royal” designation for the first time in more than 130 years, a change that will be put to a shareholder vote next month alongside broader plans to simplify its ownership structure. Announced against a backdrop of political uncertainty in the Netherlands with a government yet to be formed after elections earlier this year, it is understood politicians from multiple parties are in frantic talks about how to change Shell’s mind. A source familiar with the situation said the prime minister, Mark Rutte, who is expected to extend his 11-year tenure, is exploring proposals to scrap a 15% dividend tax that Shell has cited as one of its reasons for leaving. Discussions are understood to be at an early stage, with politicians yet to secure approval from their colleagues before agreeing a deal with potential coalition partners. Rutte’s coalition government had previously moved in 2017 to scrap the tax, long a source of frustration for Shell and the fellow Anglo-Dutch company Unilever. However, the plan was dropped after a political backlash, and as Unilever decided to move its headquarters from Rotterdam to London. The talks to abolish the dividend tax, first reported by the Financial Times, are understood to have been hastened by a feeling that something has to be done now to appease Shell, even if it means acting before a new government can be formed. The UK’s business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, welcomed Shell’s relocation proposals on Twitter and suggested it was part of the firm’s plans to transition to a clean energy provider. “A clear vote of confidence in the British economy as we work to strengthen competitiveness, attract investment and create jobs,” he said. With a market valuation of more than £125bn, Shell’s move to pick Britain as its sole home is seen in Westminster as a post-Brexit coup after it emerged earlier this year that Amsterdam had overtaken London as Europe’s largest share trading centre, a largely symbolic blow. As part of the changes announced to the stock exchange on Monday morning, Shell’s chief executive, Ben van Beurden, and the chief financial officer, Jessica Uhl, will move to London, where the company’s board meetings will be held. According to the details of the plan, the firm intends to scrap a dual share structure that divides stock into A and B classes listed on the London and Amsterdam stock exchanges. It will, however, continue to trade in the Amsterdam, London and New York markets. The company said the change would allow Shell to return more cash to shareholders, including through share buybacks, since there will be a larger pool of ordinary stock to target. Currently, the structure only allows for about $2.5bn (£1.8bn) a quarter The move comes months after a court in the Netherlands ruled that Shell must reduce its carbon emissions by 45% by 2030 relative to 2019 levels. The landmark case, brought by environmental groups and more than 17,000 Dutch citizens, applies only in the Netherlands. Shell confirmed in July it would appeal against the ruling. Shell insisted it would continue to be a “significant employer” in the Netherlands, where it still plans to have have a “major presence”. Certain parts of its business, including its projects and technology divisions, and renewable energies hub, will remain in The Hague, it added. Shell’s London-listed ‘A’ shares rose 2.1% to £16 on Monday after the announcement. Its ‘B’ class shares closed up 1.2% at £16.80. The move to simplify the share structure comes after the US hedge fund Third Point, led by the Wall Street investor Daniel Loeb, took a stake in the company and started pushing for changes, including a potential breakup. Third Point had accused Shell of having “an incoherent, conflicting set of strategies attempting to appease multiple interests but satisfying none”. Shell’s chairman, Sir Andrew Mackenzie, said the overhaul was about simplifying the business. “It will normalise our share structure under the tax and legal jurisdictions of a single country and make us more competitive. As a result, Shell will be better positioned to seize opportunities and play a leading role in the energy transition. Shell’s board unanimously recommends shareholders vote in favour of the proposed resolution.” Shareholders will be asked to vote on the changes on 10 December.It is hardly surprising that intelligence chiefs raised the terrorist threat to severe on Monday. The failed attack outside Liverpool Women’s hospital came within a month of the killing of Sir David Amess MP at his constituency surgery in Essex. Yet it had been hoped, cautiously, that the climate was changing. Two years ago the terrorism threat was downgraded to substantial, for the first time in five years, a month after the Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi had been killed. It had been at that lower level for most of the last two years, aside from an isolated three months in the winter of 2020-21, when there were heightened security concerns following Islamist attacks in Austria and France. Now, it is less certain what lies ahead. Although there is much that is not known about what happened in Liverpool on Sunday – and in particular the motivation of the deceased suspect – security agencies do know that one terrorist attack can often inspire another, as happened in the UK in 2017. “Severe” is the second-highest of the five threat levels used by Britain’s security apparatus. It means an attack is considered “highly likely” as opposed to to “substantial” where the threat is deemed likely. (The highest level, “critical”, means an attack is feared imminently and it has only ever been used for a few days at a time.) But what will trouble investigators further is that Sunday’s incident was the first explosive attack in Great Britain since 2017. The most recent of those, at Parsons Green tube station in west London, in September of that year, featured an explosive device left on a train carriage at rush hour. Witnesses described seeing a “fireball” and fled the stationary train, although 400g of home made TATP explosives mercifully failed to detonate. Nevertheless, dozens of people were injured in the incident, including 22 who suffered burns, although it clearly could have been much worse. It looks likely something similar could be said for the explosion outside the Liverpool hospital. Whether it was the intended target of the attacker is not certain – police have only said it was where the suspect asked to be driven to in a taxi picked up a few minutes’ drive away. Military experts say, having looked at the video of the explosion recorded by CCTV facing the hospital entrance, that it appears the device did not go off as intended. An initial detonation is not followed by a greater explosion, and remarkably the taxi driver was able to escape from the car seconds after. Philip Ingram, a former military intelligence officer who studied the film circulating believes that, if fully detonated, a bomb that close to the hospital “would have blown the windows out, bowed the roof [of the car] and the glass wave would likely have killed both and put hospital windows out”. It was only a few months prior to Parsons Green that the worst terrorist attack of the last decade and a half took place: the Islamist suicide bombing of the Manchester Arena, minutes after an Ariana Grande concert had finished. That night 22 were killed and many more injured after a homemade bomb exploded, a stark reminder of how deadly terrorism can be.Several outbreaks of severe bird flu in Europe and Asia have been reported in recent days to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), in a sign the virus is spreading quickly again. The spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza, commonly called bird flu, has put the poultry industry on alert after previous outbreaks led to the culling of tens of millions of birds. It is attracting the attention too of epidemiologists as the virus can be transmitted to humans. China has reported 21 human infections with the H5N6 subtype of avian influenza so far this year, more than in the whole of 2020. South Korea reported an outbreak at a farm of around 770,000 poultry in Chungcheongbuk-do, the OIE said on Monday, citing a report from the South Korean authorities. All animals were slaughtered. Also in Asia, Japan reported its first outbreak of the 2021 winter season, at a poultry farm in the north-east of the country, the OIE said, confirming a statement last week by Japan’s agriculture ministry. The serotype in this outbreak was H5N8. In Europe, Norway reported an H5N1 bird flu outbreak in the Rogaland region in a flock of 7,000 birds, the OIE said. Bird flu circulates naturally among wild birds, and when they migrate to the UK from mainland Europe in winter the disease can be spread to poultry and other captive birds. The Belgian government put the country on increased risk for bird flu, ordering poultry to be kept indoors as of Monday, after a highly pathogenic variant of bird flu was identified in a wild goose near Antwerp. This followed a similar move in neighbouring France earlier this month and in the Netherlands in October. Earlier this month, a bird flu prevention zone was declared across Great Britain, legally requiring all bird keepers to follow strict biosecurity measures after a flock of poultry was culled near Dundee in Scotland in response to a bird flu outbreak. Bird flu can affect humans in rare cases if people touch infected birds, their droppings or bedding, or while preparing infected poultry for cooking.Good morning. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has said the government is happy with Australia’s current 2030 emission targets and had a go at the Cop26 chair. And experts have called for more climate-sensitive housing developments across the country to mitigate increasing temperatures and other impacts of climate change. Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce said his party did not sign the final communiqué of the Cop26 climate summit and has mocked the summit’s chair, Alok Sharma, for his emotional reaction to the watering down of language on coal. “The Nationals did not sign it. I did not sign it,” Joyce told the ABC about the Cop26 pact signed by the Australian government on Sunday. “We are happy with our targets … we said that we wouldn’t be changing our 2030 targets.” Joyce ridiculed Sharma for becoming emotional as he told vulnerable nations he was “deeply sorry” for the way the process had unfolded. The impacts of climate change need to underpin design decisions in Australia’s new housing developments, experts say. Houses built to the fence line with dark roofs and tiny backyards, like many in western Sydney, leave their owners at the mercy of the climate crisis, according to experts who warn it’s now time to insist on climate sensitive developments. “Australians deserve a better future and if we don’t design for the changing climate, dwellings will ultimately be uninhabitable and we know that is worse in areas of disadvantage,” says Davina Rooney, chief executive of the Green Building Council. The explosion outside a hospital in Liverpool, England has been declared a terrorist incident and officials have raised the UK terror threat level to severe. A taxi burst into flames outside the Liverpool Women’s hospital just before 11am on Remembrance Sunday and left one man dead and another seriously injured. A male passenger was declared dead at the scene, while the cab driver managed to escape and has since been discharged from hospital. Early police findings indicate the improvised explosive device had been built by the deceased passenger. Australia An Australian independent debates commission could signal the end of “inane debates about debates”. Twenty principles have been proposed, including that one of three debates should be held in a regional location – and that there be no device to register audience approval and disapproval in real time. Residents of the town Nundle have accused the NSW government of double standards, calling for it to impose the same rules of community consent for existing renewable development proposals as it has for the state’s new renewable energy zones. They argue a proposed windfarm goes against a mandate that “renewables are developed where regional communities want them”. The Victorian government will water down its controversial pandemic legislation after 11th-hour negotiations. Crossbench MPs secured a number of amendments to the bill, including reducing proposed harsh fines and granting Victorians the right to appeal detention orders at the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal. The NT recorded two new Covid cases on Monday, one of which was a fully vaccinated 43-year-old man in a remote community. This sparked a lockdown of the greater Katherine area and Robinson River. The world Steve Bannon has turned himself in to the FBI after being charged with contempt of Congress for defying a Capitol attack subpoena. Bannon faces two counts of criminal contempt: one for refusing to appear for a congressional deposition and the other for refusing to provide documents in response to the committee’s subpoena. The EU has agreed on new sanctions against Belarus targeting “everyone involved” in the border crisis, where thousands are stuck in makeshift camps in freezing weather. A nine-year-old boy has become the youngest person to die from injuries sustained during a crowd surge at the Astroworld music festival in Texas. Recommended reads Larissa Behrendt’s documentary Araatika: Rise Up! follows one man’s mission to create an Indigenous Australian equivalent of the haka to perform at NRL matches. Luke Buckmaster says it’s “a warming and compelling watch, populated by likeable people pursuing a valuable endeavour … Just when you feel you have the tone and trajectory of Araatika: Rise Up! pegged, it has a habit of unexpectedly throwing something lovely or arresting at you”. The seasons have changed, we are out of lockdown and nearly at the end of spring. Hopefully, we can retire our heaviest coats for the summer, but before you do, we asked some experts for their advice on the best way to store your coats to ensure they’re in optimal condition for them next winter. “Wrapping your wool coat in a light cotton fabric ensures your wool retains its as-new appearance,” is one tip from Australian Wool Innovation chief executive John Roberts. Australian literary great Gerald Murnane has released his final book – a collection of essays about his experience of reading all of his own books in order. “The essays in Last Letter to a Reader are neither literary criticism nor memoir,” writes Emmett Stinson. “They ruminate instead on unexpected connections between books, ideas and the specific life experiences that informed his writing.” Listen When farmer Will Picker broke his back on his NSW farm there was no mobile phone reception – forcing him to crawl for 1km to get help. Federal MPs are now under pressure to sign on to a private member’s bill to force Australia’s telcos to improve patchy mobile coverage and shoddy customer service. In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to Will and his partner Hannah Sparks about the real – and sometimes dangerous – cost of Australia’s poor mobile performance. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Roger Federer will almost certainly miss the Australian Open for the second year in a row as he recovers from a third round of knee surgery in 18 months. Media roundup NSW police have sought an apprehended violence order against the foster parents of William Tyrrell on behalf of a child linked to the missing boy, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. One of the country’s largest landholders, Rallen Australia, has launched legal action in the Northern Territory against energy giant Santos over plans to frack the gas-rich Beetaloo Basin, according to the Australian. And if you’ve read this far … France changed the colour of its flag last July – but no one noticed. Emmanuel Macron’s office has darkened the blue in the French flags flying around the Élysée Palace to bring the tricolore in line with how it looked after the French revolution. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.A law that will clamp down on trophy hunting and prevent people buying harmful animal experiences such as elephant tours meant to be introduced in parliament this autumn been delayed, the Guardian has learned. The measures should be contained in the animals abroad bill – one of several new pieces of legislation the government has planned to improve animal welfare standards. However the start of its passage through parliament has been postponed, with ministers accused of “dithering”. The bill was first hoped to be published before the summer recess in July, but has since been pushed back repeatedly. Frustration at the delay has further been compounded given a public consultation on restricting the import of hunting trophies closed in February 2020, and sources said it was unlikely the government’s response and the bill being published would happen before February 2022. The hold up was blamed on the pandemic by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, which said the final bill would be informed by “continued discussions” with experts. There are understood to be technical rather than fundamental policy disagreements remaining. Eduardo Goncalves, founder of the Campaign to Ban Trophy Hunting group, said he had been assured the bill is “still alive” but expressed concern there appeared to be “no timetable or target date for bringing it to parliament”. He said: “The pledge has been in every Queen’s speech since 2019, the prime minister confirmed it at the dispatch box, there’s been an extended public consultation, so the question is how much longer is this going to take? “Every week that goes by means more animals being senselessly slaughtered for a sick souvenir. There’s a feeling of deja vu among the more sceptical observers. They point to the fact that the government said it would ban lion trophies after the Cecil furore, and then quietly dropped it … “The government has put in a lot of work to develop appealing policies on conservation and animal welfare, and deserves to get the credit for it. There’s a risk, though, that its reputation could take a hit if it’s seen to be dithering without clear cause.” Luke Pollard, Labour’s shadow environment secretary, called the delay “another broken promise from this government” and warned it would mean more endangered lions, tigers and other precious wild animals would die. He said ministers were “failing to deliver” having “abandoned” their initial timetable for passing the bill, and added: “Labour would consign trophy hunting to the history books.” A Defra spokesperson said: “Our recently published action plan for animal welfare sets out the government’s vision to introduce a range of world-leading reforms to improve the welfare and conservation of animals at home and abroad. “This year we have already introduced our animal sentience and kept animals bills to parliament and we intend to legislate further to protect animals abroad as soon as parliamentary time allows.”As a title for this California pastoral from the sunlit west coast 1970s, Licorice Pizza is whimsically inspired. According to writer-director Paul Thomas Anderson, it’s actually the name of a now defunct SoCal record store chain. I was hoping he was making that up, like Anthony Burgess’s supposed cockney phrase “Queer as a clockwork orange”. But no. It really did exist, though the movie itself teeters between reality and nostalgist-hallucination. This is a love story set in 1973 (Erich Segal’s novel is in fact slyly positioned in one shot), and far too interesting and complicated to be called “coming-of-age”. A grinningly fast-talking 15-year-old boy meets a bored 25-year-old woman who works as assistant to a photographer taking pictures for the high-school yearbook. She is in equal parts amused, intrigued and depressed when this kid starts hitting on her, and she realises that she is somehow interested in him. Anderson makes glorious movie stars of his two newcomers. Cooper Hoffman, son of the late Philip Seymour Hoffman, is eerily assured as Gary Valentine, a heavy-set kid with iffy skin whose child-actor career in TV and movies is coming to an end, and is therefore turning his various side-hustles into the main event, running his own cockamamie company selling waterbeds. Alana Haim, of the pop band Haim (for whom Anderson has directed videos), is superb as the permanently exasperated Alana Kane, a young woman with Barbra Streisand’s beauty and charisma; appropriate, perhaps, as Streisand’s notoriously quick-tempered onetime boyfriend Jon Peters is played by Bradley Cooper in a walk-on role, as one of Gary’s dissatisfied waterbed customers. The love between Gary and Alana, if love it is, does not run smooth. Alana breaks Gary’s heart by holding hands with another child actor hardly older than he is; Gary infuriates Alana by putting the moves on a girl his own age. Alana retaliates by flirting with ageing movie star Jack Holden (Sean Penn), presumably based on William Holden (why not just make him William Holden?) and then uptight political candidate Joel Wachs (Benny Safdie). But we all know, even if we can scarcely believe it, where this is heading. And this hypnotically gorgeous, funny, romantic movie freewheels its way around from scene to scene, from character to character, from setpiece to setpiece, with absolute mastery. You float and ripple around it as if on a waterbed. But every casual line, kiss, automobile-ride, set-up and joke is a joy. Anderson says that Gary’s character is partly based on former child actor Gary Goetzman who grew up to be Tom Hanks’s producing partner, and partly on a kid he saw in 2001 trying to chat up an older woman in high school. Why did he reposition the story in 1973? Well, he is superb at evoking that era; perhaps an allusion to Harold and Maude is intended, though the nearest thing to cinematic quotation is a scene weirdly close to the political campaign office moments from Taxi Driver. Yet could it be that Anderson has chosen the 1970s for what many suggest was Jonathan Franzen’s motivation in choosing that era for his new novel Crossroads? Backdate your story to the disillusioned-yet-still-groovy 70s and it’s easier to explore issues of transgressive love and sex in the right mood of tolerant romantic adventure without getting bogged down in 21st-century gender politics? Maybe. The ironising 70s might also, incidentally, make it easier to get away with the perennial male fantasy of the teen boy entrancing an older woman (yeah right). The setting certainly allows characters to drive very, very fast to places where they drink very, very large amounts of alcohol: in fact, the driving scenes are rather like those in Quentin Tarantino’s LA-period film Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, and whereas Tarantino had crazy Charlie Manson, Anderson has freaky Jon Peters smashing up cars. There’s also a cinephile fetish-moment where Gary and Alana wind up in front of a movie theatre marquee advertising Live and Let Die (although Edgar Wright got there first with his vision of the Thunderball premiere in Last Night in Soho). We get jukebox slams of Paul McCartney’s Let Me Roll It and David Bowie’s Life on Mars, and in this film we do indeed see LAPD lawmen beating up the wrong guy: Gary. This is lighter and sunnier than previous Anderson pictures; subtract the porn and indeed the sex from Boogie Nights and you have something like it; remove the metaphysical anxiety from Inherent Vice and that comes reasonably close, too. It’s such a delectable film: I’ll be cutting myself another slice very soon. • Licorice Pizza is out now in the US, and released on 1 January in the UK.Sharon Cullen has lived in Boaler Street in Kensington, Liverpool for 18 years and knows many of her neighbours. But the only detail she could recall of the residents of 2 Sutcliffe Street, which backs on to her house, was that one young man used to spend hours on a PC, highlighted in a window with no curtains or blinds. The address, a red painted brick end-of-terrace, with a bay window, has been surrounded by police since early afternoon on Sunday, when they eventually made three arrests, and a further one on Monday morning. Cullen said that the streets were “inundated with police” about 2.30 on Sunday. Then it was “armed response and the bomb squad”, she said. She could see armed officers on ladders in the alleyway behind her house, which also runs along the back of Sutcliffe Road. Three men in their twenties were arrested in the early evening, and Cullen and her family were told that police would disperse within hours but that they should remain inside and not leave. However, about 9.45pm, they heard a knock at the door. “They said we had to evacuate because whatever was in the property would take the whole block out”. Cullen, her husband and daughter scooped up her two-year-old grandson and the dog, grabbed their coats and left. “It was just horrendous, it very, very frightening”, she added. Keith Ford, who lives a couple of doors down from the property, saw two of the arrests from his front window, until he was also asked to leave his house about 6.30pm. Ford, a production operative in a factory, said he thought the inhabitants had only moved in the last month or so. “They kept themselves to themselves”, he said. Next door to the Sutcliffe Street address is the Sir Walter Raleigh pub, which was locked down with punters inside during the afternoon. It remained shut on Monday, alongside several boarded up shops and businesses. Kensington, or Kenny as it is known locally, is one of Liverpool’s most deprived boroughs. It was home to the cockle pickers who died in the 2004 Morecambe Bay tragedy, who lived in cramped conditions of up to 10 to a room. A couple of miles away, in the Sefton Park area of the city, is Rutland Avenue – the address where taxi driver David Perry picked up the passenger on Sunday before the car exploded outside the hospital. Police have “attributed” the taxi passenger to both the addresses, but remain uncertain where he lived. The one thing both properties have in common is that residents believe they were houses in multiple occupation (HMO). Located in one of Liverpool’s oldest suburbs with a bohemian reputation, the house where police are understood to have seized “significant items” related to the homemade bomb sits on one of a series of sought-after streets known as “the Avenues”. Within hours of the explosion on Sunday, it was crawling with police cars, vans and ambulances. Several of the neighbours who were evacuated on Sunday night were put up in hotels by Liverpool council. Some local residents have been told they will not return to their homes on Monday night. The entire street remained cordoned off on Monday and local residents have not been able to leave, which means police needed to deliver one man’s grocery shopping to his door as the supermarket’s van could not get down the street. A taxi driver working for Delta Taxis, the same company the driver injured in the blast was employed by, said many drivers in the city were feeling wary. “I can’t see any taxi drivers accepting fares from that area at the moment. Being a taxi driver isn’t the safest job sometimes and at the moment you are going to be concerned picking people up,” he said. “We do have to worry about our safety and nobody wants that happening to them. I’ve been looking closely at what people are wearing getting into the cab.” Kate O’Brien Fay, a writer who lives a couple of streets away, said that it was a “vibrant, multicultural” area, including older people, young families as well as some students. “I’ve never, ever felt concerned or a threat of anything. There’s never been a suspicion of it. It’s the most harmonious place,” she said. Although residents remain shocked, “people round here are going to really hold off on a judgment”, O’Brien Fay said. “They’re not the type to sensationalise or jump to conclusions”.Well graced, well spoken and (usually) well dressed on the stage, Clifford Rose, who has died aged 92, was a founder member of the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1960 and one of its most prominent “second leads” over many seasons. He initially spent nine years with the company, appearing in such landmark productions as Michael Elliott’s As You Like It, with Vanessa Redgrave; the Wars of the Roses, with Peggy Ashcroft, Donald Sinden, Janet Suzman and Ian Holm; Peter Brook’s King Lear, with Paul Scofield; and Brook’s Marat/Sade, with Glenda Jackson and Patrick Magee, in which he played the asylum director, a role he reprised at the National Theatre in 1997. He took an unofficial RSC “sabbatical” in the 1970s when he became a familiar face on television, notably in three series of Secret Army, playing a Gestapo officer, Standartenführer Ludwig Kessler, investigating an escape plan for British pilots in occupied Belgium; this yielded, in 1981, a “name-above-the-title” six-part serial, Kessler, now a wealthy industrialist and wanted war criminal in a contemporary setting. For a time, and before returning to the RSC, he was a household face, reaching even larger audiences in the 1981 Doctor Who story Warriors’ Gate, as the maverick starship trooper Captain Rorvik, who is transporting the enslaved, time-sensitive Tharils, a pride of leonine aliens – until the fourth Doctor, Tom Baker, intervenes. Even here, there was something Teutonic about Rose’s uniform and epaulettes. This was an odd development for a British “heart of oak” actor, whose clean-cut features, classic haircut and affable but not invulnerable demeanour brought to mind the abdicating Edward VIII, the Duke of Windsor, not least when he played the duke’s father, George V, in a 2005 television film, Wallis and Edward. Clifford – the name was that of a Herefordshire village adjacent to his birthplace, Hamnish – was the eldest son of Percival Rose, a gentleman farmer and lay preacher, and his wife, Violet (nee Pratt), who ran the local volunteer nurses service during the war. He was educated at the King’s school, Worcester, and at King’s College London, where he took a degree in English and developed his passion for the stage. On graduating, he auditioned for the Elizabethan theatre company, a touring set-up whose directors included John Barton and Peter Hall. They recruited him a few years later at the RSC. He made a London debut in Shakespeare (Julius Caesar and Henry V) at the Westminster theatre in 1953 and spent the next few years in weekly and fortnightly rep, and in a touring company, the Penguin Players, where he met his wife, also an actor (and teacher), Celia Ryder. What he learned from Barton about Shakespearean verse, said Rose, stayed with him all his life. In those early RSC years he was an imposing Priam in Barton’s first version of his favourite play, Troilus and Cressida (Holm and Dorothy Tutin; Peter O’Toole as Thersites); King Duncan in the Macbeth of Eric Porter and Irene Worth; and Dromio of Ephesus in the Clifford Williams production of The Comedy of Errors in 1962, hailed by Kenneth Tynan as defining the birth of a great new ensemble company. That tumultuously hilarious show was in the repertoire for several years. Rose had made a television debut in 1959 as Second Dandy in Hilda Lessways, adapted in six parts from Arnold Bennett’s Clayhanger novels, with Judi Dench and Eileen Atkins. From the RSC, apart from his Kessler saga, which occupied five years of his working life, he sprang prominently into several of the BBC’s biggest 1970s series: Jean-Paul Sartre’s The Roads to Freedom, as the brother of lead actor Michael Bryant; Simon Raven’s blockbuster adaptation of Anthony Trollope’s The Pallisers, as Quintus Slide, the editor of a scandal sheet; and Richard Llewellyn’s How Green Was My Valley, starring Stanley Baker and Siân Phillips, as the teacher Mr Jonas, given a revenge corporal punishment lesson – with fists – in front of his own class. Hall cast him in Work is a Four-Letter Word (1968), a film version of Henry Livings’s Eh?, which had been presented on stage by the RSC in 1964, alongside other RSC alumni David Warner, Elizabeth Spriggs and Alan Howard … and Cilla Black. And in the 1980s Rose cropped up in some interesting, if less than outstanding, movies such as The Wall (1982) about the uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto; as a magistrate in Terry on the Fence (1985), about “mixed-up” teenagers; and as a judge in Mike Newell’s The Good Father (1985), written by Christopher Hampton and starring Anthony Hopkins. He always worked, as they say, with “the quality”. His return to the RSC in 1989 – he became an associate, and an honorary associate, of the company – led to performances as fraternal dukes, good and bad, in As You Like It; the Ghost of Hamlet’s father in Kenneth Branagh’s electrifying non-princely interpretation; a dignified and involving Antonio in a modern-dress Merchant of Venice; and the Archbishop of York in Henry IV. In Shakespeare outside the RSC, he most enjoyed playing Polonius – “outstanding as an icy paterfamilias and court fixer” said Nicholas de Jongh – to Michael Maloney’s spring-heeled Hamlet at Greenwich in 1996. For the fourth and final time he donned swastikas in the million-dollar television miniseries War and Remembrance, starring Robert Mitchum and Jane Seymour, covering the US involvement in the war from Pearl Harbor through to Hiroshima. He played Hans Kammler, the engineer who supervised the construction of the Nazi concentration camps and then disappeared off the face of the earth. Closer to home, he was Judge Critchley in four episodes of Alan Bleasdale’s politically ambitious and controversial GBH (1991), starring Robert Lindsay, Lindsay Duncan and Michael Palin, for Channel 4. On his third reincarnation at the RSC, he played a notable double as the Earl of Worcester and the Lord Chief Justice in Henry IV, directed by Michael Attenborough in 2000, and the Duke of Venice in Othello in 2004. And, in 2008, he was a slinky high court judge in Michael Grandage’s superb Donmar Warehouse revival of Enid Bagnold’s The Chalk Garden – with Margaret Tyzack, Penelope Wilton and the sensational newcomer Felicity Jones – for which he won the Clarence Derwent award as best supporting actor. That was his last major stage appearance. On film, he played nice cameos in 2011, in the fourth of the Pirates of the Caribbean franchise, On Stranger Tides (in a neat scene with Johnny Depp, he plays bailiff to Depp’s “pretend” judge), and in Phyllida Lloyd’s underrated The Iron Lady, with Meryl Streep as the best ever Mrs Thatcher, Jim Broadbent her gobsmacked loyal husband, Denis. He continued doing recitals by invitation until last year, having signed off as the Dean of Windsor in The Crown in 2019, with Olivia Colman on the throne. He and Celia moved back to Stratford-upon-Avon 20 years ago, and he continued to follow the RSC with interest. Celia died in 2012. He is survived by his children, Rosalind and Duncan, his grandson, Charlie, and his brother Bob. His younger brother, David, also an actor, predeceased him. • John Clifford Rose, actor, born 24 October 1929; died 6 November 2021 • This article was amended on 16 November 2021. Clifford Rose’s appearance in The Crown came in 2019 rather than 2011.It is being billed as the world’s first “TikTopera” – a collaboration between the English National Opera and Netflix – based on hit documentary series Tiger King, created entirely on TikTok ahead of the second series this week. The production lives entirely on the social media app and features TikTok superstars cast in the lead roles, including Sophia Aurora, Hellovicco and Hannah Lother, as well as X-Factor finalists Max and Harvey and Britain’s Got Talent comedian Phil Green. Each recap a portion of the Tiger King story, including the battle between Joe Exotic and Carole Baskin. This is set to the music of George Bizet’s 1875 masterpiece Carmen, performed live in London by ENO’s 40-person professional chorus and full string orchestra. Stuart Murphy, chief executive of ENO, said the company had “pulled out all the stops” to bring to life one of Netflix’s most watched shows and a “modern-day mythic drama”. “Opera is an art form that deals best with epic themes – rival worlds, passionate love, carnal lusts and monstrous betrayal,” he said. “In many ways, it’s the art form that this story was made for.” The project, Murphy said, “spoke to our key value of trying to take opera out to everyone. On Friday, we’ve got five hours of Wagner on the Coliseum stage, for the proper aficionados. It felt right to do this at the other end of the extreme, to make opera as accessible as possible to everyone.” Accessibility has long been important to Murphy. Earlier in his career, he launched BBC Three because he was “passionate about getting public service content to people who generally reject the BBC”, as well as Sky Atlantic because “epic world class TV should be part and parcel of our TV consumption.” Since joining the ENO, he’s introduced a string of initiatives to try to get young people through the doors, including free tickets for under-21s (which has reduced the average age of attendees from 67 to 59) and putting on “a drive-in production” of La bohème that featured a remix by Stormzy producer Mikey J. The ENO’s latest move is part of a wider trend that sees major organisations turning to TikTok to welcome new, and particularly younger audiences. The platform – full of in-jokes, dance rituals and memes – is most popular among the under-25s and can turn relatively unknown songs or artists into viral sensations. Sea shanty TikTok star Nathan Evans signed a record deal with Universal, a multilingual love song by little-known Somali singer Nimco Happy was given an official release and shared by the likes of Bella Hadid and Cardi B. “It’s really important for us that we’re part of the kind of national conversation so we’re not seen as a kind of hermetically sealed art form,” Murphy said. “Netflix dictates that conversation on a global scale, you just look at how the world stopped and took notice of Squid Game or the Crown. And TikTok is like a popcorn machine that can throw up a million narratives every second and hour.” Opera, he added, can speak to all ages. “What’s really timeless is people’s yearning to tell stories, listen to stories and get inside worlds. Shows like The Chestnut Man or Making a Murderer are all brilliantly told stories. We’re in a similar Venn diagram. And actually, when people turn up they’re like ‘Wow, I didn’t realise it was that epic.’” Max and Harvey, who have 6.4 million followers on TikTok, said they’d watched Tiger King twice over lockdown so working on the TikTopera had been an “amazing” experience. “We’ve enjoyed learning more about opera and hearing 40 people singing with a full orchestra is unreal,” they added. “We’d love to go and see one.”