Taiwan has expressed “sincere gratitude” to the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, and his defence minister for their warnings against Beijing ratcheting up military pressure against the self-ruled island. Peter Dutton used a significant speech on Friday to argue “dark clouds” were forming and the world should not repeat “the mistakes of the 1930s” while arguing China was expanding its military at a rapid rate and saw countries across the region as “tributary states”. The defence minister brushed off accusations he was seeking to use national security to score domestic political points in the lead-up to next year’s election, and said the cost of Australia joining the US in a potential future war to defend Taiwan should be weighed against the cost of inaction. Morrison backed Dutton’s speech, saying the pair had discussed it beforehand and Australia would “stand up to any form of coercion that occurs”. The prime minister said Dutton was “spot on when it comes to the uncertain environment in which we live”. Taiwan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs welcomed the statements of support, adding that it saw Australia as “an important friend and like-minded partner of Taiwan in the Indo-Pacific region”. Joanne Ou, a ministry spokesperson, told the Guardian there was “a high level of consensus among Australia, the US, Japan, France and other major democracies” on the importance of maintaining peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait. “Both Prime Minister Morrison and Defence Minister Dutton’s remarks reiterated the Australian government’s deep concern for security and peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and the need to guard against the use of Chinese force against Taiwan, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs would like to express its sincere gratitude for this,” she said. Ou did not comment on Australia’s domestic political debate, but said Taiwan’s government would “continue to work closely with Australia and like-minded countries” to safeguard democratic values and a rules-based international order, and to maintain peace, stability and prosperity. Dutton attracted significant attention earlier this month when he said it would be “inconceivable” that Australia would not join military action if the US came to Taiwan’s aid in a conflict with China. As the Australian parliament met for the final sitting week of the year, the leader of the opposition, Anthony Albanese, said it was appropriate to maintain support for the status quo regarding Taiwan. “You look at the position of the Biden administration, it’s very different from the rhetorical position that Peter Dutton has put forward,” Albanese told the ABC’s 7.30 program on Monday evening. “We maintain the same position as the United States and we think that is sensible – that is support for the status quo.” Dutton’s comments prompted criticism from Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong. “Amping up the prospect of war against a superpower is the most dangerous election tactic in Australian history – a tactic employed by irresponsible politicians who are desperate to hang on to power at any cost,” Wong said last week. Under Australia’s one-China policy, it does not recognise Taiwan as a country in the international system but pursues cooperation with the island of 24 million people in areas such as trade, culture and education. The intensifying domestic debate in Australia comes at a time when Taiwan is seeking to deepen trade ties and to play a role in international forums such as the World Health Organization. Taiwan wants support from Australia and other members of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership to join the big regional trade pact, but so far the Morrison government has not expressed outright support for its application. China has also said it wants to join the CPTPP. Taiwan has encouraged Canberra and like-minded partners to participate in security and intelligence-related exchanges. Dutton on Friday stopped short of outlining any specific short-term step to bolster Taiwan’s role in the international arena, or for closer security or law enforcement cooperation, saying only that he was in “favour of a continuation of the existing arrangement”. Dr Mark Harrison, a senior lecturer in Chinese studies at the University of Tasmania and a close watcher of Australia’s unofficial relationship with Taiwan, said: “The test for Australia is what kind of defence preparedness it undertakes and what kind of relationship it is willing to have with the defence establishment in Taiwan, in order to bolster any commitment that Australia would be making to deterrence.” Taiwan is a particularly sensitive issue in the already strained relationship between Canberra and Beijing. “Reunification” with Taiwan is a core part of the Chinese Communist party’s ideology – although the CCP has never ruled the island – and China’s president, Xi Jinping, has not ruled out taking it by force if necessary. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, hit back at Dutton earlier this month, calling on Australian politicians to “refrain from doing anything that’s destructive to our relationship”. In an interview with the Guardian, Wang also said Australia would be branded as a “sabre wielder” because of the Aukus plan to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines, and questioned whether Australia could afford to cancel a Chinese company’s lease over the Port of Darwin. China flew 150 warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone in the space of four days in early October, prompting both the Australian government and opposition to raise concerns about the increase in military pressure. Dutton has defended his commentary about Beijing’s “aggressive behaviour”, saying it is based on “facts” and not “wishful thinking”. But some analysts have argued talk of an inevitable military conflict can inadvertently assist Beijing in its goal to “gradually weaken the will of the people of Taiwan to resist integration with the mainland”.Bernardine Evaristo is to be the next president of the Royal Society of Literature, becoming the first writer of colour to hold the position. Evaristo, whose novel Girl, Woman, Other won the Booker prize in 2019, will take over from Marina Warner at the end of this year. She will be the second female president in the society’s 200-year history. She said she was “deeply honoured” to be chosen as the organisation’s figurehead. The society was “boldly embracing the 21st century as a great champion of the possibilities of a more egalitarian culture for literature”, she added. “Storytelling is embedded in our DNA as human beings – it is sewn into the narrative arc of our lives, it is in our relationships, desires and conflicts, and it is the prism through which we explore and understand ourselves and the world in which we live. Literature is not a luxury, but essential to our civilisation. “I am so proud, therefore, to be the figurehead of such an august and robust literature organisation that is so actively and urgently committed to being inclusive of the widest range of outstanding writers from every demographic and geographical location in Britain, and to reaching marginalised communities through literature projects, including introducing young people in schools to some of Britain’s leading writers who visit, teach and discuss their work with them,” she said. Evaristo was the first black woman to win the Booker prize, and the award propelled her into the spotlight after six earlier novels. Girl, Woman, Other became a bestseller in many languages. Daljit Nagra, the chair of the RSL, said Evaristo was a seminal writer and a trailblazer. “As a writer she speaks with striking originality about under-represented voices, as an advocate she has championed neglected authors, and as a campaigner she has given voice to the value of literature. Across all media, her voice rings out in passionate open-mindedness, recognisably unique and essential.” The RSL also announced the first 12 authors in its international writers’ programme, which recognises the contribution of writers across the globe to literature in English. The authors are: Don Mee Choi, Annie Ernaux, David Grossman, Jamaica Kincaid, Yan Lianke, Amin Maalouf, Alain Mabanckou, Javier Marías, Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o, Claudia Rankine, Olga Tokarczuk and Dubravka Ugrešić. Evaristo grew up in south London with a Nigerian father and a white English mother, and seven siblings, at a time when it was “still legal to discriminate against people based on the colour of their skin”, she wrote in her memoir, Manifesto, published last month. She said her family “endured the name-calling of children who parroted their parents’ racism, along with violent assaults on our family home by thugs who threw bricks at our windows on such a regular basis that as soon as they were replaced, we knew they’d be smashed again … As a child, you are profoundly affected by this level of hostility without being able to intellectualise or articulate it. You feel hated, even though you have done nothing to deserve it.” • This article was amended on 30 November 2021. Bernardine Evaristo was the first black woman to win the Booker prize, but not the first black writer as an earlier version said.As tips season begins in earnest, the Brit awards has named the shortlist for its annual Rising Star prize. London pop star Bree Runway, Lincolnshire songwriter Holly Humberstone and London balladeer Lola Young – who soundtracks this year’s festive John Lewis advert – will compete for the prize formerly known as the Critics’ Choice award. As with 2019 and 2018, all three nominees are female solo artists. They will be hoping to follow in the footsteps of previous winners such as Adele, Sam Fender, Rag’n’Bone Man and last year’s winner, Griff. The award is open to British artists who have not achieved a UK Top 20 album or more than one Top 20 single by 31 October 2021. Hackney-born Bree Runway, 29, received acclaim from Rihanna and Missy Elliott – with whom she would later collaborate on her 2020 single ATM – as she rose through social media, self-releasing her first two EPs. In 2018, she signed to Virgin EMI and released further collaborations with the likes of rappers Brooke Candy, Yung Baby Tate and British band Glass Animals. She was shortlisted for the BBC Sound of 2021 poll, was named Vogue Darling for the magazine’s January 2021 issue and garnered further acclaim from US rappers Cardi B, Saweetie and Doja Cat. She has pushed back against being categorised as an R&amp;B star or rapper, citing the diversity of her sound and influences such as Elliott, Britney Spears, Kelis, Grace Jones, Freddie Mercury, Kate Bush and Daddy Yankee. “I’m from here, but I don’t make Afropop or Afroswing or whatever,” she told Vogue. “My genre is very much a fluid thing. You close your eyes for a minute: she’s a country singer. Oh, she’s a rock star. This is my comfort, this quirky eccentric world.” She told the magazine that she dreamed of being “a leading example of the fact that a Black girl can do anything, and Black girls are everything”. Holly Humberstone, 21, was spotted by a manager after performing on her local BBC Introducing radio show. She developed her songwriting with Rob Milton, formerly of UK indie band Dog Is Dead, and released her debut EP, Falling Asleep at the Wheel, last year. Her intimate songwriting – distinguished by pop hooks and many-layered vocal harmonies that have drawn comparisons to Lorde – made her into a pandemic breakout star. “I have chaos in my head all the time,” she told the Guardian last month. “When I sit down to write, it’s working through all these things that I’m going through. When I put it in a song, it’s a more manageable piece to understand. It’s really my therapy.” On her second EP, The Walls Are Way Too Thin, released in early November, she collaborated with Matty Healy of the 1975. She recently returned from her first US tour, which included a live performance on Jimmy Fallon’s late-night talk show. Lola Young, 21, grew up in south London and attended the Brit school after winning a national open-mic contest. “That school was a hub for people who maybe couldn’t be themselves even at home, but they could be themselves there,” she told the Forty-Five. She is managed by Nick Shymansky, former manager to Amy Winehouse, and Nick Huggett, the A&amp;R who signed Adele to XL Recordings. She released her debut album Intro in 2019, followed by the EPs Renaissance and After Midnight, to acclaim from the likes of Annie Mac, Clara Amfo and Gilles Peterson. She has spent 2021 writing her debut album with producer Paul Epworth. Her influences include Joni Mitchell, Anderson .Paak, Prince and Alanis Morissette. Her cover of the 1984 song Together in Electric Dreams, originally by Phil Oakey and Giorgio Moroder, soundtracks this year’s John Lewis Christmas advert. The Rising Star winner is announced on 10 December. The Brit awards 2022 take place on 8 February at the London O2 Arena. A new host, comedian Mo Gilligan, replaces Jack Whitehall, who has helmed the ceremony for the previous four years. The Brit awards recently announced that it would do away with gendered categories that split male and female talent apart. A new award, artist of the year, will replace the British male and female solo artist categories; international artist of the year will replace the previously gendered international solo awards. At 2021’s ceremony, the non-binary British pop singer Sam Smith was left out of the gendered categories for solo artist. They responded: “I look forward to a time where awards shows can be reflective of the society we live in. Let’s celebrate everybody, regardless of gender, race, age, ability, sexuality and class.”Cuts to education spending in England over the last decade are “effectively without precedent in postwar UK history” and have hit the most deprived schools hardest, according to analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Its report highlights how the most disadvantaged fifth of secondary schools have faced the biggest cuts, with a 14% real-terms fall in spending per pupil between 2009 and 2019, compared with 9% for the least deprived schools. It also says recent changes to the way education funding is distributed has compounded that disadvantage by providing bigger real-terms increases for the least deprived schools, making the government’s stated levelling-up goals harder to achieve. According to the IFS’s annual report on education spending in England, published on Tuesday, public spending on health has gone up as investment in education has declined. In the early 1990s, health and education spending each represented about 4.5% of national income, but while education investment has stayed pegged at about this level, health spending rose to more than 7% of national income before the pandemic. Colleges and sixth-forms have faced the biggest cuts, and even with additional funding from the spending review, spending per student will still be lower in 2024 than in 2010, the report says. It also confirms earlier findings that the most deprived schools have lost out most in the reorganisation of schools funding via the national funding formula, with the least deprived schools receiving real-terms increases of 8%-9%, compared with 5% for the most deprived, between 2017 and 2022. The pupil premium, which provides additional funding for children on free school meals, has failed to keep pace with inflation since 2015. “These patterns run counter to the government’s goal of levelling up poorer areas,” the report states. The IFS said: “The cuts to education spending over the last decade are effectively without precedent in postwar UK history, including a 9% real-terms fall in school spending per pupil and a 14% fall in spending per student in colleges. “Whilst we have been choosing to spend an ever expanding share of national income on health, we have remarkably reduced the fraction of national income we devote to public spending on education.” It said the government had ambitious goals to level up poorer areas of the country, including a big role for technical education. “However, changes to the distribution of education spending have been working in the opposite direction. Recent school funding changes have tended to work against schools serving disadvantaged areas. Cuts to spending have been larger for colleges and adult education, and still won’t be reversed by 2024.” The government’s recent spending review included an extra £4.4bn for the schools budget in 2024 compared with previous plans, but the IFS calculates that spending per pupil in 2024 will still only be at about the same level as in 2010. Luke Sibieta, an IFS research fellow and an author of the report, said: “Extra funding in the spending review will reverse cuts to school spending per pupil, but will mean 15 years without any overall growth. Recent funding changes have also worked against schools serving disadvantaged communities. This will make it that much harder to achieve ambitious goals to level up poorer areas of the country and narrow educational inequalities, which were gaping even before the pandemic.” Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the IFS report was a “grim indictment” of the government’s record. “It is a pretty dreadful legacy to have presided over cuts to education which are without precedent in postwar UK history.” A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We have made above-inflation increases in school funding every year since 2019/20, and have just announced a further funding boost of £4.7bn by 2024-25, compared to previous plans. This includes an additional £1.6bn in the next financial year.”As Barbados removes the Queen as its head of state and becomes a republic, the monarch has sent her congratulations on the nation’s “momentous” day. Prince Charles arrived on the Caribbean island on Sunday to join the inauguration ceremony of the president-elect, Sandra Mason, who replaces the Queen as head of state overnight as Barbados sheds the vestiges of a colonial system stretching back 400 years. In a message to Mason, the Queen wished all Barbadians happiness, peace and prosperity in the future. She said: “On this significant occasion and your assumption of office as the first president of Barbados, I extend my congratulations to you and all Barbadians. “I first visited your beautiful country on the eve of independence in early 1966, and I am very pleased that my son is with you today. Since then, the people of Barbados have held a special place in my heart; it is a country rightly proud of its vibrant culture, its sporting prowess, and its natural beauty, that attracts visitors from all over the world, including many people from the United Kingdom.” She continued: “Over the years, our countries have enjoyed a partnership based on common values, shared prosperity, and close collaboration on a wide range of issues, including recent work on climate change. It is also a source of great satisfaction that Barbados remains an active participant within the Commonwealth, and I look forward to the continuation of the friendship between our two countries and peoples. “As you celebrate this momentous day, I send you and all Barbadians my warmest good wishes for your happiness, peace and prosperity in the future. Elizabeth R.” Charles travelled to the island on Sunday to reaffirm the “myriad” connections between the people of the two countries. He delivered an address as Barbados began a new chapter in its history on 30 November, the 55th anniversary of its independence from Britain. The celebrations began at 8pm local time, midnight UK time. The last time the Queen was removed as head of a state was in 1992, when Mauritius proclaimed itself a republic. Barbados’s decision will be watched closely by other members of the Commonwealth, especially in the Caribbean.Westpac has admitted it broke the law and agreed to pay penalties totalling $113m after the corporate regulator hit the bank with six lawsuits over shoddy treatment of customers that included charging dead people fees and lambasted the bank for a “poor compliance culture” that needs urgent improvement. The bank has admitted the allegations in the lawsuits, filed in the federal court by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and in addition to the penalty will pay customers $80m in remediation. Tens of thousands of customers were improperly charged tens of millions of dollars as a result of Westpac’s misconduct, Asic said. It is the latest regulatory blow for the bank, which in September last year agreed to pay a record $1.3bn fine to settle legal action over allegations of non-compliance with money laundering and child exploitation regulations levelled against it by the financial intelligence agency, Austrac. In 2018 the bank was fined $3.3m for unconscionable conduct by trying to rig the benchmark bank bill swap rate. It also sparked political controversy over a lawsuit Asic brought against it over responsible lending, dubbed the “wagyu and shiraz” case, that it won. Asic’s commissioner, Sarah Court, said it was “unprecedented for Asic to file multiple proceedings against the same respondent at the same time” and the regulator was “disappointed” that it continued to have to take big banks to court. “The conduct and breaches alleged in these proceedings caused widespread consumer harm and ranged across Westpac’s everyday banking, financial advice, superannuation and insurance businesses,” she said. “A common aspect across these matters has been poor systems, poor processes and poor governance, which is suggestive of an overall poor compliance culture within Westpac at the relevant time. “Westpac must urgently improve its systems and culture to ensure these systemic failures do not continue.” Westpac’s chief executive, Peter King, said the bank had “fallen short of our standards and the standards our customers expect of us”. “The issues raised in these matters should not have occurred, and our processes, systems and monitoring should have been better. We are putting things right and unreservedly apologise to our customers.” The $113m penalty has been agreed to between Asic and Westpac but is subject to approval by the court. Asic’s litigation showbag includes allegations Westpac charged more than 11,000 dead people more than $10m in fees, charged 7,000 people for two insurance policies over the same property, collected $12m in illegal commissions from 8,000 people, failed to properly disclose $7m in fees it charged to 25,000 customers, kept 21,000 accounts open for companies that no longer existed and on-sold debts to collectors at rates higher than it was allowed to charge. It comes as Asic is under pressure over its decision to drop the phrase “why not litigate” from its corporate plan in favour of focusing on economic recovery from the Covid-19 recession. The phrase was inserted after the financial services royal commission criticised Asic over its lack of enforcement action against the banks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Despite the large fine, Westpac has escaped more severe regulatory action. In relation to charging the dead fees, the bank has admitted that the ways it broke the law included accepting payment without intending or being able to supply as ordered, as well as unconscionable conduct and continuing to charge a fee once an agreement has come to an end. And in relation to the double charging of insurance premiums, Westpac has admitted to breaches including making false or misleading representations. Westpac’s wealth management subsidiary, BT, admitted to misleading or deceptive conduct by filching illegal commissions from super fund clients. Westpac has acknowledged that financial advice subsidiaries Magnitude Group and Securitor, both of which closed down in 2019, broke the Corporations Act by failing to provide financial services efficiently, honestly and fairly. Keeping 21,000 business accounts open even though the companies that held them had been deregistered allowed Westpac to keep charging fees. It also allowed transactions on the accounts, which held tens of millions of dollars that should have been vested with the commonwealth. Westpac has also admitted to making false or misleading statements by selling the debts of 17,000 customers, many of whom were likely to be in financial distress, to collection agencies at interest rates above what it was entitled to charge.Consider a construction worker who hasn’t slept more than four hours a night for the past week, a software engineer who is battling a persistent cold but keeps working from their home office, and a schoolteacher who worries about their students so shows up each day despite feeling emotionally burned out. What do they have in common? Presenteeism, otherwise known as the act of working while unwell – physically, emotionally, or mentally. To be perfectly forthright, presenteeism – like burnout – is most often an individual response to a systemic problem. Few of us would prefer to be at work when we feel like garbage. Addressing presenteeism involves addressing poor management, toxic workplace cultures, and socioeconomic trends and inequities that force people to prioritise hours worked over their own health and that of their colleagues. In writing this, we acknowledge all of this and the long way that our working cultures have to go, and we offer hope on how we get there. Holding the “and” is a psychological practice commonly used in several therapies, including dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT). At its simplest, DBT encourages a balance between opposites. One of these opposites – at least in common discourse – is that of productivity and wellbeing. Perhaps we view our job as a machine – a mechanism where we input hours, and we receive money in return. We tell ourselves that if we manipulate the input (ie, hours worked), we can maximise the output (eg, fatter pay cheque and a fast-tracked promotion). But, when we ramp up our working hours out of compulsion rather than passion, we are subtracting time away from our time to connect, sleep, move, rest, create, play, cook, or explore. We are using our time as a commodity to trade for more money, at the expense of our health and wellbeing. By holding the “and”, let’s explore an alternative. What if we were supported by a workplace that encouraged us to be productive and to be healthy? What if our workplace celebrated achievement and also discouraged pulling all-nighters to reach the try-line? What if we were able to take sufficient time off to recover from physical or emotional hardship and we knew our job would be waiting for us when we came back? It needs noting that, for some people, including those living with chronic psychological or physical illness, presenteeism is unavoidable. For these people, presenteeism might be the best option for them and their organisation. But outside of these chronic cases, we are considerably more productive when we are working healthily and engaged, compared with working while unwell. We can achieve this state more deliberately, more of the time, by taking time off to rest and recover when it’s needed, leading to shorter illness periods and better health outcomes, and by looking after our wellbeing such that we experience lower stress and illness to begin with. By tackling presenteeism, we can make the most of our days at work, and treat our non-work time as a chance to do more of what we love, rather than being a finish line that we cross at the end of each day or week - exhausted and gasping for air. For organisations, this means getting three things right. First, wellbeing is not just a nice-to-have – it’s a strategic opportunity. While supporting people’s wellbeing should always come from the heart, it’s also a virtuous cycle for a business’s bottom line with a demonstrable return on investment. When we look after our people properly and with integrity, we reduce presenteeism and absenteeism, leading to lower people costs (the single biggest expense for many companies). We also reduce business risk from health and safety incidents, and reap the benefits of a high-performing organisation that attracts and retains good talent in a tight market. Second, you don’t know what you can’t see. Sometimes you need to dig below the surface to understand the size of the problem. We often speak with employers who judge the health of their people based on whether they catch wind of problems or not – not realising that the responsibility to create a culture of safe disclosure falls firmly in their corner of the court. Moreover, waiting for problems to be bad enough to arrive on the CEO’s desk is a costly exercise for all involved. Proactive support is crucial. The most effective means of accurately and proactively determining wellbeing and presenteeism is through anonymous assessments that deliver a comprehensive picture of both outcomes and the factors that contribute to them, complemented with 1:1s and team conversations. These communication channels allow business leaders to accurately assess the size of any problems, and take evidence-based action to address them at their root. Third, building a culture of wellbeing and productivity means supporting workers to be truly present. Once you’ve brought wellbeing to the executive boardroom, and determined the size of the problem and what’s causing it, that’s when the real work begins. Some of the best initiatives range from actively encouraging sick and holiday leave to setting protocols for limited access to email and planned shared recovery times where meetings are not booked in – like around lunch times. Tackling presenteeism and being truly present is the antidote to our “always on” culture – where our thinking, emotions and actions race. Being authentically present helps to calm the overwhelm, the stress spiral, and the need to work late to “show face”. It is creating space to rest and recover, an emphasis on outcomes rather than hours worked, greater collaboration and creativity and, ultimately, greater productivity and performance. Dr Amanda Wallis leads the research program at Umbrella Wellbeing and is passionate about making psychological research useable in our every day lives. Gaynor Parkin is a clinical psychologist and CEO at Umbrella Wellbeing, a team of psychologists who provide workplace wellbeing supportMI6 will have to become “more open to stay secret” and work with tech companies to counter threats posed by China and Russia who seek to gain advantage by mastering artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. In his first speech as the foreign spy agency’s head on Tuesday, Richard Moore is expected to admit that “unlike Q in the Bond movies”, MI6 cannot develop the tools it needs in-house to counter hybrid physical and virtual threats. It would become necessary to “tap into” the global technology industry, he added, through initiatives such as the National Security Investment Fund, which earlier this year put £100m into seven venture capital funds aimed at backing hi-tech startups. “I cannot stress enough what a sea change this is in MI6’s culture, ethos and way of working, since we have traditionally relied primarily on our own capabilities to develop the world-class technologies we need to stay secret and deliver against our mission,” Moore is expected to say. “We must become more open to stay secret.” MI6 has been concerned for some time that China, in particular, could leapfrog the traditional technological advantage enjoyed by the west, and which underpins its intelligence activities. Rapid improvements in Beijing’s cyber capacity over the past five years have led some to conclude it has a capability for global surveillance. “Our adversaries are pouring money and ambition into mastering artificial intelligence, quantum computing and synthetic biology, because they know that mastering these technologies will give them leverage,” the spy chief will say. Synthetic biology gives researchers precision tools to manipulate living organisms. Its emergence has prompted US warnings that its existence “enhances and expands” opportunities to create bioweapons, although – despite the apparent reference to Covid-19 – the UK intelligence community believes the most likely scenario is that the disease came to humans via animals. Russia too has been rapidly developing its hacking capabilities and has been accused by the west of a sophisticated hack of the relatively obscure SolarWinds software to spy on the US government – and of allowing hackers based in the country to try to extort money from UK businesses in so-called ransomware attacks. Last month it emerged that MI6 and the UK’s other spy agencies, MI5 and GCHQ, had signed a deal with US tech and shopping giant Amazon to host their cloud computing. A former chief executive of the National Cyber Security Centre, Ciaran Martin, said that would allow agencies “to get information from huge amounts of data in minutes”.The CDC announced Monday that all adults should get a Covid-19 booster shot, strengthening its previous recommendation amid growing concerns over the Omicron variant. Pfizer is reportedly planning to request authorization from the FDA for its Covid booster for 16- and 17-year-olds. Dr Oz is expected to join the Pennsylvania Senate race as a Republican to replace Pat Toomey Joe Biden postponed his remarks about the supply chain for Tuesday instead. Democratic congresswoman Ilhan Omar hung up on a phone call with far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert. The phone call was to address Islamophobic comments that Boebert made about Omar - Omar wanted a public apology while Boebert also wanted an apology from Omar. The House select committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol announced on Monday that it will vote to recommend the criminal prosecution of top former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, after he defied a subpoena seeking his cooperation with the inquiry. The justice department is accusing Trump ally Steve Bannon of seeking to try his charge of criminal contempt of Congress through the media. – Vivian Ho and Dani Anguiano Dr Oz expected to join Pennsylvania Senate race Dr Mehmet Oz is expected to join the Pennsylvania Senate race, the Philadelphia Inquirer reports. Several news reports in recent weeks have indicated the TV doctor, who until recently lived in New Jersey, was considering running as a Republican to replace Senator Pat Toomey. Army veteran Sean Parnell was previously considered the lead contender in the race and had gained an endorsement from Donald Trump, but he suspended his campaign after losing a custody battle with his estranged wife. His wife had accused him of abusing her and striking one of their children. “There is nothing more important to me than my children, and while I plan to ask the court to reconsider, I can’t continue with a Senate campaign,” Parnell said. Oz would enter the race with widespread name recognition, but not without controversy. He has a history of promoting dubious medical treatments on his show. In 2015, a group of prominent doctors urged Columbia University to cut ties with Oz for “an egregious lack of integrity” and promoting “quack treatments” unsupported by scientific evidence. Amazon workers in Alabama will get another union election after the company was found to have violated labor law in the previous election, the Associated Press reports. The move is a major blow to Amazon, which had spent about a year aggressively campaigning for warehouse workers in Bessemer to reject the union, which they ultimately did by a wide margin. It also comes at a time of widespread labor unrest in the US as a somewhat rejuvenated American union movement is flexing its muscles in an economy that is seeking to recover from the coronavirus pandemic. The rare move was first announced on Monday by the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union (RWDSU), which spearheaded the union organizing movement. A National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) spokeswoman confirmed the decision. The RWDSU charged Amazon with illegal misconduct during the first vote. In August, the hearing officer at NLRB who presided over the case determined that Amazon violated labor law and recommended that the regional director set aside the results and direct another election. Full story here: Joe Manchin has told reporters he won’t commit to passing Joe Biden’s Build Back Better bill by Christmas, the timeline laid out by Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader. “We will wait to see what we have,” the West Virginia Democrat said. Manchin and Arizona Senator Krysten Sinema have wielded outsize influence over the president’s $1.75tn social spending and climate package, which was passed by Democrats in the House of Representatives earlier this month. The conservative pair, who present the last hurdle to the president’s Build Back Better plan, pressured colleagues to cut the cost of the plan in half and continue to raise concerns over its cost. The Senate holdouts have been heavily criticized for accepting a flood of money from Republican and corporate donors. Pfizer is reportedly planning to request authorization for its Covid booster for 16- and 17-year-olds. The company and partner BioNTech are expected to ask the FDA to authorize its booster shot for the age group in the coming days, according to the Washington Post. All adults are currently eligible for the booster shot after the CDC strengthened its booster recommendation on Monday amid growing fears over the new Omicron variant. The variant has not yet been detected in the US, but the World Health Organization warns it poses a high global risk. “Given the current overall situation of the pandemic, FDA will evaluate any such EUA request in a very timely manner,” the agency told the Post. A Pfizer spokesperson said the company expects “to share updates on this soon”. Good afternoon. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over our live US politics coverage for the rest of the day. The CDC announced Monday that all adults should get a Covid-19 booster shot, strengthening its previous recommendation amid growing concerns over the Omicron variant. The agency now recommends that everyone 18 and older get a booster shot within two months of receiving the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine or within six months of receiving the Pfizer or Moderna shots. The World Health Organization has said the Omicron variant carries a very high global risk of infection surges. Though significant questions remain, including whether the new variant is more transmissible. Joe Biden said on Monday that the variant is a “cause for concern, not a cause for panic”, and urged Americans to get vaccinated and get booster shots. “Do not wait,” he said. “Go get your booster if it’s time for you to do so. And if you are not vaccinated, now is the time to go get vaccinated and to bring your children to go get vaccinated.” Joe Biden postponed his remarks about the supply chain for tomorrow instead. Democratic congresswoman Ilhan Omar hung up on a phone call with far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert. The phone call was to address Islamophobic comments that Boebert made about Omar - Omar wanted a public apology while Boebert also wanted an apology from Omar. The House select committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol announced on Monday that it will vote to recommend the criminal prosecution of top former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, after he defied a subpoena seeking his cooperation with the inquiry. Thejustice department is accusing Trump ally Steve Bannon, the Trump ally of charging his criminal contempt of Congress through the media. So far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert has posted on Instagram her version of the phone call with Democratic congresswoman Ilhan Omar, and the Islamophobic remarks she made about Omar for which she had to issue an apology. Turns out, Boebert went into the phone call expecting Omar to apologize to her. In 1973, supreme court justices issued a landmark ruling in the case of Roe v Wade, effectively legalizing abortion across the US. In Roe, the court affirmed that access to safe and legal abortion was a constitutional right. The court ruled that states could not ban abortion before a fetus can survive outside the womb, roughly considered to be 24 weeks gestation (a full-term pregnancy is considered to be 39 weeks). Now, Roe faces a direct challenge. The supreme court justices has taken up the case of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Clinic, in which they will consider whether the state of Mississippi can ban nearly all abortion from 15 weeks. Abortion advocates believe the choice to take the case implies that at last four justices see it as a chance to reconsider the precedent set by Roe. Oral arguments in the case are set to be heard on 1 December, Wednesday, with a ruling expected in June next year. But already, pro-choice campaigners are warning of a future where abortion may no longer be legal in the majority of the US. Full story: Joe Biden was set to speak about the supply chain today, his second public remarks of the day. But at last minute, the White House postponed the event until tomorrow. Democrat congresswoman Ilhan Omar has issued a new statement regarding a phone call she had with far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert regarding the Islamophobic remarks Boebert made about Omar. “Instead of apologizing for her Islamophobic comments and fabricated lies, Representative Boebert refused to publicly acknowledge her hurtful and dangerous comments,” Omar said. “She instead doubled down on her rhetoric and I decided to end the unproductive call.” In comments in her home district, Boebert referred to Omar as part of the “Jihad Squad” and described her as a suicide bomber. Republican congressman Adam Kinzinger of Illinois called her “trash” for her remarks, but House minority leader Kevin McCarthy has been noticably silent on the matter. Donald Trump’s “fact-free” approach to the presidency created unprecedented challenges for intelligence officials responsible for briefing him, according to a newly released account from the CIA. The 45th president’s chaotic and freewheeling style, which included rarely reading anything put in front of him, resulted in the presidential daily briefing, or PDB – a crucial security update including information about potential threats to the US – being delivered more regularly to Vice-president Mike Pence instead, the report states. By the middle of Trump’s term in office, his briefings were reduced to two weekly sessions of 45 minutes each. Briefings were discontinued altogether following the deadly insurrection of 6 January, which was sparked by Trump urging his supporters to march on the US Capitol in a failed attempt to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack announced on Monday that it will vote to recommend the criminal prosecution of top former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, after he defied a subpoena seeking his cooperation with the inquiry. The move to pursue contempt of Congress charges against Clark reflects the select committee’s aggressive approach to warn recalcitrant witnesses against attempting to derail their investigation as Trump tried during his administration. Members on the select committee will convene on Wednesday evening to vote on the contempt report – which is expected to be unanimous, according to a source familiar with the matter – and send it to a vote before the full House of Representatives. The former Florida congresswoman Carrie Meek, who died on Sunday, has been remembered as a trailblazer, a descendent of enslaved people who became one of the first Black Floridians elected to Congress since Reconstruction. The late congressman John Lewis had another way of describing her. “We see showboats and we see tugboats. She’s a tugboat. I never want to be on the side of issues against her,” Lewis said of Meek in 1999. On Monday, politicians and public figures including Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, recalled a pioneering career, many noting Meek’s devotion to working-class families in her Miami district as well as her powerful oratory, in an outpouring of support after her death at 95 after a long illness. The US Department of Justice has accused Steve Bannon, the Trump ally and adviser charged with criminal contempt of Congress, of trying to try his own case through the media. Bannon pleaded not guilty to the rare charge, which carries jail time and a fine and which arises from his refusal to co-operate with the House select committee investigating the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, by Trump supporters seeking to overturn the presidential election. On Sunday, the DoJ filed a response to Bannon’s request for all records in the case to be made public. Assistant US attorney Amanda Vaughn wrote: “The defense’s misleading claims, failure to confer, unexplained wholesale opposition, and extrajudicial statements make clear the defense’s real purpose: to abuse criminal discovery to try this case in the media rather than in court.” Bannon’s request, last Wednesday, came with a statement to the Washington Post. “Members of the public should make their own independent judgment as to whether the US Department of Justice is committed to a just result based upon all the facts,” the statement said. “In the opposition filed today, Mr Bannon asked the judge to follow the normal process and allow unfettered access to and use of the documents.” Vaughan made clear prosecutors have been aware of Bannon’s tactics from the start, writing with reference to his appearance in court earlier in November: “Upon release from custody, the defendant and his counsel gathered the press outside of the courthouse and made a five-minute statement about the pending charges. “See ‘Misdemeanor from Hell’: Watch Bannon Speak Out After He’s Released, CNN, 15 November 2021”. Vaughan also wrote that Bannon had “indicated he intends to publicly disseminate [court] materials for an improper purpose: to make extrajudicial arguments about the merits of the case pending against him and the validity of the government’s decision to seek an indictment. “Contrary to what the defendant told the Washington Post, allowing unfettered public access to discovery materials, regardless of their use or relevance to public judicial proceedings, is not the ‘normal process’. It is the opposite of normal.” Here’s more on the 6 January committee and what might be coming this week: Joe Biden addressed Americans about the omicron variant of Covid-19, calling it a “cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. Both Biden and White House press secretary Jen Psaki defended the travel ban issued against eight southern African countries - but not against the number of other countries in Europe and beyond where scientists have detected the variant. “It’s much more wider spread” in southern Africa, Psaki said. Congress is expected to be busy this week with the debt limit, with the House of Representatives set to introduce a stopgap funding bill to extend government funding beyond the current deadline – Friday 3 December – through mid- to late January, with 21 January and 28 January the dates up for discussion. Democrat congressman Tom Suozzi has just announced that he will be running for governor of New York, making him the 18th Democrat in Congress to not seek reelection in 2022 - very much putting the Democrats’ narrow majority at risk. Today a federal court issued an injunction pausing the vaccine mandate for most healthcare workers. White House press secretary Jen Psaki had a response: “We’re obviously going to abide by the law and fight any efforts in court or otherwise to prevent local authorities, officials, leaders in the health care industries and other industries from protecting their workforces,” she said. Psaki noted that private, individual companies can put in place requirements in order to protect their workforce and that is something a number of companies have done across the company. “We continue to encourage leaders to take steps to protect their workforces,” Psaki said. White House press secretary Jen Psaki addressed the travel ban that Joe Biden issued against eight southern African countries - the omicron variant of Covid-19 was first detected in that region. “The objective here is not to punish, but to protect the American people,” Psaki said. “As you just heard the president say, this is not going to prevent - this is going to delay and that delay is going to help us have the necessary time to do the research by our health and medical teams to get more people vaccinated and more people boosted. He is always going to air on the side of protecting the American people.” Though the omicron variant has since been detected the United Kingdom, Australia, Belgium, Botswana, Denmark, Germany, Hong Kong, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, France and Canada. Psaki said the reason why the ban applied to southern Africa rather than these other countries is because there were thousands of omicron cases in southern Africa while only a few cases in the other countries. . The new omicron variant is at the forefront of today’s White House press briefing. Again, there have been no reported cases on US soil yet. But White House press secretary Jen Psaki said today the administration’s top health officials are “working around the clock” to be prepared and the Centers for Disease Control is meeting today with state labs and state health associations to make sure everybody is ready on a federal, state and local level. “What the president was trying to convey is that there are several layers of work to be done right now,” Psaki said. White House press secretary Jen Psaki has taken the podium for the White House press briefing, prepping the press corps for the president’s round table meeting for Cyber Monday with the chief executives of several companies to discuss issues with the supply chain, which he will be speaking about later today. Joe Biden was immediately asked about the travel ban he issued, which he said was because “there were a significant number of cases”. “We needed time to get people the opportunity to get the vaccination now before it moved around the world,” he said. Biden. said he doesn’t anticipate any more travel restrictions. Dr Anthony Fauci, Biden’s chief medical adviser, took to the podium to explain the stringent requirements already in place for those traveling internationally to the US - travellers must both be vaccinated and be tested before entering. Biden said he does not anticipate the need for any future lockdowns. “If people are vaccinated and wear their masks, there won’t be a need for a lockdown,” he said. “In the event, hopefully unlikely, that updated vaccinations or boosters are needed to respond to this new variant, we will accelerate their development and deployment with every available tool. “We do not yet believe that additional measures will be needed. But so that we are prepared if needed, my team is already working with officials at Pfizer and Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson to develop contingency plans for vaccines and boosters if needed. I will also direct the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and CDC (Centers for Disease Control) to use the fastest process possible without cutting any corners for safekeeping to get vaccines approved and on the market as soon as possible if needed. “I’m sparing no effort. I’m removing all road blocks to keep the American people safe.” “If you are 18 years and older and got fully vaccinated before 1 June go get the get booster shot today,” Joe Biden said today. “They’re free and they’re available at 80,000 locations coast to coast. A fully vaccinated booster person is the most protected against Covid. “Do not wait. Go get your booster if it’s time for you to do so. And if you are not vaccinated, now is the time to go get vaccinated and to bring your children to go get vaccinated.” So far, no cases of the new omicron variant of Covid-19 have been reported in the US. But Biden said it’s only a matter of time. “Sooner or later, we are going to see new cases of this new variant here in the United States and we’re going to have to face this new threat just as we have faced the ones that came before it.” Joe Biden took to the podium to tell Americans that the new omicron variant of Covid-19 “is a cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. “We’ll fight this variant with scientific and knowledgeable actions and speed, not chaos and confusion,” he said. “We have more tools today to fight the variant than we ever had before, from vaccines to boosters, to vaccines for children.” “A year ago, America was floundering against the first variant of Covid,” Biden continued. “We beat that variant significantly, and then we got hit by a far more powerful threat, the Delta variant. But we took action and now we’re seeing deaths from Delta come down. “Look, we’re going to fight and beat this new variant as well.” Joe Biden is expected to speak momentarily about the new omicron variant of Covid-19. The Associated Press is reporting that the president is expected to urge Americans to get vaccinated - but not push for more restrictions - in the face of this new variant, of which there are no reported cases yet in the US. Democrat congressman Tom Suozzi has just announced that he will be running for governor of New York. This is significant in that Suozzi is now the 18th Democrat in Congress to not seek reelection in 2022, putting at risk the very narrow majority that the left holds. Actor Matthew McConaughey has officially announced that he will not be running for governor of Texas, a seat for which former Democratic congressman and candidate for Senate and president Beto O’Rourke is also vying. Read more about it here: Tis the season for the White House to unveil its holiday decorations - a task that falls under the purview of first lady Jill Biden. Rand Paul, a senator from Kentucky, has clashed publicly with Anthony Fauci over virus research carried out before the pandemic. Ted Cruz, from Texas, has said Fauci should be prosecuted regarding his handling of the Covid response. “Yeah,” Fauci told CBS in his Sunday interview. “I have to laugh at that. I should be prosecuted? What happened on 6 January, senator?” Cruz was among Republicans who voted to object to electoral college results in key states, even after Trump supporters mounted a deadly attack on the US Capitol. Asked if he was being made a scapegoat for Trump’s failings under Covid, Fauci said: “Of course, you have to be asleep not to figure that one out … That’s OK, I’m just going to do my job and I’m going to be saving lives and they’re going to be lying.” Playing politics with his role in the Covid response, Fauci said, was “unbelievably bad because all I want to do is save people’s lives. That’s what I have done for the last 50 years … “I mean, anybody who’s looking at this carefully realises that there’s a distinct anti-science flavor to this. So if they get up and criticize science, nobody’s going to know what they’re talking about. But if they get up and really aim their bullets at Tony Fauci, well, people could recognize there’s a person there. There’s a face, there’s a voice you can recognize, you see him on television. “So it’s easy to criticise, but they’re really criticising science because I represent science. That’s dangerous. To me, that’s more dangerous than the slings and the arrows that get thrown at me. “I’m not going to be around here forever, but science is going to be here forever. And if you damage science, you are doing something very detrimental to society long after I leave. And that’s what I worry about.” Here’s video of one memorable exchange between Paul and Fauci, from a Senate hearing in July: In an interview broadcast by CBS on Sunday, Dr Anthony Fauci had strong words for Republicans attacking him over his role in the federal coronavirus response. Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser has served seven presidents since 1984 and is now to the fore in preparations for the arrival of the Omicron coronavirus variant and efforts to increase vaccination against Covid-19. Under Donald Trump, Fauci was often at odds with his boss or attacked by him. He attracted death threats as well as the ire of Republicans in Congress. He told CBS: “I dealt with it by focusing on what my job is from the time that I went into medicine to right now. Where I am at my age” – nearly 81 – “my job has been totally focused on doing what I can with the talents and the influence I had to make scientific advances to protect the health of the American public. “So anybody who spins lies and threatens and all that theatre that goes on with some of the investigations and the congressional committees and the Rand Pauls and all that other nonsense … that’s noise. I know what my job is.” Punchbowl News, a Capitol Hill-focused outlet, is reporting that House leaders are ready to introduce a stopgap funding bill to extend government funding beyond the current deadline – Friday 3 December – through mid- to late January, with 21 January and 28 January the dates up for discussion. A floor vote could take place as early as Wednesday, but then Senate leaders will need an agreement to push the resolution through by Friday. There is also the small matter of the debt limit, the arbitrary borrowing cap that is raised each year to prevent the US from defaulting on its debts – a move that would cause economic catastrophe across the globe. The treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, has said the US can meet its obligations till 15 December or so. Punchbowl isn’t expecting the same high drama on the issue as October, when Biden bluffed on filibuster reform to get Republicans to move amid heated words from both sides. But the week’s still young. Republicans believe Democrats and Democrats alone should raise the debt limit, which would be fine if the Democrats held workable majorities in both the House and the Senate. Last time, the Republicans twice used their beloved filibuster to block efforts to raise the debt limit which required 60 votes. In October, Republicans wanted Democrats to raise the debt limit through budget reconciliation, a complicated process that neither Biden nor Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer were very keen on – in part because there are only so many times Congress can consider reconciliation bills each year. One has already gone to the Covid bill and the ambitious Build Back Better Act is now before the Senate. Last time out, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell eventually agreed to a short-term deal that increased the borrowing limit by $480bn – sufficient to prevent the government from defaulting by keeping debt payments up until mid-December. Which is quite soon, if not so soon as the deadline to fund government itself. Ahoy there, live blog readers. Let’s strap in for the week, shall we? Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver remarks at the White House twice today. He’s sure to field questions about supposedly impending economic doom but the main purposes of the remarks will be the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant (first, at 11.45am ET) and issues with the supply chain (second, at 3.45pm ET). The World Health Organization said this morning Omicron is likely to spread internationally, posing a “very high” global risk where Covid-19 surges could have “severe consequences”. “Omicron has an unprecedented number of spike mutations, some of which are concerning for their potential impact on the trajectory of the pandemic,” the WHO said. “The overall global risk related to the new variant of concern Omicron is assessed as very high.” No cases have yet been reported in the US. Press secretary Jen Psaki is scheduled brief too, at 1pm ET. Congress has plenty on its plate too. We’re on the cusp of December, which for all those keeping score out there means it’s time to once again talk about the possibility of the federal government shutting down and/or disaster over the debt ceiling. More to come.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting from Sydney, Australia. Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage on our new blog here. The World Health Organisation (WHO) said the Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally, posing a “very high” global risk where Covid-19 surges could have “severe consequences” in some areas. UK to ramp up booster vaccinations and will halve the minimum gap in between jabs to three months aims with an aim to administer 500,000 jabs a day. The UK also announced that all adults would be eligible for a booster jab as part of the country’s response to the Omicron variant. UK records 42,583 new cases and further 35 deaths. France records a big jump in Covid cases after the health minister said the country had entered the fifth wave of the pandemic last week. Omicron has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. Sweden, Canada and Spain reported their first cases linked to the omicron variant. US president Joe Biden has said the Omicron variant “is a cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. President Xi Jinping said China would offer another 1 billion doses of Covid vaccines to African countries and would encourage Chinese companies to invest $10 billion in Africa over the next three years, Reuters reports. Poland, Ghana and Norway announced new restrictions on travel and socialising. The US says it doesn’t plan to introduce further travel restrictions. As Europe braces for a possible outbreak of the new Omicron coronavirus variant, here is a quick visual refresh of where the continent stands in its fight against the coronavirus. This updated map indicates incidence rates across Europe. South Africa reported 2,273 new Covid-19 cases and 25 deaths in the past 24 hours, according to National Department of Health data. A total of 21,302 tests were conducted with the 2,273 new cases representing a 10.7% positivity rate. President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines said he favours mandatory vaccination against Covid should the government’s Covid-19 task force recommend the policy. “As a worker of government also in charge of the overall operations of the government, I may agree with the task force [Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases] if they decide to make it mandatory. It’s for public health,” Duterte said in a televised meeting with the National Task Force (NTF) against Covid-19 and medical experts in Malacañan Palace. He acknowledged that a law is needed to mandate Filipinos to receive the Covid-19 vaccine shots, but reiterated that government can also use its police power to compel citizens to get vaccinated against Covid-19, the Philippine News Agency reports. Ministers are set to ramp up vaccinations to 3.5m a week as the minimum gap for boosters was cut to three months. Confirmed Omicron cases rose to 11 in England and Scotland on Monday, with scientific advisers braced for hundreds more to be detected in the next week or so. From Tuesday, masks will be mandatory on public transport including airports and stations and in shops – including hair salons and takeaways but not pubs or restaurants. The NHS is set to confirm an expansion of the vaccine programme this week. Read the full story here. Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the Covid news. Let’s start off with some updates out of Australia. NSW and Victoria have reported their Covid data for the day. Victoria records 917 Covid cases and six deaths and NSW records 179 cases and three deaths. There are five cases of the new Omicron confirmed in the country – all are in quarantine. There are four in Sydney (after two more were confirmed late yesterday) and one in the Northern Territory. All five people had been vaccinated. Anthony Fauci, the top infectious disease official of the US, told CNN on Monday it could not yet be predicted if the Omicron Covid-19 variant will become the dominant variant in the country. Fauci also reiterated that the US was unlikely to impose further travel restrictions. The mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, has urged New Yorkers to take up vaccine and booster offers and wear face masks, while claiming that there are currently zero cases of Omicron in the city. Acccording to the New York Times, de Blasio said on Monday that he was emphasising the city health department’s standing advice that unvaccinated as well as vaccinated New Yorkers wear masks in public indoor settings, although he has has so far not made them mandatory in all indoor public spaces. “We’re doubling down on it, basically,” de Blasio said. “It’s time to re-up that advisory and make it very, very clear this is a smart thing to do at this point.” Masks are already required on mass transit and in hospitals and schools. The mayor said the rules for indoor dining would remain unchanged, with vaccinations required for guests, and that planned New Year’s Eve celebrations in Times Square would not be cancelled. The Omicron Covid-19 variant could hurt global growth prospects while also pushing prices higher, rating agencies Fitch Ratings and Moody’s Investors Service said on Monday, after the World Health Organization said the variant carried a very high risk of infection surges. “The Omicron variant poses risks to global growth and inflation, especially as it comes during a period of already stretched supply chains, elevated inflation and labour market shortages,” Elena Duggar, associate managing director at Moody’s, told Reuters. The variant is also likely to hit demand during the upcoming holiday travel and spending season, according to Duggar. “If the new variant affects global market risk appetite, it would cause further financial stress for debt issuers with large financing needs. For example, emerging market countries that rely on international market borrowing may face heightened refinancing risks,” she said. Fitch Ratings said separately that it was too soon to incorporate the effects of the Omicron coronavirus variant into its economic growth forecasts until more is known about its transmissibility and severity. “We currently believe that another large, synchronised global downturn, such as that seen in the first half of 2020, is highly unlikely but the rise in inflation will complicate macroeconomic responses if the new variant takes hold,” Fitch said. More countries closed borders on Monday, casting a shadow over economic recovery from the two-year pandemic. Big airlines acted swiftly to protect their hubs by curbing passenger travel from southern Africa, fearing that a spread of the new variant would trigger restrictions from other destinations beyond the immediately affected regions, industry sources said. The experience with past variants suggests that, even with some restrictions on international travel, the spread of the Omicron variant may be hard to stop, Duggar said, adding: “Should the new variant lead to another rising wave of Covid infections, the hardest-hit economies will be those with lower vaccination rates, higher dependence on tourism and lower capacity to offer fiscal and monetary policy support to offset the growth impact of the new wave of infections.” Cuba will tighten coronavirus restrictions from 4 December for passengers from certain African countries over concerns about the Omicron coronavirus variant, the country’s government said on Monday. This from Reuters: Travellers arriving from South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Malawi, and Mozambique will be allowed to enter Cuba, the country’s health ministry said, but will be required to comply with multiple precautionary measures, including proof of vaccination, three PCR tests and a seven-day quarantine. Travellers from other sub-Saharan African nations, as well as Belgium, Israel, Hong Kong, Egypt and Turkey will be required to take two PCR tests, the ministry said. Concerns over the Omicron variant are flaring in Cuba just two weeks after the Caribbean island nation reopened its borders to international visitors. Cuba, whose economy depends on tourism, eased entry requirements after inoculating most of its people with a Covid-19 vaccine developed domestically. New infections have dropped off sharply in recent weeks, as have deaths from Covid-19. As part of targeted measures to prevent the spread of the new Covid-19 variant Omicron, from 4am on 30 November, people in England will be required by law to wear a face covering in shops, enclosed shopping centres, banks, post offices, and on public transport. Some individuals will be exempt from doing so, such as children under the age of 11, shop and public transport staff, police officers and emergency responders, plus anyone with a reasonable excuse, such as a disability or physical or mental illness. People will not be required to wear masks in hospitality settings, and photography studios are also exempt. People who are not wearing a face covering where they have to can be fined in form of a fixed penalty notice and ordered to pay £200, rising to £400 for the second such offence, £800 for the third, up to a maximum of £6,400 for a sixth or subsequent fixed penalty notice. In the 24 hours to Sunday, 22,304 first doses of Covid vaccine were administered in the UK, taking the total of first doses delivered to 50,941,327 as of 28 November, government figures show. Some 46,341,057 second doses have been delivered as of Sunday, an increase of 29,445. A combined total of 17,581,331 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 450,480. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. As always, don’t hesitate to get in touch with updates, tips and pointers, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. Here are the main developments we’ve reported on the blog so far today: The UK announced that all adults would be eligible for a booster jab as part of the country’s response to the omicron variant Poland, Ghana and Norway announced new restrictions on travel and socialising to tackle the spread of omicron Sweden, Canada and Spain reported their first cases linked to the omicron variant A big jump in coronavirus cases was recorded in France, after the health minister said the country had entered the fifth wave of the pandemic last week The US said it didn’t plan to introduce further travel restrictions, and advocated vaccinations, boosters and mask-wearing as preventative measures against the omicron variant, which has not yet been detected in the country Thanks for tuning in today, I’m tapping out but the blog will stay open to monitor further coronavirus-related developments around the world under Jedidajah Otte’s watch. France registered its biggest jump in coronavirus-related hospital admissions since the spring, according to official data. Reuters reports: The number of patients in intensive care units jumped by 117 to 1,749 people, the biggest increase since March-April, when the ICU number rose by more than 100 per day on several days. The number of people in hospital with the virus jumped by 470 to 9,860, the biggest one-day increase since March 29. Compared with a week ago, the number of Covid-19 patients was up more than 18%, the biggest week-on-week increase this year. The French health minister last week said that France has entered a fifth wave of the pandemic. France is registering nearly 30,000 new cases a day on average. The Quebecois health minister has reported the discovery of a first case of the omicron variant, Reuters reports. One case of the Omicron coronavirus variant has been detected in Sweden, the Public Health Agency said on Monday. Reuters reports: The case was detected in a test taken a little over a week ago from a person who had travelled from South Africa, the agency said in a statement. US President Joe Biden has said the omicron variant “is a cause for concern, not a cause for panic”. The best protection is to get vaccinated and receive a booster when eligible, he said, urging all Americans to do so as quickly as possible. Although no cases of the omicron variant have yet been found in the US, he said: “Sooner or later, we are going to see new cases of this new variant here in the United States and we’re going to have to face this new threat just as we have faced the ones that came before it.” In terms of preventative measures, he encouraged Americans to wear masks indoors and in public places, but said that further travel bans were unlikely. US President Joe Biden is poised to speak on plans to tackle the threat of the omicron variant. I’ll keep you updated with key messages, but you can follow the detail on our US as it happens: Spain has detected its first case of the omicron variant of the coronavirus in a 51-year-old man who arrived from South Africa on Sunday after a layover in Amsterdam, according to Madrid’s regional health authorities. Reuters reports: The microbiology unit at Madrid’s Gregorio Maranon hospital, which sequenced and confirmed the new variant, added in a separate tweet that the patient was in fair condition with light symptoms. Ghana’s government is ordering access to beaches, restaurants, night clubs and stadiums be limited to people who have been vaccinated against Covid, as part of its efforts to fight the spread of the virus, AP reports. While the Omicron variant has not yet been identified in the west African country, the government health service is “taking steps to protect the country towards the Christmas season,” Ghana’s health service director-general Patrick Kuma-Aboagye said. At least 5.45 million people of Ghana’s population of 31 million have received at least one vaccine dose. Vaccines being administered in Ghana include AstraZeneca, Sputnik V, Moderna, Pfizer/BioNTech and Johnson &amp; Johnson. Ghana’s land borders are currently closed and air travellers are required to have a PCR test within 72 hours of arrival and antigen tests upon arrival. The country aims to administer 20 million doses of vaccines by the end of 2021, Kuma-Aboagye said in a statement issued on Sunday. “Among Covid-19 deaths at the Ghana Infectious Diseases Center, 12.5% of the deaths were persons who had been vaccinated (they also had severe underlying medical conditions). The rest, 87.5%, hadn’t been vaccinated,” he said. Ghana has recorded more than 1,209 deaths and 130,920 cases of Covid-19. The UK has reported another 42,583 Covid cases and a further 35 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared to 37,681 infections and 51 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. The Omicron variant is highly transmissible and requires “urgent action,” G7 health ministers said on Monday, praising South Africa’s “exemplary work” for both detecting the strain and alerting others. “The global community is faced with the threat of a new, at a first evaluation, highly transmissible variant of Covid-19, which requires urgent action,” the health ministers said in a statement following an emergency meeting, adding they would work together to monitor Omicron. Underlining the “strategic relevance of ensuring access to vaccines”, they pledged to hold to their donation commitments, as well as to provide support to research and development. At the same time, they will tackle “vaccine misinformation”, something that has in parts of the world led to resistance against inoculation. A new meeting will be held in December, they said, committing to work closely together with the World Health Organization and international partners to share information on Omicron. Scientists in South Africa said they had last week detected the new variant with at least 10 mutations, compared with three for Beta or two for Delta - the variant that hit the global recovery and sent millions worldwide back into lockdown earlier this year. Omicron has sparked a frenzy of travel restrictions across the world, with a growing list of countries having already imposed travel curbs on southern Africa, including Qatar, the US, the UK, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the Netherlands. With new travel restrictions coming into effect in England from 4am on Tuesday to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant, my colleague Nazia Parveen explains what this means for travellers arriving in the country: The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has identified two further cases of Covid-19 with mutations consistent with Omicron in England, officials have announced. The two cases are in addition to the previous three confirmed cases of the Sars-CoV-2 variant known as B.1.1.529 – aka the Omicron variant – on 27 and 28 November. The total number of confirmed cases in England is now five. The individuals that have tested positive are not connected to each other and are not linked to the previously confirmed cases. Both have links to travel to southern Africa. One case is located in Camden, north London and one case is located in Wandsworth, south London. Both individuals and their households had been told to self-isolate, the UKHSA said. It was carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to be infectious. Good afternoon from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next hour while Rachel takes a break. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The JCVI briefing has now wrapped up. Here’s a reminder of the key points: All adults aged 18-39 are now eligible for a booster People who are immunosuppressed are eligible for a fourth dose A second dose will now be available for children aged 12-15 Boosters will be given three months after the second dose The booster programme is expected to improve the efficacy of the jabs against omicron Lim said all the JCVI advice given today applies to pregnant women. He added that “there is a time to move quickly and a time to move more cautiously” on the vaccine programme, and the current moment calls for swifter-decision making. Raine said a study of the side effects of the vaccine in those aged under 18 had shown there are “no new safety issues”. She said: “Our message to people aged 12-15 is that it is safe to have a second dose of the Pfizer vaccine and if you’re called to receive your second dose, please go and take that offer. “It will ensure that you’re further protected from Covid-19.” The UK’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, is about to speak in the House of Commons. You can follow the discussion on our UK blog: Lim said that there is evidence that “the vaccines we have at the moment may be less good against omicron than the currently circulating delta variant”, since viruses that develop variants increase “the likelihood of a mismatch”. One way of reducing this impact is to increase the strength of the immune response provided by the current vaccine. Since evidence suggests that the strongest response comes from the booster, it is expected to provide “extra protection” against omicron. He added that the pre-booster interval must absolutely not be shorter than three months, which would be “too early”. The NHS is working through the updated guidance and will set out how it will be operationalised soon, said Van Tam. He added that the important message from the NHS is that it “understands the real urgency of this” and is “up for the task” but will open bookings in an orderly way to prevent younger people from receiving their boosters ahead of more vulnerable and older adults. All adults should be given a booster jab from three months after receiving their second dose, while those who are immunocompromised should receive a fourth jab, said Lim. This is an increase from the present interval of six months, and an extension of the eligibility for those aged under 40. Children aged 12 to 15 will also be invited for a second dose three months after their first. More details to follow Message to people aged 12 to 15 is that “it’s safe to receive the second dose of the Pfizer vaccine”, said chief medicines regulator Dr June Raine. Raine added that there is no evidence so far that the vaccines aren’t effective against the omicron variant. She added that adults should be assured of the safety of the booster programme. Speaking at the JCVI press conference, England’s deputy chief medical officer Prof Jonathan Van Tam said: “Variants have always been inevitable and we’ve seen many come and the names include alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and there are others. When a variant appears it always causes initial concern because at that point we don’t know how it will behave and in particular we don’t know how our vaccines will hold up against that variant. “At some points, we’ve always said it, we’re going to get a variant that gives us heightened concern. We’re at that moment with omicron. “I want to emphasise the very high degree of uncertainty in our knowledge. “That’s going to change rapidly as scientists mobilise on this over the next three weeks. but everyone needs to give us time to assemble that data.” He said scientists were certain of several features of the variant: “The omicron variant has many mutations, some we know something about and others are new. “The number of mutations already on first principles makes us worry about a possible effect on vaccine effectiveness.” Uncertainties include the transferability of the virus and the severity of the disease it causes, he said. He added: “I do not want people to panic at this stage. “The biggest effects are likely to be in preventing infections and hopefully smaller effects on preventing severe disease.” A press conference in the UK is starting now on the vaccination policy - more to follow. President Xi Jinping on Monday said China would offer another 1 billion doses of Covid-19 vaccines to African countries and would encourage Chinese companies to invest no less than $10 billion (£7.5 billion) in Africa over the next three years, Reuters reports. Anthony Fauci, the leading Covid-19 adviser in the US, said that instead of introducing restrictions, Americans will be urged to get vaccinated and receive booster shots to address concerns over the possible spread of omicron. Fauci said that there were as yet still no cases of the variant identified in the US but that it was “inevitable” that it would make its way into the country eventually, Associated Press reports. Speaking on ABC’s “Good Morning America,” Fauci said scientists hope to know in the next week or two how well the existing Covid-19 vaccines protect against the variant, and how dangerous it is compared to earlier strains. “We really don’t know,” Fauci said, calling speculation “premature.” Biden is set to speak later on Monday about the urgency of getting vaccinated against Covid-19 to protect against variants, especially as roughly 80 million Americans aged 5 and up haven’t yet received a shot. But Biden was not expected to announce any new virus-related restrictions, beyond last week’s move to restrict travel from South Africa and seven other countries in the region, effective Monday. A senior EU official has told Reuters that an EU summit on the coronavirus situation is likely at the end of this week or possibly the week after. The official, who declined to be named, said a decision could come in the coming hours or on Tuesday. EU leaders would seek a common approach on various issues, including the question of booster vaccine doses, the official said. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa has urged other countries to resist “unjustified and unscientific” Covid-19 travel restrictions that mostly hurt developing nations. Reuters reports Ramaphosa’s speech at the opening of the China-Africa Summit in Dakar: “We need to resist unjustified and unscientific travel restrictions that are damaging the economies and sectors of the economies that rely on travel. “There is a world order where a country’s wealth is the difference between sickness and health.” Russia has said it would be ready to provide booster shots to protect against the Omicron coronavirus variant if needed. Reuters reports comments from Kirill Dmitriev, the head of the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), which markets the vaccine overseas: “Gamaleya Institute believes Sputnik V and Light will neutralize Omicron as they have highest efficacy versus other mutations. “In unlikely case a modification is needed, we will provide several hundred million of Sputnik Omicron boosters by 20 February 2022.” Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told reporters earlier in the day: “We see that the reaction on markets is emotional, it is not based on scientific evidence because there is none yet. The whole world is currently trying to figure out how dangerous it is.” Russia was quick to develop its two-dose Sputnik V vaccine last year and has also deployed a one-shot Sputnik Light vaccine, both of which have it says demonstrated high efficacy in trials, but are still awaiting WHO approval. More from the interview on CNBC from Pfizer’s chief exec: Pfizer now expects to manufacture 80m treatment courses of its experimental Covid-19 antiviral drug, up from a forecast of 50m by the end of next year made earlier in the month. Reuters reports that Bourla said he was confident that the drug, with the brand name Paxlovid, would be unaffected by the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, adding that the company would know more details about the new variant in the next few weeks. Pfizer applied for emergency authorization of Paxlovid last week after reporting data showing that it was 89% effective at preventing hospitalisation or death in at-risk people. The Polish government has announced the following restrictions to come into force between 1-17 December: Restaurants, cinemas and some other places to be reduced to 50% capacity. Weddings limited to 100 vaccinated people, no limits on those with jabs. 14-day quarantine for all those travelling from outside the Schengen zone. Longer quarantine for those returning from some African countries. There’s another CNBC interview with a vaccine manufacturer, this time we’re hearing from Pfizer’s chief exec, Albert Bourla. Reuters reports that on Friday Pfizer made a new template to develop an Omicron vaccine. UK prime minister Boris Johnson has been urged to introduce far tougher travel restrictions on travellers from abroad by the first ministers of Scotland and Wales, Severin Carrell reports. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister of Scotland, and Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, also urged Johnson to host an urgent meeting of Cobra, the UK government’s emergency planning committee, to agree a common approach. Sturgeon said she and Drakeford believed there was a clear need to increase quarantine times and precautionary testing for new arrivals to prevent the variant getting a hold in the UK. Speaking at an emergency briefing in Edinburgh, Sturgeon said all travellers from abroad should quarantine for eight days and undergo a PCR test on the eighth day, as well as on day two, as is already required. The chief executive of Moderna, Stephane Bancel, said data on the efficacy of the vaccine against the newest variant could be available within two to six weeks but that it will be months before Omicron-specific jabs can be shipped. Speaking in a CNBC interview reported by Reuters, Bancel added that this variant is understood to be highly infectious, but that current measures that countries are taking will be effective in slowing down its spread. Poland will announce new restrictions later today to protect the country against the Omicron variant, its prime minister said. “We will present some additional restrictions today so that it is possible to protect ourselves better from those countries where this virus is,” Mateusz Morawiecki told a news conference reported bby Reuters. AFP has just shared its regular tally of global coronavirus cases, compiled from official sources. The new figures show that coronavirus has killed at least 5,197,718 people since the outbreak emerged in China in December 2019. At least 260,817,750 cases of coronavirus have been registered. On Sunday, 4,760 new deaths and 382,619 new cases were recorded worldwide. The report notes that the World Health Organization estimates that the pandemic’s overall toll could be two to three times higher than official records, due to the excess mortality that is directly and indirectly linked to Covid-19. A large number of the less severe or asymptomatic cases also remain undetected, despite intensified testing in many countries The country breakdowns are as follows: Based on latest reports, the countries with the most new deaths were Russia with 1,209 new deaths, followed by Ukraine with 297 and India with 236. The United States is the worst-affected country with 776,639 deaths from 48,229,273 cases. After the US, the hardest-hit countries are Brazil with 614,278 deaths from 22,080,906 cases, India with 468,790 deaths from 34,580,832 cases, Mexico with 293,897 deaths from 3,883,842 cases, and Russia with 273,964 deaths from 9,604,233 cases. The country with the highest number of deaths compared to its population is Peru with 610 fatalities per 100,000 inhabitants, followed by Bulgaria with 404, Bosnia-Herzegovina with 380, Montenegro with 364, Republic of North Macedonia with 362, Hungary with 351 and Czech Republic with 307. Latin America and the Caribbean overall has 1,539,738 deaths from 46,642,178 cases, Europe 1,514,834 deaths from 83,767,638 infections, and Asia 896,740 deaths from 57,159,434 cases. The US and Canada has reported 806,268 deaths from 50,014,587 cases, Africa 222,568 deaths from 8,638,847 cases, Middle East 214,292 deaths from 14,288,635 cases, and Oceania 3,278 deaths from 306,439 cases. South Africa has described the decision of fellow African nations to impose travel bans over the new Omicron varient as “regrettable … (and) sad”, following a rush by wealthy countries to shut their borders to the nation that first detected the strain. AFP reports that Angola, Mauritius, Rwanda and the Seychelles have halted flights from South Africa in a bid to shield themselves from Omicron. The interview cited foreign ministry spokesman Clayson Monyela, who said: “It is quite regrettable, very unfortunate, and I will even say sad, to be talking about travel restrictions imposed by a fellow African country “What I don’t understand is that some of these African countries that are doing this, know the struggles (that) as a continent we have, where European countries will take this decision and impose travel bans.” Moyela said South Africa had recently made “substantial donations” of vaccines to some of the countries that were now imposing flight bans. “When a fellow African country does that, especially in the context where most of these countries are beneficiaries … it doesn’t make sense,” he told an online news conference organised by the health ministry. “That’s why we think these decision must be reversed immediately.” A snap from Reuters states that Norway’s government is poised to introduce measures to curb the spread of Omicron. More to follow. The Dutch police have arrested a married couple who fled a quarantine hotel to get a flight out of the country, despite at least one of them testing positive for Covid on arrival in the Netherlands from South Africa, where the new Omicron variant was first identified, Daniel Boffey writes. The Portuguese woman and Spanish man were apprehended in their seats moments before their plane was scheduled to leave for Spain from Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport on Sunday evening. A spokesperson for the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee, a national police force, said the couple had been taken off the plane “almost silently and without resistance”. As the Covid-19 pandemic raged, New Zealanders and Australians developed the world’s highest levels of trust in scientists, newly released survey data has found – and those trust levels soared as the global crisis evolved. The Wellcome Global Monitor, conducted by Gallup, surveyed 119,000 people across 113 countries. It found 62% of the two countries’ citizens said they trusted scientists “a lot”, compared with a global average of 41%. While trust in scientists had increased around the world since 2018, the portion who said they trusted scientists a lot jumped 15 percentage points in Australia and New Zealand, compared with nine points elsewhere. In 2018, western Europe had had the highest levels of trust in scientists, but they were overtaken in the past two years. Particularly during the first year of the pandemic, Australia and New Zealand were lauded for the success of their zero-Covid strategies, which closely matched with public health experts’ advice. The survey – which grouped the two countries together, with no national breakdown – was completed before the recent Delta outbreaks, and reflects a strong sense that the two governments were in step with the science: they were by far the most likely to believe that their governments were making their decisions based on scientific advice. Sixty-two per cent said their governments were basing decisions on science – compared with just 25% in North America, and 43% in western Europe. Read more of Tess McClure’s report from Christchurch here: Trust in scientists soared in Australia and New Zealand during Covid pandemic, poll finds The Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally, posing a “very high” global risk where Covid-19 surges could have “severe consequences” in some areas, the World Health Organisation (WHO) said this morning. “Omicron has an unprecedented number of spike mutations, some of which are concerning for their potential impact on the trajectory of the pandemic,” the WHO said. “The overall global risk related to the new variant of concern Omicron is assessed as very high.” Omicron has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. Portugal has detected 13 cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant – all related to players and staff members of the Lisbon football team Belenenses. Defender Cafu Phete tested positive for Covid-19 after returning to Portugal last week from international duty in South Africa. Six cases of Omicron have been identified in Scotland – four in Lanarkshire and two in Glasgow and Clyde. Scotland’s deputy first minister John Swinney said that some of the Omicron variant cases identified in Scotland have no travel history, which suggests there is a degree of community transmission. Pupils and staff at a school in Essex in England are being tested for Covid after it was linked to one of England’s three cases. Junior health minister Edward Argar said that number was sure to increase, saying: “I would expect that to rise. We don’t know by what speed, or by what numbers. What we’re doing is trying to slow it down, but we can’t we can’t stop it.” Asked if the government might tighten up the rules even further in the next three weeks, he said: “It’s not something I’m anticipating.” G7 health ministers are to hold an emergency meeting on Monday on the new Omicron Covid-19 strain, as experts race to understand what the variant means for the fight to end the pandemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) is opening a long-planned special session of member states to discuss ways to strengthen the global fight against pandemics such as the coronavirus, just as the new omicron variant has sparked immediate concerns worldwide. Germany’s Angela Merkel said the WHO required reliable financing with higher donations from member states, and she backed it launching negotiations for a binding international accord on preventing pandemics. Authorities in France are waiting for laboratory confirmation of eight suspected cases of the new variant of the coronavirus, involving people who traveled recently to southern Africa. Prof Sir Mark Walport, who is a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) advising the UK government, said there was “good cause to be concerned” about Omicron. In the UK, Deputy Labour leader Angela Rayner said there was “no distinction” between people sitting in pubs, trains or hospitals when it came to wearing masks indoors. She has called for face coverings to be worn in hospitality venues in England, as well as on public transport and in shops. Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown said that 100 million vaccines would be “wasted” by western countries by the end of the year. “If you waste a vaccine, you’re actually putting a life at risk.” Military police in the Netherlands say they have arrested a married couple who left a hotel where they were in quarantine after testing positive for Covid-19 and were attempting to flee the country. The top US infectious disease official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has told president Joe Biden it will take about two weeks to have definitive information on the new variant and has warned the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections. Singapore and Malaysiahave re-opened one of the world’s busiest land borders, allowing vaccinated travellers to make the crossing after nearly two years of closure due to the Covid-19 pandemic. It is a busy day for coronavirus news. Andrew Sparrow is carrying the UK lines on a combined live politics and Covid blog. Rachel Hall will be here shortly to take over and bring you the latest global coronavirus developments. A quick note from Reuters here. Health officials have said it is too early to tell how many Covid-19 deaths in South Africa are driven by the new Omicron variant. “We collect information on all the Covid-19 admissions. However, we don’t do genomic typing on every patient diagnosed so we don’t know whether they have Delta variant or Omicron variant,” Waasila Jassat of South Africa’s National Institute of Communicable Diseases told reporters. There’s been a development with the Omicron variant case confirmed in Essex in England. The local council have stated that “Following further contact tracing of the known Omicron Covid-19 case in Brentwood, it has been confirmed that there is a link to Larchwood Primary school based in Pilgrims Hatch.” They have confirmed that they are “making specialist testing available for all pupils and school staff and confirming arrangements for remote learning for one class. We appreciate that this is an unsettling time for parents, pupils and the school community but we take the time to remind everyone that this is a precautionary measure.” Andrew Sparrow will have more on that in due course on our UK live Covid and politics blog, which you can find here: The newly discovered Omicron variant is likely to fuel a surge in South Africa’s coronavirus cases that could see daily infections treble this week, a top epidemiologist has warned. Agence France-Presse states that health monitors reported over 2,800 infections on Sunday, up from a daily average of 500 in the previous week and 275 the week before. “We can expect that higher transmissibility is likely and so we are going to get more cases quickly,” Dr Salim Abdool Karim said at an online health ministry press briefing. “I am expecting we will top over 10,000 cases by the end of the week per day (and) pressure on hospitals within the next two, three weeks. “Even if Omicron is not clinically worse, and certainly the anecdotes don’t raise any red flags just yet … we are going to see (rising cases) in all likelihood because of the rapidity of transmission,” Karim said. Germany’s Angela Merkel said on Monday the World Health Organization (WHO) required reliable financing with higher donations from member states, and she backed it launching negotiations for a binding international accord on preventing pandemics. Reuters reports Merkel was addressing health ministers at the start of a WHO special assembly after its 194 member states reached a tentative consensus to negotiate a future agreement on preventing pandemics, bridging the gap between sides led by the European Union and US, diplomats said on Sunday. “As we speak, the global community is faced with the threat of a new, highly transmissible variant of Covid-19, Omicron,” Ursula von der Leyen, European Commission president, told the three-day talks that are expected to conclude on Wednesday with the adoption of the draft resolution on launching negotiations. Former UK prime minister Gordon Brown said that 100 million vaccines would be “wasted” by western countries by the end of the year. Brown, who is ambassador for global health financing at the World Health Organisation, told Sky News: “We’ve got to get vaccines out to the rest of the world. There are probably about 100m vaccines in the west that will be wasted by the end of the year because they’re not going to be used. And I think people hate waste and hate the idea that vaccines will pass the expiry date and not be used.” On the issue of richer nations shipping vaccine “leftovers” when they are very close to their expiry date, he added: “The better way is to think look, we’re producing soon 2bn vaccines a month across the world.” PA Media quotes him saying: “There’s going to be no difficulty about countries being able to get hold of them if they’re rich enough to be able to afford them over the next few months. “If we have excess supply, and we know we’re not going to use them in the next few months, then we should get them out as quickly as possible. If you waste a vaccine, you’re actually putting a life at risk.” A quick snap from Reuters that Russia’s coronavirus task force has said it will soon announce new restrictions related to the Omicron variant of Covid-19. With the emergence of the Omicron variant, vaccine equity has very much been in focus again. Today, the Council of Global Unions (CGU), who represent over 200 million workers, are pushing once more over vaccine patents. In a campaign statement released this morning, they say: It has been nearly two years since the outbreak of the global Covid-19 pandemic. Workers have stepped up, putting themselves at risk to safeguard people’s lives, livelihoods, and the global economy, and driven outstanding advances in science and medicine with the rapid development of Covid-19 tests, treatments, drugs, medical devices, personal protective equipment and, most importantly, vaccines. Despite the commitment of workers, a handful of governments are sabotaging global recovery by blocking the sharing of these medical advances, costing more lives and putting workers and communities at further risk. Immediate collective action is needed to ensure equal and universal access to Covid-19 vaccines and wider health products and technologies. The international trade union movement calls on all governments, in particular, the United Kingdom, Germany and Switzerland, along with the European Commission, to take all actions needed to make Covid-19 vaccines available for all, and to support the temporary and targeted ‘Trips waiver’ proposed by South Africa and India at the World Trade Organisation (WTO), tackling a key obstacle to protecting workers and communities around the world as the coronavirus continues to impact. The WTO system envisages suspending intellectual property rules in exceptional circumstances: the pandemic is clearly an exceptional circumstance. In a similar vein, nursing unions in 28 countries have filed a formal appeal with the United Nations over the refusal of the UK, EU and others to temporarily waive patents for Covid vaccines, saying this has cost huge numbers of lives in developing nations. A quick snap from Associated Press that French authorities are waiting for laboratory confirmation of eight suspected cases of the new variant of the coronavirus, involving people who traveled recently to southern Africa. Testing already conducted determined that the travellers were positive for the virus but not for one of its previous variants. Follow-up genetic testing was being done to see if they were infected with the new omicron variant. The Health Ministry said last night that results could take several days. If confirmed, they would be France’s first known cases of the omicron variant. Russia has reported 33,860 new coronavirus cases, and 1,209 further official deaths. Both those figures continue the gradual decline that has been seen over the last few weeks since the country had an enforced week’s leave from work at the beginning of the month. A little more detail here on those Omicron variant cases detected in the Portuguese football team Belenenses. Defender Cafu Phete tested positive for Covid-19 after returning to Portugal last week from international duty in South Africa. Reuters report that the new variant was found after Belenenses played a Primeira Liga match against Benfica on Saturday. The game started with only nine Belenenses players on the pitch because the rest of their squad were isolating and only seven returned to the field after halftime. The match was abandoned two minutes into the second half with Benfica leading 7-0. “We’re all in isolation except for the youth team that didn’t play on Saturday, 44 people are in isolation at home,” a club spokesman said on Monday. “Two or three players and two or three staff have symptoms, but nothing too serious, the rest are asymptomatic. Everyone is waiting to repeat the tests, as soon as the health authority authorises it,” he added. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog for today, which is likely to be dominated by developments related to the outbreak of the Omicron variant in England and Scotland. You can follow that here. I’ll be continuing here with the latest global coronavirus news – and the very top lines from the UK if there are significant further developments. Here’s an updated map of the latest case incidence in Europe. The World Health Organization is opening a long-planned special session of member states to discuss ways to strengthen the global fight against pandemics such as the coronavirus, just as the new omicron variant has sparked immediate concerns worldwide. In the wake of diplomatic wrangling, a draft resolution at the special World Health Assembly stops short of calling for work toward specifically establishing a “pandemic treaty” or “legally binding instrument” sought by some, which could beef up the international response when – not if – a new pandemic erupts. European Union member states and others had sought language calling for work toward a treaty, but the US and a few other countries countered that the substance of any accord should be worked out first before any such document is given a name. A “treaty” would suggest a legally binding agreement that would require ratification – and would likely incur domestic political haggling in some countries. Associated Press reports from Geneva that the draft text makes no reference to the word “treaty” but, among other things, calls for the creation of an “intergovernmental negotiating body” among WHO member states to work out a possible deal to improve pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. Prof Sir Mark Walport, who is a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) advising the UK government, told Sky News there was “good cause to be concerned” about Omicron. He said it “makes sense to try and hold it back” though it will be “impossible to stop it spreading around the world if it is much more infectious than the Delta variant”. PA Media quotes him saying the most important thing people in the UK could do was to have vaccines and take measures such as wearing masks. Asked if people should be told to wear masks in pubs and restaurants, he said: “If you are in a small, poorly ventilated enclosed space, it makes sense to wear a mask. Clearly when you are drinking and eating it’s not possible to do that but if you’re moving around, then absolutely. “We know that infection happens in closed spaces indoors and of course, as it gets colder, people are more likely to be indoors and they’re less likely to have the windows open. So if you’re going to wear masks in shops, it makes sense to wear them in other places as well.” Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of council at the British Medical Association, called for hospitality staff to be required to wear masks when servicing customers. He told Good Morning Britain: “What we believe is that there should be mask-wearing in all settings which are enclosed and indoors. “Now clearly, that doesn’t apply to people who are eating out, but it should apply to staff, for example, in restaurants and bars so that when you are close to a customer, when you’re in direct line of a customer, maybe a few feet away, and you’re speaking perhaps loudly, you reduce the chance of infecting others. PA Media quotes him saying: “This isn’t just about the public, it’s also about staff and employers as well, because if they have staff who become infected, staff who are ill and self-isolating, that will also affect the economy. So there is a reason for doing this for both customers and employers.” On the Omicron cases in Scotland, Dr Nagpaul added: “The difficulty here is we’re not sure at the moment exactly how infectious, transmissible and how much the new variant is going to be resistant to the vaccine, if at all. So as this work is being done, the right thing to do is to be cautious, which is what the government is doing.” Deputy Labour leader Angela Rayner said there was “no distinction” between people sitting in pubs, trains or hospitals when it came to wearing masks indoors. She has called for face coverings to be worn in hospitality venues in England, as well as on public transport and in shops. PA Media quote Rayner telling Sky News: “We think that in hospitality settings that people should be wearing a mask. I got the train here yesterday evening and it was absolutely rammed, you couldn’t even stand up, it was so full, and nobody, very few people, were wearing a mask on that train. “It’s so important that people wear masks when they’re indoors, in arenas where they’re meeting people and... mixing in large numbers. People should be wearing their masks.” On wearing masks in pubs, she said: “I think people should... especially if you’re moving around the pub, people should be wearing their masks in hospitality settings. If you’re (in) an indoor setting, there’s no distinction between a pub, sitting in a pub, or sitting on a train, or sitting in a hospital. It’s still a venue that’s indoors and we should be taking the necessary measures to protect people around us.” Scotland’s deputy first minister John Swinney said that some of the Omicron variant cases identified in Scotland have no travel history, which suggests there is a degree of community transmission. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Good Morning Scotland: “We obviously have some travel history on some of the cases, I don’t have all of that detail available to me at this stage, but on some of the cases we are aware that there is no travel history involved on some of the cases. “So what that tells us is that there must be a degree of community transmission of this particular strain of the virus in the absence of direct travel connection for some of the cases in the southern African area. “So that obviously opens up further challenges for us in terms of interrupting the spread of this particular strain of the virus and that will be the focus of the contact tracing operation that is under way already.” If you are feeling anxious about the prospects for the impact of the Omicron variant, then there was a slightly reassuring message over vaccine timelines from Prof Anthony Harnden in the UK this morning. He is deputy chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). PA Media quotes him saying to the BBC Breakfast programme that if Omicron has vaccine escape and “turns out to have a transmission advantage, then it would be sensible to have a new vaccine”. He added: “The mRNA vaccines, that’s the Pfizer and the Moderna vaccines, are relatively easy to tweak and the pharmaceutical companies that produce those vaccines have indicated that they may be able to get a variant vaccine within 100 days.” Prof Greg Towers, from the Division of Infection and Immunity at University College London, said people in the UK needed to adhere to “easier” measures to avoid potential future lockdowns. PA Media quotes him telling Times Radio this morning: “If we don’t wear masks, and if we ignore social distancing rules, and if we just pretend it’s all over, then what’s going to happen is we’ll get another big wave of infection, and we’ll get put into lockdown again, so if we don’t want lockdown we’ve got to try and stop the spread by easier means like mask-wearing and social distancing. “Unfortunately, this isn’t a situation of saying when is this going to be over? When are we going to get back to normal? I think we’re going to have to learn to live with this virus and that might mean taking action like having lockdowns if we get surges of infection. “So basically, we’re looking at behaving in such a way that we suppress waves of infection when they’re on their way – and that I hope will be through vaccination. “Even if this virus is good at escaping the first vaccine, the vaccine can be modified to make one that is more specific to these new variants. “And so there are answers to all this, but we just have to keep managing it. We have to not say: ‘When is this going to be over?’ We just have to learn to say: ‘I’m going to wear a mask today on the tube, because that will protect my fellow passengers and reduce the chance of us going into lockdown again’.” Dutch military police say they have arrested a married couple who left a hotel where they were in quarantine after testing positive for Covid-19 and were attempting to flee the country. The couple were arrested “in an airplane that was about to depart”, the police force, known as the Marechaussee, said in a statement. It was unclear whether they had tested positive for the new Omicron coronavirus variant. The Amsterdam newspaper Het Parool reported that the couple, a Spanish man and Portuguese woman, were attempting to fly to Spain. Reuters note that dozens of passengers who tested positive for Covid-19 after arriving on two flights from South Africa on Friday were being kept in quarantine at a hotel near Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport. The Marechaussee statement said the pair, whose names were not released, had been turned over to health authorities. Portugal has detected 13 cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant – all related to players and staff members of the Lisbon football team Belenenses, the health authority DGS said, according to Reuters. Their most recent game was on Saturday, a Lisbon derby match against Benfica, which sounds like it was absolute chaos due to the Covid outbreak in their ranks. Prof Anthony Harnden, deputy chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in the UK, has told BBC Breakfast there were two strategies to deal with the variant. “Either we raise the immunity in the population or we find a matched vaccine,” he said. “And it’s going to be quite a while before we can get a matched vaccine so it’s sensible to increase the immunity in the population and that will be done by actually encouraging those that are unvaccinated so far to get vaccinated, that is absolutely imperative, but also to make sure that we boost the most vulnerable in order.” PA Media quote him saying “Inevitably everybody will be offered a booster but what we want to do is make sure that it’s done in a sensible order so that those that are most vulnerable for this infection can get boosted and their natural immunity levels can go up.” He said the JCVI was looking at reducing the interval between second and booster doses and increasing the age range of who is eligible. He said it was “really important that we get the immunity levels in the population high” in case the Omicron variant was more transmissible or protection from vaccines was reduced. The Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally, posing a “very high” global risk where Covid-19 surges could have “severe consequences” in some areas, the World Health Organisation (WHO) said this morning. The UN agency, in technical advice to its 194 member states, urged them to accelerate vaccination of high-priority groups and to “ensure mitigation plans are in place” to maintain essential health services. “Omicron has an unprecedented number of spike mutations, some of which are concerning for their potential impact on the trajectory of the pandemic,” the WHO said. “The overall global risk related to the new variant of concern Omicron is assessed as very high.” Further research is needed to better understand Omicron’s potential to escape protection against immunity induced by vaccines and previous infections, it said, adding that more data was expected in coming weeks. “Covid -19 cases and infections are expected in vaccinated persons, albeit in a small and predictable proportion”, Reuters report it added. Deputy First Minister of Scotland, John Swinney, has been on the BBC’s Good Morning Scotland just now. Of the six people identified as having contracted the Omicron strain, he said: The individuals concerned are being supported but there is no evidence of serious illness. Obviously we know that Covid can develop into serious illness. He went on to say: I think one of the points I would make about the early thinking about the Omicron strain is that it’s as yet unclear whether the strain gives rise to more serious illness. It certainly does look as if it is more transmissible than the Delta variant, for example, which was highly transmissible, but on the evidence that we have available at this stage, it doesn’t appear that Omicron leads to more serious illness. But obviously we we have to do everything we can to try to suppress the strain of the virus and to interrupted circulation within Scotland. Asked about the prospect for future travel restrictions in Scotland, he said: We’ve got to look very carefully at what will be the most effective ways of interrupting the circulation of the virus, and that’s the issue that we keep constantly under review within the Scottish Government. We have a range of well established baseline measures that we insist members of the public comply with in relation to the reading of face coverings, to observing social distancing, to ventilated rooms, to hand hygiene arrangements. If we undertake as many of these measures as we possibly can do, we can take steps to interrupt the circulation of the virus. But we may have to take further measures in the light of the fact that we may be dealing with a strain of the virus which is more transmissible than previous incarnations. Asked about the prospects for Christmas, Swinny said: It is too early to say that. I think we are in a much stronger position because of the level of vaccination that we have within our society, and members of the public taking part tremendously in the vaccination programme. So we do have very high levels of protection within the population. It’s what we need to do beyond that, that I think is relevant for the next period ahead Nicola Sturgeon is to hold an emergency briefing at 10.30am Monday morning after it emerged that six cases of the new Covid variant Omnicron have been detected in Scotland, in Lanarkshire and the Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. The first minister is already due to warn people to redouble their efforts to follow physical distancing and mask-wearing guidelines in Scotland, and to make sure they are fully vaccinated, in her key- note speech to a Scottish National party conference later. In a text released in advance, Sturgeon is expected to say: There are big and very real challenges ahead over the winter months. Cases are rising in countries all around us. We know that colder weather, forcing us indoors, coupled with festive socialising will create increased opportunities for the virus to spread. And, most seriously of all, the Omicron variant is causing profound concern here and across the world So we must not drop our guard. This is a time to be more vigilant, not less. Alongside that confirmation from the Scottish government that six cases of the Omicron variant have been identified, there are some quotes from Scotland’s health secretary Humza Yousaf. He said: This will be a worrying time for the six people now identified as having the new variant. All will receive expert help and support and Public Health Scotland will undertake enhanced contact tracing in all cases. This will help establish the origin of the virus and any further individuals they have come into contact with in recent weeks. We have already taken steps and are aligning with the new border restrictions being introduced by the UK Government which will require fully vaccinated arrivals to take a PCR test within two days of arrival and to self-isolate until a negative result is received. These measures will be introduced as soon as possible and kept under constant review. However, we reserve the right to go further if necessary. We are also adopting the expanded red list of countries identified by the UK Government. This will also be kept under review. We must now redouble our efforts to follow the basic rules that have served us well throughout the pandemic – wear a face covering on public transport and in all indoor settings for food and retail; open windows especially if you have people visiting at home; keep washing your hands regularly and thoroughly. Work from home where possible, take regular lateral flow tests – especially before mixing with others outside your household. The Scottish government has just issued a statement confirming that six cases of the Omicron variant have been identified in Scotland. That takes the total number of identified cases in the UK to nine. The statement says: Six cases of the Covid-19 Omicron variant have been identified in Scotland. Four cases are in the Lanarkshire area and two have been identified in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. Public Health Scotland and local health protection teams are supporting and contact tracing is being undertaken to establish the origin of the virus and any individuals they have come into contact with in recent weeks. Somewhat in contrast to the gloomy coronavirus news about new restrictions coming into place over the Omicron variant, there are pictures coming out from Singapore and Malaysia where they have just finally opened a long-awaited travel corridor. Associated Press note that Malaysian health minister Khairy Jamaluddin tweeted that a Covid-19 case was detected during the screening in southern Johor state, but didn’t elaborate. “As we safely reopen our borders, there will be positive cases at points of entry. Risk assessment, isolation and monitoring close contacts will become the norm,” he said. Under the first phase, only 1,440 travellers who must be citizens, permanent residents or long-term pass holders are allowed from each side per day. The Causeway was one of the world’s busiest land borders before the pandemic struck. Back to UK junior health minister Edward Argar on Sky News for a moment, asked if the government might tighten up the rules even further in the next three weeks, he said: “It’s not something I’m anticipating.” Questioned why mask rules were being applied in some settings but not others – particularly crowded hospitality venues – he said: In pubs, restaurants, hospitality venues, partly we’ve always seen this throughout the pandemic, people are eating, drinking. It’s clearly not practical to wear a mask in those circumstances. In a restaurant a long time is spent sitting down with your group, whoever you come with. Again describing the government’s decision as “proportionate” and “measured” he said that the situation in retail and transport was different from the situation in hospitality venues because they were often a more confined space. We don’t believe we need to, or should do that, in hospitality or restaurant venues at this point, and hopefully we won’t need to make any further changes. Hopefully in three weeks we’ll be able to scale back what we’ve done. If you haven’t seen it already, my colleague Linda Geddes has put together this explainer answering the question: What does appearance of Omicron variant mean for the double-vaccinated? All the vaccines currently available in the UK work by training the immune system against the coronavirus spike protein – the key it uses to infect cells by binding to the ACE2 receptor. Omicron possesses more than 30 mutations in this protein, including 10 in the so-called “receptor-binding domain” (RBD) – the specific part that latches on to this receptor. Delta has two RBD mutations. We know that people who have been double-jabbed can, and do, get infected with the Delta variant – although the chances of this happening are approximately three times lower than if they hadn’t been vaccinated. More importantly, vaccinated individuals are roughly nine times less likely to die if they do become infected. Read more here: What does appearance of Omicron variant mean for the double-vaccinated? In the UK, Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner has said ensuring people have sick pay when they have to self-isolate is “one of the most crucial things we can do” amid the rise of the Omicron variant, along with people wearing face coverings – “including the prime minister”. PA Media quotes her appearing on BBC Breakfast, where she said: If people have to self-isolate or go off sick they have to be given sick pay, it’s one of the most crucial things we can do to ensure that everybody can do the right thing and protect people from this new variant. The booster jab should be given as quickly as possible – we said five months – hopefully that will happen now, and there should be ventilation in schools. People should be wearing masks, including the prime minister when he’s visiting public spaces indoors. The G7 was very clear in its commitment to rolling out the vaccines across the globe and we’ve not met those targets. We’ve seen that there’s no point in vaccinating Britain if the rest of the world is not given the vaccines as well. Global health expert Dr Peter Drobac has questioned UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s comment on low vaccination rates in developing nations being due to vaccine hesitancy, adding that a lack of vaccine equity has “created the perfect breeding ground” for new variants. Dr Drobac, a University of Oxford academic who specialises in infectious diseases, speaking on Sky News earlier, said: “There are still over 3 billion people around the world who haven’t had access to a vaccine. In Africa only 5% of the population is fully vaccinated. The prime minister’s comments just aren’t true. “Botswana, a middle-income country, signed a deal with Moderna at a very high price – a higher price than we pay for vaccines – months ago and are still waiting for stock because they’re being prioritised to wealthier countries,” PA Media quotes him saying. “The conditions where you have low levels of vaccination and high levels of virus circulating are the perfect breeding ground for variants which are resistant to vaccines. “So by allowing this continued moral failure of not being more creative and ambitious and aggressive in vaccinating everyone around the world, we have made it more likely for things like the Omicron variant to appear.” UK junior health minister Edward Argar has defended the speed with which the UK government moved to add countries to England’s travel red list in the light of the emergence of the Omicron variant, saying: I think we’ve moved globally among, if not, the fastest countries in the world. I think South Africa identified the genomic sequencing on Tuesday. On Thursday, even before this was designated, we’d already set out a set of steps to tackle this both in terms on borders, but also in terms of the plans around around testing. I think we moved very swiftly when people were returning or were in flight. They were met by health officials. We would expect them to take that PCR test of course. Now we’ve got the ten countries, I think it is, on the red list. So I think we move very swiftly, proportionately. Here are the countries on England’s travel red list: Argar was pressed on the sudden imposition of the cost of testing and hotel quarantine on families who had travelled to the affected countries when they weren’t on the red list. He said: I do appreciate that it’s extremely difficult people who will go on holiday gone to visit family or family events and suddenly fall into this situation. This is the nature of this virus. We believe that we’ve acted in a proportionate, measured way to help address the challenge. Edward Argar, minister of state for health in the UK, is on media duties this morning for the government, and he has made an appearance on Sky News. The interview ranged across several Covid-related topics. Firstly he stressed that “it’s still early days in terms of understanding how it actually affects total transmissibility, in terms of how dangerous it is. Therefore, let’s let the scientists do their work.” On the discovery of three cases so far in the UK, he said he expected the numbers to rise: I’ll be honest, I would expect that to rise. We don’t know by what speed, or by what numbers. What we’re doing is trying to slow it down, but we can’t we can’t stop it. And we’re trying to give ourselves the time to understand how it works and how it interacts with the vaccine. But that’s why we’re putting in place these sensible precautionary measures to help slow it down. India has announced that new travel rules will come into effect from 1 December. A government statement says that in view of the development of the Omicron variant. Reuters report they say that all inbound travellers from “countries at risk” are to mandatorily undergo post-arrival testing. Additionally 5% of travellers coming from countries not in the “at risk” category will be tested on a random basis. Hello from London, it is Martin Belam here. Here’s a reminder of the latest Covid data in the UK, as the world braces for the potential impact of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Over the last seven days there have been 305,656 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 8.6% week-on-week. There have been 848 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 17.6% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 11.2% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,633 people in hospital in total, of whom 925 are in ventilation beds. That’s it from me, Virginia Harrison. I’m handing over to my colleague, Martin Belam in London. Here are the major developments around the world over the past 24 hours: G7 health ministers are to hold an emergency meeting on Monday on the new Omicron Covid-19 strain, as experts race to understand what the variant means for the fight to end the pandemic. Omicron has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. Japan will close its border to all foreign visitors from Tuesday to prevent the spread of Omicron, prime minister Fumio Kishida said. South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, has criticised border closures and called on nations to lift the travel bans “before any further damage is done to our economies”. Singapore and Malaysia have re-opened one of the world’s busiest land borders, allowing vaccinated travellers to make the crossing after nearly two years of closure due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Reuters reports. Canada’s health minister says the country’s first two cases of Omicron have been found in Ontario after two individuals who had recently travelled from Nigeria tested positive. They are the first cases to be detected in North America. The Philippines has launched an ambitious drive to vaccinate nine million people against Covid-19 over three days, deploying security forces and using tens of thousands of volunteers to help administer the programme. A case of the Omicron variant has been confirmed in Australia’s Northern Territory, while New South Wales has also confirmed two and is investigating the possibility of two further cases The top US infectious disease official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has told president Joe Biden it will take about two weeks to have definitive information on the new variant and has warned the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections. Authorities in the Netherlands detected at least 13 cases of the Omicron variant from recent flights into Amsterdam from South Africa. The 194 member states of the World Health Organization have agreed to launch pandemic treaty negotiations as the world prepares to learn the lessons of Covid for the next pandemic. The UK reported 37,681 new Covid cases and 51 deaths, with the government vaccine watchdog suggesting the vaccine booster drive could be accelerated as soon as Monday to suppress cases. Switzerland has detected its first probable case of the Omicron variant, the government said late on Sunday. The case relates to a person who returned to Switzerland from South Africa around a week ago, the Federal Office for Public Health said on Twitter. Testing will clarify the situation in the coming days, it added. Switzerland has ordered that travellers from 19 countries - including Britain, South Africa and Israel - present a negative test when boarding a fight to the country, and must go into quarantine for 10 days on arrival. Swiss voters on Sunday firmly backed the law behind the country’s Covid pass in a referendum, following a tense campaign that saw unprecedented levels of hostility. US and UK markets were poised for a stronger start to trading on Monday as investors prepared to wait to see if the Omicron variant would really derail economic recoveries, Reuters reports. Oil prices bounced more than $3 a barrel to recoup a chunk of Friday’s shellacking. Asian markets mostly closed with slim losses, while the S&amp;P 500 futures added 1% and FTSE futures rose 1.3%. That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for today, I’m handing over to my colleague Virginia Harrison. Here’s a rundown of developments around the world over the past 24 hours: G7 health ministers are to hold an emergency meeting on Monday on the new Omicron Covid-19 strain, as experts race to understand what the variant means for the fight to end the pandemic. Omicron has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. Japan will effectively close its border to all foreign visitors before the end of the month to prevent the spread of Omicron, Japanese broadcaster NTV has reported. Singapore and Malaysia have re-opened one of the world’s busiest land borders, allowing vaccinated travellers to make the crossing after nearly two years of closure due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Reuters reports. Canada’s health minister says the country’s first two cases of Omicron have been found in Ontario after two individuals who had recently travelled from Nigeria tested positive. They are the first cases to be detected in North America. The Philippines has launched an ambitious drive to vaccinate nine million people against Covid-19 over three days, deploying security forces and using tens of thousands of volunteers to help administer the programme. A case of the Omicron variant has been confirmed in Australia’s Northern Territory, while New South Wales has also confirmed two and is investigating the possibility of two further cases The top US infectious disease official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has told president Joe Biden it will take about two weeks to have definitive information on the new variant and has warned the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections. Authorities in the Netherlands detected at least 13 cases of the Omicron variant from recent flights into Amsterdam from South Africa. The 194 member states of the World Health Organization have agreed to launch pandemic treaty negotiations as the world prepares to learn the lessons of Covid for the next pandemic. The UK reported 37,681 new Covid cases and 51 deaths, with the government vaccine watchdog suggesting the vaccine booster drive could be accelerated as soon as Monday to suppress cases. A resurgence of Covid-19 infections in northern China has forced two small cities to suspend public transport and tighten control over residents’ movement, Reuters reports, as the country shows no willingness to go easy on local outbreaks. China reported 21 new locally transmitted Covid-19 cases with confirmed symptoms on Sunday, official data showed on Monday, marking the highest daily count since mid-November. Almost all of the new local cases were detected in the northern Chinese region of Inner Mongolia. The latest cases came shortly after a few other northern cities, hit hard in China’s biggest Delta outbreak, which started mid-October, had contained their clusters this month and gradually lifted curbs, indicating it has become harder for China to stay clear of local flare-ups. The new resurgence is tiny relative to many outbreaks overseas, and national officials specified that China does not aim for remaining at zero cases. However, Beijing still requires officials to stay on high vigilance to be ready to quickly quash local outbreaks, meaning some tough curbs are likely to be imposed when new cases emerge. In the Inner Mongolian city of Manzhouli, a crucial port of entry that borders Russia and has about 150,000 residents, reported 20 local symptomatic cases on Sunday. Over the weekend, Manzhouli banned residents from leaving town and suspended public transport as well as certain non-urgent services at hospitals. It also closed marketplaces and entertainment venues, halted dining in restaurants, in-person school classes and religious gatherings, and started a second round of citywide testing. Hailar district, an administrative division about three hours away from Manzhouli, has blocked some roads linking it to the outside and required people arriving from Manzhouli to be quarantined at centralised facilities for two weeks. Nehe, a city of about 440,000 in the northeastern Heilongjiang province, reported on Sunday one locally transmitted asymptomatic carrier, which China counts separately from confirmed patients. Nehe has tightened controls over residents’ movement, shut down non-essential businesses, and cut public transport and some services at private hospitals and clinics. The cities of Suihua, Shuangyashan and Daqing, also in Heilongjiang province, have required people seeking to leave or enter to provide proof of a negative test result within 48 hours. More from our Tokyo correspondent Justin McCurry, after Japan announced it will this week close its border to all foreign visitors to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, only weeks after it relaxed restrictions on some travellers from overseas. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said a ban on all foreign entrants – which will not apply to the country’s non-Japan residents – would go into effect on Tuesday, reversing a decision earlier this month to admit foreign business travellers, students and interns under certain conditions. The move by Japan, which is reporting consistently low Covid-19 case numbers, comes a day after it tightened restrictions on travellers from South Africa, where the variant was discovered, and eight other countries. “We are taking measures with a strong sense of crisis,” Kishida told reporters on Monday, hours before the new measures were announced, according to the Kyodo news agency. The tightening of border controls will dismay foreign students – until now the biggest single group of foreign entrants – as many have already started the administrative process to come to Japan after a year or more of studying remotely. While no Omicron cases have been identified in Japan, confirmation that the variant is present in the country could frustrate plans to restart the government’s subsidised Go To travel scheme early next year. Canada’s health minister has said the country’s first two cases of Omicron were found in Ontario after two individuals who had recently travelled from Nigeria tested positive. They are the first cases to be detected in North America. “Today, the province of Ontario has confirmed two cases of the omicron variant of COVID-19 in Ottawa, both of which were reported in individuals with recent travel from Nigeria. Ottawa Public Health is conducting case and contact management and the patients are in isolation,” the government said in a statement on Sunday, according to CBC. The news came just days after Canada impose travel restrictions on foreign nationals travelling from several countries in southern Africa. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has said he will bar all foreign arrivals over the new variant, after saying: “We are taking measures with a strong sense of crisis.” The ban comes into effect on Tuesday. The country, which is reporting consistently low Covid-19 case numbers, had started to ease restrictions on some travellers earlier this month. Although experts say it is too early to know if existing vaccines are effective against the new variant, Kishida said Japan, where more than 76% of the population is fully vaccinated, would go ahead with plans to administer booster shots from next month, beginning with older people and health workers. The Philippines has launched an ambitious drive to vaccinate nine million people against Covid-19 over three days, Reuters reports, deploying security forces and using tens of thousands of volunteers to help administer the programme. The immunisation campaign was scaled back from an earlier target of 15 million shots, but would still be a record in a country where vaccine hesitancy remains an obstacle and there are logistical hurdles to reach people in the sprawling archipelago. Three million vaccinations per day is nearly four times the average of 829,000 daily shots in November. An official said news of the Omicron variant made the campaign even more vital. “It is better to be prepared for the effects of Omicron,” Carlito Galvez, the country’s vaccination chief, told CNN Philippines on Monday. The spread of the Omicron variant, which the World Health Organization has described as a “variant of concern”, has sparked global travel restrictions and rattled financial markets. The Philippines has faced one of the worst Covid-19 outbreaks in Asia and has been slower than many of its neighbours in immunising its people. About 35.6 million people have been fully vaccinated, or a third of its 110 million population. The country aims to immunise 54 million people by the end of 2021 and 77 million by next March. New infections have fallen sharply to an average of 1,679 a day in November from a peak of 18,579 average daily cases in September, paving the way for a wider economic reopening. Vaccination rates have remained uneven, with 93% of the capital region’s residents fully inoculated as of mid-November compared with 10.9% of the predominantly Muslim regions in the southern Philippines, government data show. The government has said it would deploy 160,000 volunteers in 11,000 vaccination sites nationwide for the three-day campaign. A case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 has been confirmed in Australia’s Northern Territory, while New South Wales is also investigating the possibility of further cases and the state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, has warned against “knee-jerk” reactions to the new strain. The NSW health department said on Monday that urgent genomic testing was under way to determine if two passengers who arrived on a flight on Sunday and tested positive to Covid had the new variant. That follows confirmation on Sunday that two people who had recently returned from southern Africa had tested positive for the new variant in Sydney. They were among 141 people to have flown into NSW from the handful of countries in southern Africa which have been subject to increased border restrictions since the new variant was detected. For more, read on here: New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern says the Omicron variant demonstrates why the country will need public health measures into the future, as the country maintains its closed borders for the next two months, and prepares to shift into a new system of “traffic light” restrictions. “Covid-19 is still with us, and the emergence of the Omicron variant overseas is a reminder of why we need to maintain a careful approach and keep public health measures in place to protect us,” Ardern said. At present the country’s borders remain closed, with the government announcing last week it would plan for a staggered reopening in the early months of 2022. The country plans to open to New Zealanders coming from Australia in mid-January, from the rest of the world in mid-February, and to vaccinated international travellers in mid-April. Asked if the country would introduce more restrictions in response to Omicron cases, director general of health Ashley Bloomfield said, “we are doing what we’ve done right through the pandemic, which is to try to keep the virus out as much as possible to give us time to learn more.” The country has already tweaked its border rules so those coming from southern African countries must do a full 14-day quarantine period. On Monday afternoon Ardern also announced how regions of the country would be split into different levels of Covid rules, under a new system that would involve an overall loosening of rules. Places with large outbreaks or low vaccination rates would come in at “red”, and the rest of the country will be at “orange”. Both levels give a high degree of freedom for the vaccinated. They require people to wear masks in many public places, and vaccine passports will be required to enter many businesses, including hospitality, hairdressers and gyms. Under orange, there are less restrictions on gathering size for those who are vaccinated. Dutch border police say they have arrested a couple on a plane after they fled a quarantine hotel where Covid-positive passengers from South African flights were staying, AFP reports. The drama came after Dutch authorities said that 61 people who arrived on two flights at Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport on Friday had tested positive for the coronavirus, 13 of them with the new Omicron variant. One of the members of the couple had tested positive for Covid-19 and went into isolation, while the other person was negative but in quarantine, according to Public health authority spokeswoman Stefanie van Waardenburg. She added that both were back in isolation, but not at the same hotel. They are a Spanish man, 30 and a Portuguese woman, aged 28, police spokesman Stan Verberkt told AFP. “The Royal Netherlands Marechaussee at Schiphol has arrested a couple this evening who had fled from a quarantine hotel,” Verberkt said. “The arrests took place in a plane that was about to take off. They were on a plane that was about to depart for Spain at around 6:00 pm,” he added. Border police are now laying charges with the Dutch public prosecutor’s office against the couple for jeopardising public safety, he said. The pair had been handed over to the public health authority, Verberkt confirmed. It was not known how the couple left the hotel or how the alarm was raised. As Omicron spreads around the globe, epidemiologist Meru Sheel argues that the emergence of the variant could have been avoided had lower income countries had more equal access to vaccines. She writes, Viral mutations are a part of natural selection and are common. When the virus enters a cell, it can make copies of itself that go off and infect other cells and then pass to another person. Sometimes during this process of copying in non-immune persons, it may introduce an “error” or mutation, and at times these mutations can offer competitive advantage to the viruses to spread from one non-immune person to another. But if a person is already immune (say from vaccination), then the virus cannot spread between people, preventing the emergence of new variants. Read more here: G7 health ministers are to hold an emergency meeting on Monday on the new Omicron Covid-19 strain, as experts race to understand what the variant means for the fight to end the pandemic, AFP reports. The meeting was called by G7 chair Britain, which is among a steadily growing number of countries detecting cases of the heavily mutated new strain. Omicron, first discovered in southern Africa, represents a fresh challenge to global efforts to battle the pandemic. Several countries have already re-imposed restrictions many had hoped were a thing of the past. “We know we are now in a race against time,” said European Commission chief Ursula von der Leyen. Vaccine manufacturers needed two to three weeks “to get a full picture of the quality of the mutations”, she added. A long list of countries has already imposed travel restrictions on southern Africa, including key travel hub Qatar, as well as the United States, Britain, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the Netherlands. Angola became the first southern African country to suspend all flights from its regional neighbours Mozambique, Namibia and South Africa. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday called on countries to lift the travel bans “before any further damage is done to our economies”. Countries are moving quickly to seal their borders as information about the Omicron variant - which was first detected in South Africa - continues to emerge. Here are some of the restrictions in place: Israel has banned the entry of all foreigners Morocco has suspended all incoming flights for two weeks Canada has banned foreigners who have travelled to certain countries in southern Africa Britain has added several African countries to its red list US will restrict travel from South Africa and seven other African nations from Monday Japan has closed its border to foreigners travelling from nine countries including South Africa Australia has banned flights from nine African countries and imposed new quarantine measures for returning citizens Angola has suspended all flights from its regional neighbours Mozambique, Namibia and South Africa. New Zealand has announced 182 new cases of Covid-19 on Monday. Daily case numbers have remained relatively steady over the past week with a rolling average of 179, in what experts say is a promising indication the outbreak could be peaking – but with the country due to switch into a new “traffic light” system of eased restrictions next week, it’s too early to say whether those numbers will remain under control. According to Ministry of Health data, 92% of the eligible (those aged 12 and over) population have received at least one dose of vaccine, and 85% are double-dosed. According to Stats NZ population estimates, 76% of the full population have had at least one dose, and 71% have had both. Māori remain behind the wider population, with 82% of those eligible having had one dose, and 68% having had both. The country has 93 people hospitalised with the virus, and 10 in ICU. China reported 41 new coronavirus cases for 28 November, up from 23 a day earlier, Reuters reports. Of the new infections, 21 were locally transmitted, according to a statement from the National Health Commission, compared with three a day earlier. Almost all of the new locally transmitted cases were in Inner Mongolia. China also reported 22 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, the same as a day earlier. So far, the Omicron strain has been detected in at least a dozen countries including Britain, Germany, France, Denmark, Israel, Canada, Hong Kong, Australia and South Africa. No cases of the new variant have been confirmed in the US. The White House said president Joe Biden would “provide an update about the new variant and the US response on Monday”. Singapore and Malaysia have re-opened one of the world’s busiest land borders, allowing vaccinated travellers to make the crossing after nearly two years of closure due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Reuters reports. The sudden closure of the border in March 2020 left tens of thousands people stranded on both sides, separated from families and fearing for their jobs. As many as 300,000 Malaysians commuted daily to wealthy city-state Singapore before the pandemic. Malaysian Prime Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob is also due to make his first official visit as premier to Singapore on Monday. Under the new arrangement, up to 1,440 travellers from each side can travel if they hold citizenship, permanent residency or long-term visas in the destination country, without undergoing quarantine, according to guidelines published by the Singapore government. Travellers must test negative for Covid-19 before departure, and Malaysia also requires travellers to pass on-arrival Covid-19 test. Singapore on Sunday followed suit by requiring on-arrival test due to concerns over the new Covid-19 variant Omicron. A vaccinated air travel lane between the two countries also started on Monday. Singapore has vaccinated 85% of its entire population, while Malaysia has jabbed around 80%. Singapore, with an ageing population of 5.5 million, relies heavily on Malaysians living in the southern state of Johor, which is connected to Singapore by land, to staff businesses ranging from restaurants to semiconductor manufacturing. Singapore reported 747 locally acquired Covid-19 cases on Sunday, the lowest tally since mid September. Malaysia reported 4,239 cases, the smallest number since early November. Japan’s prime minister Fumio Kishida has said his country will consider further tightening its borders as the Omicron variant spreads around the world, Reuters reports. “We are (taking measures) with a strong sense of crisis,” Kishida told reporters on Monday, noting that Japan closed its borders to foreigners travelling from nine countries including South Africa as of Sunday. “As we’re seeing a spread around the world, we continue to consider further measures to tighten border controls and will announce a decision at the appropriate time.” If you want to know more about the new Omicron variant and the vaccine, check out this explainer. Will Omicron be more resistant to vaccines? How much protection can vaccines offer? Will third doses help? Can we modify vaccines? What if you’ve already been infected with another strain of Covid? Will antiviral drugs work against Omicron? Guardian correspondent Linda Geddes has some answers. The Australian state of New South Wales is investigating a possible third case of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19 as the premier, Dominic Perrottet, has warned against “knee-jerk” reactions to the strain. The NSW health department announced on Sunday that two people who had recently returned from southern Africa had tested positive for the new variant in Sydney. They include South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi and the Seychelles. But on Monday Perrottet said there had “possibly” been a third case, which the state’s health department was investigating. Guardian Australia correspondent Michael McGowan has more: Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the Covid-19 pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. Canada’s health minister says the country’s first two cases of Omicron have been found in Ontario after two individuals who had recently travelled from Nigeria tested positive. They are the first cases to be detected in North America. Canada has banned travellers who have visited southern Africa countries in the past two weeks in a ban which came into effect on Friday. The top US infectious disease official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has told president Joe Biden it will take about two weeks to have definitive information on the new variant and has warned the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections. South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said Omicron was a “wake-up call” for global vaccine inequality. He has opposed travel bans announced on southern African countries in recent days, amid fears of the economic toll. The World Health Organization has echoed Ramaphosa’s concern and called for borders to remain open, citing uncertainty over the transmissibility, severity and vaccine disruption from Omicron. Here’s a recap of the latest developments as the new Omicron variant continues to cause panic around the world. Authorities in the Netherlands detected at least 13 cases of the Omicron variant from recent flights into Amsterdam from South Africa. Botswana, which borders South Africa, said it has recorded a total 19 Omicron cases. The UK said it has detected three total Omicron infections in Nottingham, Essex and the London borough of Westminster, with targeted PCR testing being stepped up. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen warned of global “race against time” against Omicron, urging people to practice social distancing and get vaccinated so scientists have time to understand the new variant’s transmissibility and severity. The health ministers of the G7 will hold an emergency meeting on Monday to discuss the Omicron variant. The 194 member states of the World Health Organization agreed to launch pandemic treaty negotiations as the world prepares to learn the lessons of Covid for the next pandemic. The UK reported 37,681 new Covid cases and 51 deaths, with the government vaccine watchdog suggesting the vaccine booster drive could be accelerated as soon as Monday to suppress cases. Secondary school pupils and teachers in England will wear once again face coverings in communal areas. Israel suspended all flights into the country on Sunday at 10pm GMT after detecting its first Omicron infection on Friday, just four weeks after it fully opened its skies to vaccinated travellers. Morocco said it will stop all incoming flights for two weeks starting Monday to prevent spread of the new strain.In the 1976 classic Storm Boy, the great Yolŋu actor David Gulpilil delivers a line that became immortalised in Australian cinema. “Bird like him, never die,” he says, describing the pelican Mr Percival. The substance of that line can apply to the man himself, who will live on through the light and shadow of the cinema, on to which he left a permanent and inimitable impression. For all the language we use to describe motion pictures, there really are no words to precisely articulate how Gulpilil changed the movies, and how he changed us. The actor died on Monday, having been diagnosed with lung cancer in 2017. As I said in my review of his final film, Molly Reynolds’ amazing documentary, My Name Is Gulpilil, he was like “a portal to a different way of thinking, a different way of being, even a different state of consciousness”. Gulpilil’s breakthrough role was in the British director Nicolas Roeg’s hallucinogenic 1971 film Walkabout, in which two young white siblings (Jenny Agutter and Luc Roeg) wander through the outback after the death of their father. They meet Gulpilil, who provides the drama’s emotional core with a warm, affecting, fresh-faced performance, and an irresistibly cheeky gleam in his eye that never fully faded all those years later, even during his illness-ravaged final years. In the latter half of the 70s Gulpilil appeared in other classics of the Australian new wave. In Mad Dog Morgan he played the partner-in-crime of the titular bushranger, played infamously by Dennis Hopper. In Storm Boy, which adapted Colin Thiele’s classic children’s book, Gulpilil was the enigmatic Fingerbone, who at one point recites a spiritual story about pelicans with the entire weight of the film behind him – the director Henri Safran cutting to trees, crashing waves and back to Gulpilil dancing, which was magic every time you saw it. Continuing the theme of water, which runs throughout his oeuvre, the actor played another mysterious character in Peter Weir’s The Last Wave, materialising from the protagonist’s dreams to reflect on how a “dream is a shadow of something real”. Gulpilil’s body of work is dotted with small but memorable performances. The clipped nature of many of his portrayals gives his oeuvre a fragmentary quality that, as this interview published in Senses of Cinema attests, was also apparent in the way he spoke, his answers to questions being “often indirect and fragmentary”, but also “constantly making surprising connections”, with the ability at any moment to be “startlingly lucid”. It is a great shame of the Australian film industry – and a testament to its longstanding whiteness – that Gulpilil was not given more opportunities as a leading actor, which he so richly deserved. Rolf de Heer’s 2002 meat pie western The Tracker was the first feature to cast him as the lead; he played the titular character, accompanying police as they make a slow trek across the wilderness in pursuit of an accused murderer. A more impressive production, with a richer and more expansive leading performance from Gulpilil, was 2013’s Charlie’s Country, for which he won the best actor award at the 2014 Cannes film festival. De Heer made the film, which Gulpilil co-wrote, after visiting the actor in prison; Gulpilil had been found guilty of assaulting his partner. On several occasions the late performer discussed the alcohol and substance abuse that occurred throughout his life, comparing beer to “putting his brain in a freezer” and marijuana to “like an early morning fog”. During his prison visit De Heer discovered that Gulpilil was sick, frail and – as the film-maker expressed in a 2015 interview – “seemed to have lost interest in life”. When he played a semi-autobiographical version of himself in Charlie’s Country, the cheeky gleam in Gulpilil’s eye had grown into something more profound, imbued with gravitas and pathos. In another world, the film would have kickstarted a career renaissance for Gulpilil, finally leading to a period in which he was delivered lead role after lead role. It was not meant to be. His subsequent work returned him to small parts, in films including the zombie movie Cargo and the neo-western Goldstone. His final performance in a narrative feature – playing the father of Finbergone Bill in the 2019 Storm Boy remake – had a cyclical quality, evoking memories of an earlier and more triumphant time in his career. If “bird like him, never die” applied to David Gulpilil, the form of bird he would take would perhaps be a kingfisher. In Molly Reynolds’ documentary, the actor says his name means “kingfisher”. Therefore, as he explained, his name is in the trees, in the fish, in the sky, in the stars, in the storm. This story was amended on 3 December 2021 to reinstate the name Gulpilil following a respectful period after David Gulpilil’s death and in line with the wishes of his family and community.Labor will aim to sidestep the religious discrimination stoush by reserving its position on the Morrison government bill until after a committee inquiry, but may wave it through the lower house if the government forces a vote. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, took that recommendation to shadow cabinet on Monday evening before Labor caucus adopted it on Tuesday, its first meeting since Scott Morrison introduced the bill late last week. The fate of the bill is still unclear and is unlikely to be debated on Tuesday. While the Coalition leadership is keen to see it voted on, the government is in a standoff with Labor and its own moderate Liberal MPs, who want to wait for an inquiry to report first. On Friday, Morrison referred the bill to a joint human rights committee inquiry reporting on 4 February, despite previously calling for a Senate-only inquiry with no input from MPs. Labor argues that having backed down from that position it would be highly unusual for the government to attempt to force a vote in the House of Representatives before the committee reports, and is seeking to enlist support from Liberal moderates to prevent it happening. Morrison could still seek a vote this week in a bid to wedge Labor, which is concerned not to appear out of touch with religious communities after a poor showing among that demographic at the 2019 election. The Labor caucus agreed to reserve its final position until after an inquiry; pursue “procedural measures” to delay a vote; but, if forced, to “not oppose” the bill in the lower house. Even if the bill passes the lower house, Labor and crossbench parties would have a further opportunity to block or amend it in the Senate in the new year. Labor resolved that it would make clear the principles that will guide its final position and the need for the government to deliver on its three-year-old commitment to protect LGBT students from discrimination. Several Liberal moderates including Trent Zimmerman, Fiona Martin, Katie Allen, and Dave Sharma have expressed concerns about the bill including the need to protect LGBT+ teachers and students and prevent unintended consequences. But it is unclear whether that group will support Labor’s bid to delay a vote or refer the bill to a joint select committee instead of the human rights committee. Only Liberal MP Warren Entsch has said he would not vote for the bill if the government forced a vote before the inquiry is complete. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Monday, the human rights committee chair, Anne Webster, told Guardian Australia she does not believe the inquiry should consider exemptions that allow schools to discriminate against teachers and students for their sexuality. On Tuesday the committee announced it had resolved to “accept submissions strictly addressing its terms of reference: that is, relating to the religious discrimination legislative package”. Stakeholders will have until 21 December to make submissions, with three public hearings to be held on 21 December, 13 and 14 January. Last week some equality advocates were concerned that Anthony Albanese’s initial reaction to the bill was to declare his support for “religious freedom”. But the Labor leader has also stressed that changes should not come at “the expense of discriminating on the basis of other people’s characteristics”, a point reinforced by Senate leader Penny Wong. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, removed some of the most controversial elements of the bill before it was introduced to parliament, including those allowing medical practitioners to object to procedures and overriding employers’ codes of conduct on religious speech. But many in Labor are now turning their minds to concerns the bill will override state discrimination laws on statements of belief and religious education institutions’ hiring practices. On Monday, the Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, urged the government and the committee to consider the religious exemptions to other discrimination laws and called for “legislation as soon as possible … without further delay to remove this discrimination” on grounds including sex and sexuality. Brown told reporters in Canberra it would be “an act of bad faith by the government” to put the bill to a vote before the inquiry could consider concerns about the bill and “utterly unacceptable” if it were waved through the lower house. “We need time to carefully consider those impacts – to hear from the community before any vote is taken on this legislation.” “We would urge all parliamentarians to support our efforts to ensure there is proper time, to support an extension of the reporting period or a deferral of a vote on this bill until we can have a proper inquiry.”A dozen countries have accused the Australian government of trying to hit pause on a process that could still lead to the Great Barrier Reef being placed on a list of world heritage sites “in danger”. But a global climate change policy to guide how more than 190 countries deal with the crisis affecting some of the world’s most special places, couldn’t be agreed on at a major international meeting in Paris. At the general assembly meeting for the UN’s world heritage convention – a treaty signed by more than 190 countries to protect the most special places on Earth – Australia raised fears if sites were placed on the “in danger” list, they could stay there forever. Earlier this month the Guardian revealed Australia was lobbying against a section of the new climate policy that asked countries to adopt domestic measures that explicitly kept global heating to 1.5C. Australia preferred more generic language. Unesco recommended earlier this year the reef be placed on a list of world heritage sites “in danger” – the first time a site would have made the list chiefly because of impacts from climate change. Corals bleached en masse across the world’s biggest reef system in 2016, 2017 and 2020 in events caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by global heating. Intensive lobbying from Australia delayed the “in danger” listing, with a decision due to be considered again at a meeting in Russia in June next year. On Saturday, Australian government representative James Larsen told the general assembly climate change needed to be addressed and a new policy was “long overdue”. But he said: “What in particular is the route off the ‘in danger’ list for a single property if the dangers concerned are global developments that require global solutions? “Are we to accept a future where a large proportion of properties are to languish permanently on the ‘in danger list’ with no resolution deliverable by the state party concerned?,” Larsen, who is deputy secretary of the environment department, said. More than 190 countries have signed the world heritage convention, but its climate change policy has not been updated since it was adopted in 2007. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Because of the large number of changes proposed by Australia and others, countries couldn’t agree on the new policy and agreed instead to develop a working group. At this point, Australia – backed by Japan and Poland – asked the assembly to agree to officially note the “desirability of avoiding decisions which would otherwise pre-empt the outcomes” of those deliberations. Norway’s representative Eva Hauge Fontaine said Australia’s request was “highly inappropriate”, saying the language being proposed would have suspended the process for putting sites on the world heritage “in danger” list. But Larsen told the meeting that was not Australia’s intention and the language would not have stopped sites being placed on the in danger list. The appeal did not convince a dozen countries who successfully pushed for Australia’s paragraph to be deleted. Led by Palestine and Norway, the other countries opposing Australia were Iran, China, France, Russia, Sweden, Germany, the Czech Republic, Finland, Thailand and Belgium. Imogen Zethoven, an adviser on world heritage issues to the Australian Marine Conservation Society, said: “The Morrison government tried to water down Unesco’s climate change policy to ensure it wasn’t required to take action on climate change to protect the Great Barrier Reef. It failed. “The failure of the Morrison government’s amendments at the general assembly means the World Heritage Committee can request ambitious climate action by Australia in line with 1.5C degrees to help protect the future of the reef. The government was trying to ensure this could not happen.” Since then, Unesco has found about one third of all the sites listed for their natural significance are under threat from the impacts of climate heating, such as rising temperatures, sea levels and extreme weather events. The Australian government has said the world heritage convention should not be used as a mechanism to encourage countries to take action on climate change, and that this should be left to the UN’s climate treaty. The UN’s science advisers are due to visit the Great Barrier Reef on a monitoring mission, and then produce a report to be considered at the Russia meeting next year. A spokesperson for environment minister Sussan Ley said Australia wanted a consistent approach for sites being affected by climate change “that does not see one site singled out when others are equally affected”. He said Australia had successfully proposed a working group with an expert panel to look at the climate policy in time for the next general assembly in 2023.Jack Dorsey has stepped down as CEO of Twitter and passed the baton to the relatively unknown executive Parag Agrawal. Agrawal, who has been with the company for 10 years – most recently as chief technology officer – has emerged from behind the scenes to take over one of Silicon Valley’s highest-profile and politically volatile jobs. But who is he, and what can we expect for Twitter under his leadership? A 37-year-old immigrant from India, Agrawal comes from outside the ranks of celebrity CEOs, which include the man he’s replacing as well as Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg and Tesla’s Elon Musk. But his lack of name recognition, coupled with a solid technical background, appears to be what some of Twitter’s biggest backers were looking for in the company’s next chapter. Agrawal is a “‘safe’ pick who should be looked upon as favorably by investors”, wrote the CFRA Research analyst Angelo Zino, who noted that the Twitter shareholder Elliott Management had pressured Dorsey to step down. That means we can expect more of the same under him in terms of policy and company direction, experts say – including plans to continue Twitter’s recent strategy to double its annual revenue by 2023 and focus on its long-term ambition to rebuild how social media companies operate. “We recently updated our strategy to hit ambitious goals, and I believe that strategy to be bold and right,” Agrawal said in an email to employees. “But our critical challenge is how we work to execute against it and deliver results.” The company currently faces a host of challenges, including slow growth in its user base as competitors like TikTok and Instagram lure away younger demographics, as well as continuing struggles with misinformation and hate speech. Agrawal is expected largely to pick up where Dorsey left off, continuing to fight for users being lured away by competitors like TikTok and Instagram, said Jill Wilson, the chief marketing officer for Esquire Digital. “Agrawal has his work cut out for him in terms of keeping Twitter relevant and getting the everyday user on board, and monetizing the platform in general,” she said. Dorsey, who co-founded Twitter in 2006, steered the company through a high-profile hack and the controversial banning of Donald Trump, who tested the boundaries of the platform’s enforcement against hate speech and misinformation. Those problems have continued beyond the Trump presidency, and Agrawal is stepping into a role in the eye of the storm over moderation policies on hate speech and misinformation, for which Dorsey has faced criticism in recent years. “The new CEO will need to work out how to stop his platform being a machine that is routinely and perpetually hijacked to distort the news agenda, produce fake popularity and influence, and provide a warped lens on the world,” said Imran Ahmed, the CEO of the Center for Countering Digital Hate. Dorsey had simultaneously been serving as CEO of the social media platform and as CEO of his payments processing company Square but will now focus primarily on Square as well as other pursuits such as philanthropy, Reuters reports. In an email to employees on Monday, Dorsey said he chose to step down due to the strength of Agrawal’s leadership, the naming of the Salesforce chief operating officer, Bret Taylor, as the new chairman of the board and his confidence in the “ambition and potential” of Twitter’s employees. “I’m really sad … yet really happy,” he wrote. “There aren’t many companies that get to this level,” adding that his move to step down “was my decision and I own it”. Over the past year, Twitter has fought to end years-long criticism that it has been slow to introduce new features for its 211 million daily users and was losing ground to social media rivals. Under Dorsey’s leadership, Twitter acquired the email newsletter service Revue and launched Spaces, a feature that lets users host or listen to live audio conversations. However, shares in the company have slumped in recent months, adding pressure on Dorsey to end his unusual arrangement of being CEO of two companies. Agrawal has already had a fast introduction to life as CEO of a central platform for political speech. Following the announcement on Monday, conservatives quickly unearthed a tweet he sent in 2010 that read: “If they are not gonna make a distinction between Muslims and extremists, then why should I distinguish between white people and racists.” As some Twitter users pointed out, the 11-year-old tweet was quoting a segment on The Daily Show, which was referencing the firing of Juan Williams, who made a comment about being nervous about Muslims on an airplane. Agencies contributed to this reportVictoria’s anti-corruption commissioner has warned there is a risk that police evidence could be tainted and officers may be prioritising credibility ahead of the administration of justice because the force is not controlling how its staff give witness statements. The Independent Broad-based Anti-Corruption commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, has urged Victoria police to strengthen its policies ahead of a coronial inquest which counsel assisting has indicated will examine claims officers were allowed to watch body-worn camera footage of a fatal shooting of a man experiencing a mental health episode before preparing their statements. The shooting is the latest in a series of cases where the force’s practices in relation to evidence given by officers has been questioned. Redlich said in a statement to Guardian Australia that the commission had made repeated and strong recommendations to Victoria police that it should stop allowing officers to watch their own footage, or footage captured from the body-worn cameras of other officers, before making statements. He said that position was also strongly supported by the state’s director of public prosecutions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “A formal statement is a person’s independent recollection of the event,” Redlich said. “Allowing police officers to watch body-worn camera footage before making a statement may taint their fair and independent recollection of the event. “Victoria’s police’s current policy position that officers may look at ... footage before making any statement is unsatisfactory as it emphasises the protection of officer credibility above the broader administration of justice considerations.” The commission found during last year’s Operation Gloucester, which examined how Victoria police investigated the 1998 murders of officers Gary Silk and Rodney Miller, that officers had used “improper practices” when it came to witness statements that had endured since the 1990s. These practices include officers using CCTV footage or the written statements of other officers when preparing their evidence. The practice of officers sharing statements has also come to light in two civil court cases in the past five years. In both cases, police were successfully sued for using excessive force during an arrest. In the case of Ethan Cruse, a member of the elite Special Operations Group admitted he should not have shared his statement with another officer who was yet to give evidence, and that it was a “poor” practice. Cruse was awarded $400,000 after a court found police had used excessive force during his arrest in 2015. He was later released without charge and the court found police had no reasonable basis to suspect him of any offence. Supreme court judge Melinda Richards found the officer had been “disingenuous” in his evidence regarding the practice, concluding: “This was more than ‘poor practice’. It was a calculated attempt to ensure that [colleague] gave a statement that was consistent with his.” Police also admitted sharing statements in relation to the violent arrest of a Melbourne woman in 2012, but no findings about the practice were made when the matter was finalised in 2017. The woman was awarded $85,000 after the court found that police had used excessive force in the incident. Redlich said officers should not use any record of events when making their statements. He said that official police training information including the Victoria police manual should be updated to ensure the practice was stamped out. Concerns about the methods used when officers prepare statements comes as the Andrews government prepares to overhaul the police accountability framework in the state. A Victoria police spokesperson said the police manual set out clear responsibilities and procedures in relation to how police should record information and events. But the spokesperson did not comment on how the manual related specifically to police statements. “In the case of investigations, notes must include all relevant facts, information and observations, including details of the incident scene and the questioning of all suspects and witnesses.” Earlier this month, Guardian Australia revealed that an inquest into the shooting of a man known as XY would include questions about how police completed their statements using body-worn camera footage, including footage captured by other officers. “Victoria police have been requested to provide a statement outlining any [policies], procedure or training that concerns the use of such evidence in the preparation of witness statements,” counsel assisting the coroner Catherine Fitzgerald said.Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions rose in the June quarter by about 2% as pollution from the electricity sector and transport increased. Figures released on Tuesday by the Morrison government showed that on a year to year basis, emissions for the 12 months to last June totalled 498.9m tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. That tally was down 2.1%, or 10.8m tonnes compared with the same period a year earlier. However, on a seasonally adjusted quarterly basis, emissions increased to 127m tonnes, or just over 2%, from the 124.4m tonnes reported in the March quarter. For the year to March, emissions totalled 494.2m tonnes, underscoring the pickup in pollution in the more recent quarter. A stable pollution rate, if not a rising one, is also implied by the government’s release of preliminary figures for the September quarter. They point to 125m tonnes of emissions in trend terms for the July-September months, bringing the year to September total to about 500m tonnes, the latest report said. The government has made much of Australia “meeting and beating” climate targets. However, the latest statistics show mostly emissions are not in decline despite its pledge ahead of the Glasgow climate summit that the country would hit net zero by 2050. “Nothing’s happening except for the electricity sector,” said Hugh Saddler, an honorary associate professor at the Australian National University. Once Covid curbs on the economy eased, such as during the current quarter, emission sources such as from transport will show a rise, he predicted. Falling costs for new wind and solar farms are pushing coal and gas out of electricity generation, as well as pushing down power prices. In seasonally adjusted terms, though, emissions for that sector rose from 39.7m tonnes the March quarter to 41.6m in the June one. Most other sectors were steady, with pollution from transport adding almost 1m tonnes in the June quarter. On an annual basis, a 500m tonnes tally is the lowest since records began in the 1990s. That lower trajectory, though, is lower due much to the land sector remaining a net sink even as some experts raise questions about the true trends when it comes to land clearing. According to the government, this sector – known as land use, land-use change and forestry – amounted to a net reduction of emissions of 24.4m tonnes, or almost negative 5% of the national total, in the year to June. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The magnitude of this net sink has decreased by 0.6% (0.2 Mt CO2-e) on the previous 12 months due to an increase in emissions from agricultural soils, partially offset by a continuing decline in land clearing emissions,” the latest report said. For its part, the government also touted the increase of renewable energy as central to driving emissions lower. “Since 2017, Australia’s consumption of renewable energy has grown at a compound annual rate of 4.6%, with more than $40bn invested in Australia’s renewable energy sector,” Angus Taylor, the federal energy minister said. “Last year, Australia deployed new solar and wind at eight times the global per capita average.” ANU’s Saddler said the main driver had been the 2020 Renewable Energy Target that the Coalition government had cut, and had anyway been implemented “a very considerable time ago”. Tim Baxter, the Climate Council’s senior researcher, said “the time for leaning on the achievements of others is long since past”. “We need a federal government willing to step up on emissions reductions and take charge with real policy, not wishlists,” he said, referring to the government’s net zero plan to rely on technologies to cut pollution, some of which don’t exist now.Victoria’s controversial pandemic laws are set to pass parliament after the crossbench MP Rod Barton agreed to support the legislation, securing amendments to give parliament power to disallow pandemic orders. But parliament will only be able to exercise that power if the disallowance has been recommended by a cross-parliamentary committee and then supported by an absolute majority in both houses of parliament, a scenario which is unlikely unless there is a change of government. Barton said the amendments made it “a much better and fairer bill” than was originally introduced by the government earlier this month. He told Guardian Australia the creation of a cross-parliamentary committee with real-time oversight of how the pandemic powers were exercised was “a very powerful thing”. “It puts a spotlight on the government that stops them from putting this through quietly on the side,” he said. With Barton’s support, the Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill is expected to pass the upper house. Debate will begin at 3pm and is expected to run late into the night on Tuesday. The Andrews government says it needs the legislation in place before the state of emergency expires on 15 December in order to ensure it can still make and enforce public health orders. Debate on the bill was suspended two weeks ago after the former Labor MP Adem Somyurek returned to parliament, having belatedly proved his vaccination status, and indicated he would vote against the bill. That left the Andrews government one vote short of what it needed to pass the legislation, having already secured the support of three other crossbench MPs – Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party’s Andy Meddick – who negotiated a raft of reforms including a significant reduction in fines for breaching public health orders and a fully funded independent oversight committee. The premier, Daniel Andrews, did not express relief at the deal, saying “we’ll wait and see what happens in the legislative council”. He said the emergence of the Omicron variant showed the pandemic “is not over”. “These are extraordinary arrangements because a pandemic is an extraordinary thing,” Andrews said. “It’s not something we face all that often although it has dominated our lives, I know, for the last couple of years. “This is a one-in-100-year event, if you like. Who knows when the next one will be? Who knows when the current things will end?” Andrews said vaccine mandates “won’t be here forever” but indicated they may need to remain in place until booster shots were rolled out and children under 12 were vaccinated. “It’s going to keep changing, and our response will need to be nimble,” he said. “And the inherent protections that come from encouraging everyone to get vaccinated, well, the hospitalisation numbers tell you all that you need to know.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Barton said on Facebook that the version of the bill he was supporting was “fundamentally a different bill” than what was originally introduced by the government. “We have absolutely curbed the powers of the Government,” he said. Barton locked comments on that post and also locked his Twitter account. The proposed amendments include replacing the current detention review panel with a new independent review panel, clarifying that complaints made about detention can be filed with the Ombudsman, and removing the aggravated offence clause which initially carried penalties for individuals of $91,000 or two years jail. Those penalties were reduced under earlier amendments negotiated by other crossbenchers. The Law Institute of Victoria said it supported the amendments, which mirrored changes it had called for, and now supported the bill. “The LIV believes that the proposed amendments to the Bill are an improvement and the government has come a long way in addressing the concerns raised by the LIV and other bodies who have been consulted,” LIV president, Tania Wolff, said. “There are notable changes in important areas of independent oversight, scrutiny and review proposed. Given what we are seeing in these additional amendments, this is an improvement, and, on balance, the LIV would support this Bill.” The Sustainable Australia party MP Clifford Hayes was also in talks to support the bill, but said on Tuesday that while the government had negotiated in good faith and made “commendable” amendments, “the final position of the government was not enough to garner my support”. Tweets from anti-lockdown, anti-vaccine protesters branded Barton a “traitor” and told supporters to “know their faces”. Others urged people to email Barton and beg him to reconsider, saying the legislation would be used to “target and oppress unvaccinated Victorians”. A modest group of protesters had gathered outside parliament but at the time the legislative council began sitting they appeared to be outnumbered by police officers. Barton said he and his staff had spent the morning “dodging threats” after their phone numbers were leaked. Some had been referred to police. “We have had threats to kill and threats against our families. It’s quite brutal,” he said. “It is not acceptable and we should not tolerate it, and it is a matter for police.” He said this decision would be more scrutinised than any he had made in his public life so far. “There’s a lot of angry people out there, but ultimately what we are trying to get through is a very different bill than what the government attempted to get up last sitting week.” The state opposition leader, Matthew Guy, earlier accused Barton of doing a deal to support the legislation. Guy also criticised the government for not consulting with the Liberal party, saying “our phone never rang”. Barton rejected Guy’s comments and said he did not strike a deal with the government. “It’s typical of the opposition to come up with something like this when they haven’t got anything else to say.”Elizabeth Holmes has testified that she was emotionally and physically abused by her former lover and business partner, Sunny Balwani, part of her attempt to refute accusations that she lied about Theranos’s core blood-testing technology. Monday marked Holmes’s fourth day on the stand as the continued to testify in her own defense in a fraud case that has gripped Silicon Valley. After recounting how she met Balwani while she was still in high school, Holmes said she eventually fell under his sway after she dropped out of Stanford University in 2003 to found Theranos, the startup she led as CEO for the next 15 years. Holmes, now 37, grew tearful as she testified that she was raped at Stanford, a factor she believes played a role in what she characterized as her later subservience to Balwani, now 56. The two became romantically involved in 2005 before Balwani became the chief operating officer at Theranos, a position he held from 2009 to 2016. Even before joining Theranos, Balwani was regularly berating Holmes as an inept executive who needed to “kill” her former self in an effort to become more disciplined and focused, according to her testimony and contemporaneous notes with strict instructions for Holmes handwritten by Balwani. “He felt like I came across as a little girl and thought I needed to be more serious and more pointed,” Holmes explained as she read through Balwani’s demands. They included spending at least 30 minutes each morning writing out her daily goals and never spending more than five minutes meeting with anyone unless she had written down a reason justifying the additional time. If she didn’t do what Balwani said, Holmes said, he would yell and tell her he was “so disappointed in my mediocrity”. At other times, Holmes said, Balwani would liken her to a “monkey flying a space ship” and tried to cut her off from her family in an alleged effort to ensure that she devoted herself full-time to Theranos. She also said he controlled her diet in an attempt to keep her “pure”. Sometimes after Balwani belittled her, Holmes testified, he would force her to have sex against her will. The dramatic turn came during Holmes’s testimony before a jury weighing fraud charges that include swindling investors and customers while putting patients at risk by telling elaborate lies about the company’s development of an allegedly revolutionary blood-testing device. Holmes could face a prison sentence of up to 20 years if convicted. In her testimony, Holmes said most people didn’t realize how much Balwani controlled her because most of his alleged abuse occurred outside the office. Her condemnation of Balwani contrasted with some of the messages she sent him. During a flurry of texts in April 2016, about a month before her romance with Balwani ended, Holmes quoted the poet Maya Angelou. “In all the world, there is no heart for me like yours. In all the world there is no love for you like mine,” Holmes told him. Under questioning by one of her attorneys, Holmes acknowledged that Balwani never told her what to say to the investors she is now accused of deceiving. She also testified that Balwani didn’t influence her discussions with Walgreens and Safeway, two major retailers that agreed to use Theranos’s blood-testing technology before backing out after discovering it wasn’t performing as she promised. Holmes will return to the witness stand on Tuesday when prosecutors will get their first chance to grill her under oath. Balwani faces fraud allegations mirroring those against Holmes in another trial scheduled to begin early next year. Federal prosecutors wanted to try Balwani alongside Holmes, but the US district judge Edward Davila separated the proceedings because of the possibility that Holmes would blame some of her behavior on “intimate partner abuse”. Jeffrey Coopersmith, Balwani’s lawyer, has vehemently denied Holmes’s abuse allegations. Although Coopersmith was present for Holmes’s testimony on Monday, Balwani couldn’t be there because he is prohibited from being in the courtroom in Holmes’s presence. During the trial, jurors also have heard testimony from more than two dozen prosecution witnesses, including patients and investors who prosecutors have said Holmes deceived.“Once upon a time,” on an afternoon in 1991, my family gathered around the television. We had been alerted by my sister Blazey to the airing of American Playhouse’s recording of Into the Woods, a musical by someone called Stephen Sondheim. Across those 2 hours and 31 minutes, I experienced something akin to a paradigm shift: a musical, it was now clear to me, could be more than just pretty melodies and glittering costumes. It could be erudite, scary, thrilling, as funny as Blackadder and as moving as National Velvet (such are the high watermarks of the nine-year-old’s pantheon). But there was something deeper at play for that (then-undiagnosed) autistic child: in the emotional ambivalence and lyrical dazzlement of songs like Moments in the Woods and On the Steps of the Palace, I felt, somehow, recognised. I quickly set about consuming every skerrick of Sondheim’s work that I could get my hands on. In Sondheim’s music and lyrics I had found a trusted friend and confidante, a harmonist to harmonise with. There was something irresistible in the rhythms and dazzling word puzzles of his lyrics that set synapses alight in my brain. This sad weekend past, I have been delighted anew by A Little Night Music’s Later: “Though I’ve been born, I’ve never been! How can I wait around for later? I’ll be ninety on my deathbed And the late, or, rather, later, Henrik Egerman.” To paraphrase Jane Austen, what are Melrose Place and Smash Hits compilations to The Ladies Who Lunch and A Little Priest? This position did not brook me much schoolyard cachet; I once attempted to introduce Assassins to some cooler, older kids by shrugging, “It has swearing in it”. Learning Sondheim’s catalogue by heart was at first an act of musical perseveration, but his lyrics soon became my echolalic tenets. “He was,” as Mandy Patinkin offered this weekend, “simply one of our greatest teachers.” Though my 11-year-old attempt to sing Company’s Being Alive at the school talent quest was squashed in favour of the more age-appropriate Getting to Know You from The King and I, Sondheim remained a daily part of my life for the ensuing three decades. I suspect it would have embarrassed him, even as he delighted in quiz shows, to hear that I once went on The Einstein Factor with his life and work as my topic. (And, in a positively Sondheimian result, came second to a Sherlock Holmes expert; Mark Humphries fared better on Mastermind.) Reading, for what must be the 47th time, biographer Martin Gottfried’s Sondheim, I am drawn once again to his assessment of Sondheim’s character. “He seems afraid only of the cliched, the banal, the careless, and the unintelligent,” Gottfried wrote of Sondheim. “He is in this way a hero.” I lived my life in fear of the same things, not always successfully in the case of my own work, as fealty to his mighty influence upon me. Having been introduced to his work at such a formative age led to bafflement at Sondheim’s undue reputation as a tetchy, un-hummable show-off. At 23, I brought Another Hundred People to a “BYO sheet music” sing-along at The Arts Centre’s Cafe Vic; I was somewhere around “By the rusty fountains and the dusty trees with the battered barks” when the accompanist gave up in a huff, and moved on to more crowd-pleasing fare. Later, I wandered back to my tram in a daze, and cried the whole way home. There is a breathtaking moment in Greta Gerwig’s Lady Bird, when Father Leviatch says of the school’s coolly received performance of Merrily We Roll Along, to nobody in particular, “They didn’t understand it.” Burnt by the letdown of receiving a Xeroxed autograph from the office of Steven Spielberg at the tender age of 12, I never wrote to Sondheim to tell him what his work meant to me. That fear that he’d be terse in reply, or never respond, was eventually replaced by a sort of stage fright: how could I find the words to explain his immense influence upon me? (As countless stories shared in the aftermath of his death have demonstrated to the contrary, he was in fact a generous and committed letter-replier.) Just a week ago, unpacking my Sondheim books as I moved house, the thought once again rose: I really need to write to him, and soon. There was a part of me that genuinely believed with trademark autistic magical thinking, when I first travelled to New York at the not-so-tender age of 28, that I might just bump into him somewhere and be able to tell him in person that nobody – no teacher, mentor, friend or enemy – has made a bigger impact on my life than Stephen Sondheim. It didn’t happen, so I’ll tell him now, and hope that, somewhere, he hears it. “I wish …”New Zealand’s opposition has announced a new leader, former airline boss Christopher Luxon, after its leader Judith Collins flamed out of the role last week. The National party emerged from its caucus meeting on Tuesday to announce Luxon, a political novice and former Air New Zealand chief executive, would be taking the party’s helm. He will be National’s fifth leader in as many years, and will work alongside deputy Nicola Willis. The party was forced into a new leadership vote last week, after leader Judith Collins self-destructed in an ill-fated attempt to take down political rival Simon Bridges. Luxon promised a new era for the National party, which has spent much of its recent years embroiled in leadership battles and minor scandals and plagued by bleak polling. “We are the reset,” he said. “Much has been made of my relative newness to parliament, but to be honest I see it as an advantage. I bring a fresh set of eyes, and what I see is that this place and this country needs a real shake up.” “Today we are drawing a line under the events of the last four years and we are putting them behind us. And I want to say to all New Zealanders – if you’re one of the 413,000 voters who moved away from us, my message to you is very simple: National is back.” Luxon is a relative political unknown, with just a year in parliament under his belt. He is the fastest MP in New Zealand political history to transition from entering parliament to leadership of a major party. “It’s a huge risk for National. A calculated risk, but still,” says former National government staffer and political commentator Ben Thomas. “He’s an unknown quantity.” The swiftness with which Luxon has been pushed from new entrant to party leader reflects a narrow suite of options on National’s frontbench – and also drives home the risk the party is taking. Luxon may have preferred to hold off on a leadership bid, but the party’s chaotic leadership spill left them with few options going forward. If Luxon’s inexperience sees him toppled or stepping down from leadership before the next election, National may have burned through one of its brightest new talents at the outset of his political career. “[Some]thing we haven’t seen in recent history is a party losing an election and their leader staying … so it’s a really tricky space for him to be in,” said Dr Lara Greaves, associate director of the Public Policy Institute. “I don’t want to use the cliche ‘do or die’ for 2023 but that’s really his position here.” But the MP has some factors working in his favour – including his years at the helm of Air New Zealand, one of New Zealand’s best-known companies. Luxon emphasised that track record in his first comments as leader. “I came to politics because I know how to solve problems and get things done,” he said. “I have built a career out of reversing the fortunes of under-performing companies and I’ll bring that real-world experience to this role.” “He has the perfect backstory for a National MP,” Thomas said. “[Running] that kind of business and the implied fiscal and economic experience that that brings ideally bolsters National’s credentials as a traditionally strong economic manager, which is an area where it’s kind of fallen off the pace in the last few years.” Luxon also came out swinging at Labour’s performance, saying it had been a government of slick PR and meagre results. “Jacinda Ardern is a fine communicator, but the reality is we need much more than that at this point in time,” he said. “Talking about something gets you a headline, actually getting things done is what improves the lives of New Zealanders … New Zealand has had a government that’s very good at delivering PR, but woeful at delivering much else. Nice ideas and good intentions don’t pay the rent or the mortgage. They don’t educate our children. They don’t keep us healthy. They don’t keep us safe from crime and gangs. They don’t improve our mental health and they don’t lower our emissions or keep us united.” In Luxon, the party will be hoping for a fresh start, after months of bleak polling and internal strife. He will have an uphill battle ahead of him – while support for Jacinda Ardern’s hugely popular Labour party has decreased in recent months to about 41 to 47%, Luxon will inherit a party that is still languishing about 20 percentage points behind, and shedding voters to its right. In a 1 News Colmar Brunton poll released in November, Ardern was sitting at 39% in the preferred prime minister stakes, while National’s prospects sat in the single digits: then-leader Judith Collins was at just 5%, alongside Luxon’s 4%. Both were being soundly beaten by David Seymour at 11%, the leader of the smaller libertarian Act party. The MP has also taken the top job without a protracted battle over leadership, which Thomas said was a “promising sign” for the party’s hopes of unifying the caucus. Greaves said it was “Really positive that they figured out a way to do this that makes them look united – these kinds of processes can be disruptive and destructive to people’s political careers – and for public perception of the unity of the caucus.” Bridges, the subject of Collins’ attack, had initially put his hat into the ring for leadership, but withdrew his candidacy on Tuesday afternoon, saying he would back Luxon for the role. “This morning I met with Chris Luxon and had a great discussion. I am withdrawing from the leadership contest and will be backing Chris. He will make a brilliant National leader and prime minister,” Bridges said.Liberal MP Russell Broadbent has announced he will resign as chair of the privileges committee and has called for an investigation into an alleged breach of confidentiality revealing its deliberations on Christian Porter. On Monday Guardian Australia revealed the powerful parliamentary committee had cleared Porter over his declaration that a trust part-paid his legal fees with money from undisclosed sources. Nevertheless, it concluded rules should be overhauled to uphold the “intent and integrity” of the register of interests. On Tuesday Broadbent tabled that report and the Guardian story, which he said contained “details of the committee’s report and deliberations”, a matter of “considerable concern” to him as chair. “It is clear this article is the result of the unauthorised disclosure of information contained in the report and the committee’s private deliberations,” he told the House of Representatives. Broadbent warned that unauthorised disclosure of committee proceedings is prohibited, and may amount to contempt of the house where it causes or is likely to cause substantial interference with the House or committee system. He raised the alleged leak “as a matter of privileges”, indicating that he intends to ask the committee “to investigate this apparent breach in the first instance and report back to the House”. “Clearly the privileges committee confidence has been surely offended. “This is an important committee of the House, where someone has decided to use the committee as a dirty rag and throw it in the bin. “The walls of the integrity, intention and spirit of the committee has been breached and I take full responsibility for that breach.” Broadbent told the House he intends to tender his resignation as chair of the committee at the first meeting in the next sitting of parliament in the new year, “allowing the prime minister … to appoint a chair that will have the confidence of all the committee”. Warren Snowdon, a Labor member of the committee, told the House he did not think Broadbent needed to “fall on his sword” over the alleged leak. “I have no idea what the explanation is as to why this matter was leaked into the Guardian,” he said. Snowdon agreed that it was “appropriate” to raise the alleged leak as a matter of privilege, but asked Broadbent to reconsider his intention to resign. He cited Labor members’ “great respect” for him and assured Broadbent he had the confidence of the committee. The health minister, Greg Hunt, confirmed Broadbent has the “full, complete and absolute confidence” of the government and encouraged him to reconsider his resignation. Liberal Kevin Andrews, the father of the House as its longest-serving MP, said what had happened was “absolutely regrettable” but it was “not the fault” of Broadbent. Andrews added the Coalition supported Broadbent’s chairmanship, describing him as “one of the most honourable people who sit in the parliament”. In September Porter updated the register of interests, revealing the trust part-paid his legal fees for his defamation case against the ABC and reporter Louise Milligan. In October, the Morrison government blocked a move to refer Porter to the privileges committee by asking it to consider the rules on funding legal cases generally. But the committee continued to examine a complaint from the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, into Porter’s disclosure. Porter maintains he has properly disclosed his interests in accordance with the rules and the ministerial standards, but he resigned as a minister in September on the basis the issue had become an “unhelpful distraction” for the government. The register of interest rules require MPs to declare “registrable interests of which the member is aware” including gifts worth more than $750 from official sources or more than $300 from other sources. But the rules also state that gifts from other sources “need not be registered unless the member judges that an appearance of conflict of interest may be seen to exist”. The privileges committee report noted that Porter had responded to Dreyfus’s complaint in a letter received on 17 November. “Having carefully considered the information provided, the committee concludes that the declaration by the member for Pearce was consistent with his obligations,” it said. “However, the committee considers all members should seek to provide the greatest level of transparency in the disclosure of the source of gifts received by them.” According to explanatory notes to the rules, members are urged to “bear in mind the purpose and spirit” of the register of interests. The report noted that guidance but concluded the current arrangements were “inadequate”. “The committee considers that additional detail within the requirements of the register would assist members in meeting the expectations of the House. “Therefore, as a result of our deliberations the committee has begun work on changes we believe are necessary to the requirements of the register … in order to ensure the requirements more comprehensively reflect the intent and integrity of the register.”It wouldn’t be an Australian election campaign without a barbecue meat-related scandal, would it? But this time it isn’t just Bill Shorten biting into a democracy sausage in landscape mode, but something potentially much more scandalous. Anthony Albanese and Daniel Andrews have been accused of faking a candid weekend barbecue snap after Twitter users pointed out their meat had a distinct lack of grill marks. But the premier has hit back, declaring that the photo was 100% legitimate, and the gas was on. The federal election may still be many months away, but over the weekend the federal Labor leader made his way to Victoria to promise an upgrade to the Barwon Heads Road, which connects Geelong and Melbourne, if elected. While he was down there, he caught up with the Victorian premier, and, as it turns out, former housemate, (terrifying to imagine the arguments over dishes those two would have gotten into). “Great to catch up with my friend and former housemate, Daniel Andrews, who cooks a great [barbecue],” Albanese tweeted, with a photo of him standing in front of a backyard grill with his more popular Victorian counterpart, tongs in hands and both sporting business formal attire. While some were quick to point out the pair looked like a “nice older couple who own a bookshop in Daylesford”, others, including federal Liberal frontbencher, Jason Wood, were more preoccupied with what was actually on the grill. “When zoomed in, the meat does not appear to have any char marks from the barbecue grill leading many to believe the photo was a ‘fake’,” the assistant minister for customs, community safety and multicultural affairs wrote in a Facebook post. “Also from personal experience, you don’t wear a suit jacket to a [barbecue] &amp; when cooking you don’t wear a wool jumper. What do you think? Is it [two] old mates catching up for a BBQ, or is it photo opp of the year?” This sentiment was echoed across social media, with others pointing out how bizarre it was that the pair appear to only be cooking four steaks and a giant plate of asparagus. But, as Andrews arrived at Victoria’s parliament house on Monday, to pass his controversial pandemic powers bill, he hit back against these accusations after being asked by media. “The gas was on! Searing a steak before you put it on the barbecue is not the most novel thing ever,” he said. “And the raw asparagus, I assure you we didn’t eat it raw. It went on to the barbecue. And it was windy and not that warm. So that’s why I had a jumper on.” He went on to admonish Woods for taking the time to criticise the weekend snap. “That joker Jason Wood. If I were him I’d be out there campaigning given the way they’re travelling at the moment, rather than being a commentator on my barbecuing skills,” he said. “I’m sure taxpayers are delighted that that’s his biggest contribution in the federal parliament. What a joker he is.”New Zealand has a new leader for its opposition, and – the party hopes – a new challenger to the enduring popularity of Labour’s Jacinda Ardern. The National party is pinning its hopes on Christopher Luxon, a former airline boss and a teetotaller, country music fan, waterskier, relative political unknown and – somewhat unusually for New Zealand politics – an evangelical Christian. Luxon is the latest in a string of National leaders and will be tasked with uniting a party long plagued by poor polling, minor scandals and political infighting. In their new leader, the party will hope to recapture the glory days of its long reign under the hugely popular John Key. Prime minister for eight years, Key was known for his affable, jocular and pragmatic persona. In his first appearance as leader, Luxon sought to channel a similar “everyman” image – asked to introduce himself to New Zealanders, he said he was a family man with a fondness for DIY. “I love waterskiing and I love country music and that’s not cool to say and I apologise to New Zealand for saying it. But I do like it.” Luxon had the former prime minister’s backing for the leadership role, and like Key, emerged from a high-profile role in the private sector – he was CEO of Air New Zealand between 2012 and 2019 – rather than devoting his professional life to gradually coming up through the political ranks. Those years at the helm of the national airline have given him a degree of name recognition, and despite being a newcomer to New Zealand politics the MP consistently registers in “preferred prime minister” polling. His political inexperience, however, could be his biggest challenge: Luxon has been in parliament for just one year. In that time, he’s kept a relatively low profile – and as a result, has little experience dealing with heated controversy, or a variety of substantive policy work, or being a spokesperson for the party. “He’s very green,” says political commentator and former national government staffer Ben Thomas. “We just don’t really know much about him or who he is,” said Dr Lara Greaves, associate director of the Public Policy Institute. Thomas said that while Luxon was often heralded as “the next Key”, it wasn’t yet clear whether he would have the keen political instincts that made his predecessor so popular. “Luxon hasn’t had the time to demonstrate the talents that Key clearly signalled to the public in the four years before he became leader … there’s no indication either way as to whether Luxon is or is not a supremely talented, natural politician,” he said. “We just don’t know.” Supporters will also be hoping, however, that that inexperience could also work in his favour. As a candidate, Luxon brings none of the baggage – or history of losses – that a number of others on National’s frontbench would come carrying. After farewelling so many leaders in the last four years, the party desperately needs a fresh, solid face – one not associated with the chaos, infighting and toxic interpersonal politics that have plagued its caucus. Luxon is an evangelical Christian, a relatively rare entity among New Zealand premiers, and his faith has been enough of a curiosity – or potential electability obstacle – that he devoted a chunk of his maiden speech to addressing it. “It seems it has become acceptable to stereotype those who have a Christian faith in public life as being extreme, so I will say a little about my Christian faith. It has anchored me, given my life purpose and shaped my values,” he said. “My faith is personal to me. It is not in itself a political agenda.” Asked again about it in his first press conference as leader, Luxon said: “To be honest, my faith has been often misrepresented and portrayed very negatively. What I can tell you is that my faith is actually something that has grounded me. It’s given me context and put me into [the] context [of] something bigger than myself – but I want to be very clear, we have separation between politics and faith.” Christian leaders are by no means unheard of in New Zealand politics, but over the past two decades its elected prime ministers have not been overtly religious. Both Helen Clark and John Key were openly agnostic. Ardern, while raised Mormon, left the church as a young adult, after disagreeing with the church’s stance on LGBTQ issues. Religious New Zealanders are a steadily shrinking portion of the population – in the last census, its largest faith affiliation was no religion at all, accounting for 48.5% of the population. That portion is much higher than Australia, the US and UK, and has risen steadily. Christians of various denominations made up about 38% of the population.Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, has recommended a significant overhaul of federal parliament’s toxic workplace culture after handing down her landmark report that found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The Jenkins inquiry into parliament’s workplace culture was triggered after former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins alleged she was raped after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins’ allegations are the subject of separate criminal proceedings. The review found gender inequality in the political ecosystem was a key driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault within commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. It found that power imbalances and the misuse of power, was “one of the primary drivers of misconduct”. Among key insights in a survey undertaken to inform the review, 37% of respondents in parliamentary workplaces had personally experienced bullying and 33% of people had personally experienced sexual harassment, with 1% experiencing an actual or attempted sexual assault. 84% of people who experienced sexual harassment did not seek support or advice. The report calls for a new code of conduct for parliamentarians and their staff as part of normalising employment conventions. It says that code should address current legal requirements that prohibit bullying, sexual harassment, sexual assault and workplace discrimination. As part of structural reforms, Jenkins recommended the establishment of a new Office of Parliamentarian Staffing and Culture to provide centralised human resources support, including policy development, training, advice, support and education. It also recommended the creation of an Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission “to ensure that there are independent and consistent responses to reports and complaints of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault” in parliamentary workplaces. The commission would operate with delegated power and “operate a fair, independent, confidential and transparent system to receive disclosures, handle informal and formal complaints”. The report also recommends new targets to achieve gender balance among parliamentarians “as part of a 10-year strategy designed to advance gender equality, diversity and inclusion” – as well as stronger protections for staff against arbitrary dismissal, including through amendments to the Members of parliament Staff Act – the legislation under which political staffers are employed. As part of a recommended cultural shift, Jenkins urged the presiding officers to review the standing orders of the parliament with a view to eliminating language, behaviour and practices that are sexist or otherwise exclusionary and discriminatory, and improving safety and respect in the parliamentary chambers. She said it was time to review the parliamentary sitting calendar and the daily order of business to enhance “wellbeing, balance and flexibility for parliamentarians and workers in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces”. As part of overhauling what Jenkins characterised as the “work hard play hard” culture, she recommended parliament develop and implement consistent and comprehensive alcohol policies across commonwealth parliamentary workplaces “with a view to restricting availability in line with work health and safety obligations, and the principle of harm minimisation”. The review found as well as an entrenched gender imbalance in parliamentary workplaces and a culture that allowed misuses of power, Jenkins said parliament lacked a culture of accountability. She said people interviewed as part of the review reported that people who engaged in misconduct were very often rewarded. Jenkins said there were particular difficulties sanctioning parliamentarians who engaged in misconduct “because they do not have an employer”. “Throughout the review, the commission heard about a lack of diversity across commonwealth parliamentary offices, the privilege of some groups of people, and the marginalisation and exclusion of others,” the report finds. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Certain marginalised groups of people … experienced greater vulnerability to misconduct, as well as specific and unique experiences of discrimination, bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault”. The sex discrimination commissioner recommended the reform process begin with a statement of acknowledgment to “acknowledge the harm, caused by bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces.” Higgins, who was briefed by Jenkins ahead of the public release of the report on Tuesday, issued a short statement on Tuesday. “I want to thank the many brave people who shared their stories which contributed to this review,” the former staffer said. “I hope all sides of politics not only commit to but implement these recommendations in full”. Scott Morrison said the recommendations would be the responsibility of all in the parliament, not just the Coalition. Morrison said the statistics uncovered by the review were “appalling and disturbing”. But he acknowledged he wasn’t shocked. “I wish I found them more surprising,” the prime minister said. Jenkins told reporters the recommendations to overhaul structures and culture was designed “to bring parliamentary workplaces into line with the standards expected of all modern Australian workplaces and support all parts of the parliament to perform at their best”. Jenkins was thwarted by the Morrison government in a separate process recommending the imposition of a positive duty on employers to stamp out sexual harassment. The new review recommends establishing a follow up external independent review to examine the implementation of recommendations made in this report “within 18 months of its tabling in the parliament”. Asked whether she was confident the recommendations would be followed, Jenkins said: “I’m also really certain that this piece of work reflects the voices of the people that work in there, including that 147 current and former parliamentarians who participated – so there’s a really good ground for this to be implemented”. “I will look forward to the response in due course,” she said. The man accused of raping Higgins in parliament house March 2019 will stand trial in June. Bruce Lehrmann is pleading not guilty to the charge and denies that any form of sexual activity took place. The Australian Capital Territory supreme court earlier this month extended Lehrmann’s bail until a criminal case conference in February, and set a tentative date of 6 June for a trial expected to last three to four weeks.As the world scrambles to contain the new variant, some are hopefully seizing on anecdotal reports from South Africa that it may cause only mild illness. But although previous variants of the coronavirus have been associated with different symptoms and severity, it would be dangerous to assume that Omicron is a viral pussy cat, experts say. At a briefing convened by South Africa’s Department of Health on Monday, Unben Pillay, a GP from practising in Midrand on the outskirts of Johannesburg, said that while “it is still early days” the cases he was seeing were typically mild: “We are seeing patients present with dry cough, fever, night sweats and a lot of body pains. Vaccinated people tend to do much better.” Meanwhile, Pretoria-based GP Dr Angelique Coetzee said many of the patients she’d seen were presenting with unusual symptoms, particularly severe tiredness, and none were reporting loss of taste or smell. While it may take several weeks before we get any definitive answers regarding the nature of the threat posed by Omicron, early evidence is emerging that vaccines do offer at least some protection. Dr Wassila Jassat from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases said that in the South African city of Tshwane, where Omicron was detected, 87% of hospital admissions were among unvaccinated patients. Rudo Mathivha, head of intensive care at Chris Hani Baragwanath, the main hospital in Soweto, painted a similar picture at a briefing on Saturday. “We’re seeing a marked change in the demographic profile of patients with Covid-19,” Mathivha said. “Young people, in their 20s to just over their late 30s, are coming in with moderate to severe disease, some needing intensive care. About 65% are not vaccinated and most of the rest are only half-vaccinated.” However, these demographic differences could simply be a factor of vaccination rates: 64% of over-60s in South Africa have had at least one dose, compared with only 26% of those aged between 18 and 34. Reassuring as such anecdotes may be, they should be treated with caution. Dr Müge Çevik, a clinician in infectious diseases at the University of St Andrews, said: “All the statements about severity of Omicron – either in the direction of more severe, or milder – are unreliable at this point as they are based on anecdotes or very little data. Even results from the first epidemiological studies will likely be biased as there are major challenges when inferring causality of disease severity with new variants – especially now that many people have acquired immunity, either via vaccination or infection.” On the other hand, we know from previous iterations of the virus that different variants can trigger more or less severe disease, and varying symptoms. For instance, Alpha (first detected in the UK) was more transmissible and associated with more severe disease compared to earlier variants but the symptoms were broadly similar. Delta (first detected in India) is even more transmissible and deadly, and yet two of the cardinal Covid symptoms: persistent cough and loss of smell and taste, are less common, but more people report headaches and/or runny noses. One reason for such differences could be changes in the way the virus interacts with our immune cells. Many common symptoms of illness, such as fever or a runny nose, are primarily caused by our immune responses to infections rather than direct damage by viruses or bacteria. Differences in our immune responses may also explain why two individuals don’t necessarily experience the same symptoms if infected with the same virus or variant. “All of this is about variations in bits of the genome that result in changes to the proteins that the virus uses when it gets into our bodies,” said Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist at the University of Warwick. “In the same way that the variants have different impacts on our immune system, and therefore the concerns we have about vaccine effectiveness, some of those same effects can influence the way our bodies respond to the virus and the symptoms we have.”Vast networks of underground fungi – the “circulatory system of the planet” – are to be mapped for the first time, in an attempt to protect them from damage and improve their ability to absorb and store carbon dioxide. Fungi use carbon to build networks in the soil, which connect to plant roots and act as nutrient “highways”, exchanging carbon from plant roots for nutrients. For instance, some fungi are known to supply 80% of phosphorus to their host plants. Underground fungal networks can extend for many miles but are rarely noticed, though trillions of miles of them are thought to exist around the world. These fungi are vital to the biodiversity of soils and soil fertility, but little is known about them. Many hotspots of mycorrhizal fungi are thought to be under threat, from the expansion of agriculture, urbanisation, pollution, water scarcity and changes to the climate. The new project, from the Society for the Protection of Underground Networks (SPUN), will involve the collection of 10,000 samples around the world, from hotspots that are being identified through artificial intelligence technology. Jane Goodall, the conservationist, who is advising the project, said: “An understanding of underground fungal networks is essential to our efforts to protect the soil, on which life depends, before it is too late.” The Society for the Protection of Underground Networks comprises scientists from the Netherlands, Canada, the US, France, Germany and the University of Manchester in the UK. The first collections will take place next year in Patagonia, and continue for about 18 months, to create maps of potential underground mycorrhizal fungi that can be used for further research. Using the maps, the scientists hope to pinpoint the ecosystems facing the most urgent threats, and partner with local conservation organisations to try to create “conservation corridors” for the underground ecosystems. This is believed to be the first major effort to map an underground ecosystem in this way. Climate science has focused on above-ground ecosystems, and although we know that fungi are essential for soil structure and fertility, and the global carbon cycle – as ecosystems with thriving mycorrhizal fungi networks have been shown to store eight times as much carbon as ecosystems without such networks – much of the role of fungi in the soil nutrient cycle remains mysterious. Mark Tercek, former CEO of the Nature Conservancy, and a member of the governing body for SPUN, said: “Fungal networks underpin life on Earth. If trees are the ‘lungs’ of the planet, fungal networks are the ‘circulatory systems’. These networks are largely unexplored.” Mycorrhizal fungi create tough organic compounds that provide structure to the soil, and store carbon in their necromass, the networks that are no longer active, but remain woven into the soil. Modern industrial agriculture adds vast quantities of chemical fertiliser which interrupts the dynamics of exchange between plants and fungi, scientists warn. Without thriving fungal networks, crops require more chemical inputs and are more vulnerable to drought, soil erosion, pests and pathogens. Mechanical ploughing in modern agriculture also damages the physical integrity of fungal networks. There is also increasing evidence that some combinations of fungi can enhance productivity more than others, so guarding these is critical, according to soil scientists. Ten hotspots have been identified by the scientists involved, including: Canadian tundra; the Mexican plateau; high altitudes in South America; Morocco; the western Sahara; Israel’s Negev desert; the steppes of Kazakhstan; the grasslands and high plains of Tibet; and the Russian taiga. Jeremy Grantham, a billionaire financier and funder of climate research who is funding the project with $3.5m (£2.6m), said: “Just below our feet lies an invaluable ally in mitigating climate change: vast hidden fungal networks. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide flow annually from plants to fungal networks. Yet these carbon sinks are poorly understood. In working to map and harness this threatened but vital resource for life on earth, SPUN is pioneering a new chapter in global conservation.”For seven months the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, and her team investigated the culture in Parliament House, and other commonwealth parliamentary workplaces (CPWs). They interviewed 490 people, read 302 written submissions, studied 935 survey responses, and heard from 1,723 individuals and 33 organisations. What did we learn from the resulting 456-page report? 1. Lots of shocking statistics More than half the people (51%) currently working in parliament had experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault, while 77% had experienced, witnessed or heard about such behaviour. Let’s break those stats down a bit. 2. Bullying Thirty-seven per cent of people experienced bullying. One participant told the review: “Frequently, like at least every week, the advice was go and cry in the toilet so that nobody can see you, because that’s what it’s like up here.” 3. Sexual harassment Thirty-three per cent experienced some form of sexual harassment. “Aspiring male politicians who thought nothing of, in one case, picking you up, kissing you on the lips, lifting you up, touching you, pats on the bottom, comments about appearance, you know, the usual ... the culture allowed it,” the review heard. 4. Sexual assault About 1% of participants had experienced actual or attempted sexual assault. According to one: “The MP sitting beside me leaned over … thinking he wanted to tell me something, I leaned in. He grabbed me and stuck his tongue down my throat. The others all laughed. It was revolting and humiliating.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning 5. Gender Women experienced sexual harassment at a higher rate, bullying at a higher rate, and actual and attempted sexual assault at a higher rate. (And those who identify as LGBTIQ+ experienced sexual harassment at a higher rate than people who identify as heterosexual or who preferred not to say. First Nations people and others from marginalised communities were also more at risk.) As for those doing the bullying, harassing and assaulting, they tended to be more senior, and women were more likely to bully while men were more likely to perpetrate sexual harassment. 6. Gender inequality Gender balance matters, and gender inequality is a driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault. One participant said: “It is a man’s world and you are reminded of it every day thanks to the looks up and down you get, to the representation in the parliamentary chambers, to the preferential treatment politicians give senior male journalists.” 7. Power matters And in the parliament workplace, that power works in all sorts of ways. Top down, of course, but sideways and upwards as well. One parliamentarian told the commission that having a big profile makes you a big target. “The staff work in the environment and they know that. All they have to do is threaten to take it to the media.” 8. The impact Unsurprisingly, incidents affected people’s mental health. The review heard from one person about the people they knew. “One tried to commit suicide, another admitted themselves into a mental facility. I know three women [who worked in CPWs] that are still seeing psychologists. One had a marriage breakdown, and one has completely dislocated with her children as a result of the direct influence of that member of parliament … I will never work in a political office again, it’s not worth it,” the participant said. 9. The lack of reporting Only half the people who were involved knew how to make a report or complaint. And even if they know how to, most said they wouldn’t report it. Only 11% of people who experienced sexual harassment reported it, because they thought it wasn’t serious enough, or that people would think they were overreacting. Just 32% of people who experienced bullying reported it, as they thought nothing would be done or it would damage their reputation or career. The review recommends a range of new standards and codes of conduct to help address this. 10. The lifestyle Throughout its work the review heard about the “high pressure” and “win at all costs” work environment in parliament. “Participants also identified a range of factors that create both physical and psychosocial risks, such as a ‘work hard, play hard’ culture, with high levels of stress, long and irregular hours, extensive travel and regular alcohol use,” the report found. We also learned that, despite the volume of information the commission had to deal with, it apparently remains optimistic that the culture can be changed, concluding that: “An opportunity exists for leaders not only to set the standard, but to set in motion a program of lasting reform.”After 396 years, the sun has set on the British monarchy’s reign over the Caribbean island of Barbados, with a handover ceremony at midnight on Monday marking the birth of the world’s newest republic. As the clock struck 12, the Royal Standard flag representing the Queen was lowered over a crowded Heroes Square in Bridgetown and Carol Roberts-Reifer, chief executive officer of the National Cultural Foundation, made the declaration of Barbados’ transition to its new constitutional status. Guests in the square applauded as Dame Sandra Mason was sworn in as president by the chief justice and took the oath of allegiance to her country. Hundreds of people lining Chamberlain Bridge in the capital cheered and a 21-gun salute was fired as the national anthem was played. Barbadian singer Rihanna also attended the ceremony and was declared a national hero. “Republic Barbados has set sail on her maiden voyage,” Mason said in her inauguration speech as the first president of the country, recognising the “complex, fractured and turbulent world” it would need to navigate. “Our country must dream big dreams and fight to realise them,” the former governor-general told those gathered for the ceremony. A solemn Prince Charles was on hand to witness the transition. “The creation of this republic offers a new beginning,” he said in a speech to the ceremony. “From the darkest days of our past and the appalling atrocity of slavery, which forever stains our history, people of this island forged their path with extraordinary fortitude.” “Full stop this colonial page,” Winston Farrell, a Barbadian poet said in a reading at the ceremony. “Some have grown up stupid under the Union Jack, lost in the castle of their skin.” “It is about us, rising out of the cane fields, reclaiming our history,” he said. “End all that she mean, put a Bajan there instead.” Announcing the decision to cut ties with the monarchy in 2020, prime minister Mia Mottley, who led the ceremony, said the time had come for Barbados to “fully leave our colonial past behind”, though some in the country said the moment had been long overdue. “It cuts into your dignity as a citizen,” Sir Hilary Beckles, the country’s most renowned historian and vice-chancellor of the University of the West Indies, said of the ongoing role of the monarchy in the country. “It reduces you psychologically in terms of being a citizen of your nation, and then you have public officials who have to swear allegiance to this sovereign who is not a part of their reality.” A comprehensive survey of Barbadian attitudes to the royal family – the early results of which were shared with the Guardian – suggested that more than 60% of Barbadians were in favour of becoming a republic, half of them enthusiastically, while about one in 10 people preferred to keep the status quo. “A significant number of persons were not interested one way or the other,” said Cynthia Barrow-Giles, a professor at the University of the West Indies and a lead investigator for the poll, which is yet to be released. On an island whose anglophile tendencies once led it to be dubbed “little England”, where people still drive on the left, play cricket at Kensington Oval and bathe at Brighton beach, the republic is part of a wider agenda building steam across the Caribbean to forge a future outside a British framework. The last time a spate of former colonies in the region cut their ties with the monarchy was the 1970s at the peak of the black power era. It was amid another reckoning on race last year, after the killing of the African American George Floyd, that Barbados flagged its own breakaway from the Queen. Barbadian leaders have mooted a republic since the run-up to independence in 1966, when the country’s first prime minister, Errol Barrow, told a British minister his nation would “not loiter on colonial property past closing time”. But in a world still shaped by colonialism, that has proved to be a fraught task that successive Barbadian governments have avoided, seeing it either as divisive, a distraction or a source of potential disquiet in Britain – from where more than a third of tourists to the country hail. It took until independence day in November 2020 for Mottley’s government to announce the transition, shortly before she presided over a ceremony to remove a statue of the British naval hero Horatio Nelson from a city square, over his defence of the colonial slave trade. A planned protest in Bridgetown over the presence of Prince Charles at the handover ceremony was denied permission on grounds of avoiding the spread of Covid-19. Other than Black Lives Matter protests, questions over the role of the Queen in Barbados may have grown in light of the Windrush scandal that saw thousands of people of Caribbean heritage living in Britain facing potential deportation, said Guy Hewitt, a former Barbadian high commissioner in London. “Windrush would have been one of those significant events that showed the divergence between where the Queen, as the queen of the United Kingdom, and her role as the queen of Barbados, may have been irreconcilable,” he said. The poll of Barbadian attitudes to the monarchy suggests any personal admiration for Queen Elizabeth that outlasted the colonial era has long dissipated on the island. “People are neither here nor there about her,” Barrow-Giles said. Few of those surveyed could name any others in her family, she added, with the exception of one member. “Where Prince Harry is concerned, in terms of the royal family outside of the Queen, he has the greatest level of favourability,” Barrow-Giles says. “People like him.”More countries have imposed travel restrictions on visitors from other parts of the world in order to try to contain the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, as China pledged to send 600m vaccine doses to Africa. As cases of Omicron continued to grow around the world from Japan to Reunion Island, Hong Kong widened its ban on non-residents entering the city on Tuesday to include visitors who have been to Australia, Canada, Israel or six European countries in the past 21 days. Non-resident arrivals from four southern African nations have already been barred. Ecuador joined the move to tighten border by imposing entry restrictions on travellers flying from or via a number of African countries. It would also request vaccine certificates from those arriving from other countries due to the new Omicron strain of coronavirus, president Guillermo Lasso said late on Monday. With the announcement Ecuador joins other countries across the globe in restricting travel in response to the Omicron strain, which carries a very high risk of increased infection, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The head of WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said the emergence of the new strain in South Africa last week showed how “hard-won gains could vanish in an instant”. He told a special session of the World Health Assembly in Geneva that “Covid-19 is not done with us”. Media in Japan reported that the first case of Omicron was recorded on Tuesday, while a person has tested positive for Omicron on the French Indian Ocean island of Réunion, it was reported on Tuesday, citing an official researcher on the island. The 35-year-old person had recently travelled to Mozambique. Amid concern about the gulf between vaccine rates in developed countries and less wealthy ones, China has pledged to donate 600m doses of its Covid-19 vaccines to Africa. China’s president, Xi Jinping, made the promise in a video speech to the opening ceremony of a China-Africa forum on economic cooperation in Senegal on Monday. He said China would supply 1bn doses in all. The other 400m are to come through other routes such as production by Chinese companies in Africa. “We need to put people and their lives first, be guided by science, support waiving intellectual property rights on Covid-19 vaccines, and truly ensure the accessibility and affordability of vaccines in Africa to bridge the immunisation gap,” Xi said. Stock markets in Asia made a good recovery on Tuesday after steep falls in values in recent days brought on by concerns about Omicron. The Nikkei in Tokyo led the way by lifting 0.5% while the ASX200 was up more than 1% in Sydney. “We’ll get a new variant, we’ll get new waves, but the market – and we all as investors – will see how that might play out,” Jason Brady, president at Thornburg Investment Management in Hong Kong, told Bloomberg. In the United States, president Joe Biden said Omicron was a “cause for concern, not a cause for panic”, as the US implemented restrictions on travel from South Africa and several other countries. Biden urged all Americans to get vaccinated, including booster shots, saying it was the best protection against the new variant. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention weighed in by saying on Monday that everyone aged 18 years and older should get a booster shot. Canada saw another two cases on Monday, taking its total to five, and the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, also appealed to the public to make sure they were vaccinated. “Let’s be clear: getting vaccinated is the best thing you can do right now,” Trudeau said in a tweet on Monday night local time. “So, if you don’t have your shots yet, get them. And now that we have enough vaccine doses for every kid between the ages of 5 and 11 to get their first shot, make sure you get your kids vaccinated, too.” The UK government is planning to reboot its vaccination programme back to levels seen earlier in the pandemic when around 500,000 jabs a day were being administered. In addition, ministers cut the waiting time for boosters to three months in a bid to outpace the Omicron variant that scientists believe is already spreading in the community. There were 11 confirmed cases of Omicron in England and Scotland on Monday, with hundreds more expected in the coming days. From Tuesday, masks will be mandatory on public transport including airports and stations, and in shops. Two arrivals into Australia have tested positive to Omicron, becoming the first cases in the country. The pair are in quarantine in Sydney after arriving from Johannesburg via Qatar on Saturday. Authorities in Singapore said on Tuesday that two travellers who tested positive for Omicron in Sydney transited through Changi airport. And a fifth person is self-isolating with the Omicron strain after returning to Australia from southern Africa before the variant emerged last week.A ruffled vibration, like running a thumb across the pages of a book, comes from the open window. I register it, distantly, thinking of the goldfinches who like to peck cobwebs from the lintel. But I don’t look up. The fanning becomes louder, but I’m busy writing and still don’t look. Now, the quiver is inside the room. The air ripples and the stirring grows. I look up. A chiffchaff in my bedroom whirs its wings, taking no notice. Rapid olive feathers beat. A palette of green and brown, moss and pine, brings the woodland directly into the house. Its pale eye-stripe flashes like a thread of sun. One of the first migrants to arrive in spring, the chiffchaff’s song is often what makes it memorable. The familiar, disyllabic “chiff-chaff” heralds warmer days and a swell of birdsong. There is, therefore, something dissonant about its voiceless presence in November, with the only song coming from purring, woodwind wings. Inside when it should be out, quiet when it should be loud – these broken patterns shake me out of my routine, as, for around 10 minutes, we build a gentle camaraderie, working side by side in the new normal. Since an increasing number of these traditional summer migrants are now staying through the UK’s warming winters, it’s not so unusual to find it here. With more of my work taking place in the house, it’s not so surprising to meet different neighbours. As I write, it explores the room with a series of sorties, interspersed with intervals of treading air. I stretch periodically, as it hangs there, neither of us moving towards cover. We are getting used to one another. It is only when I reach for a camera that it stirs and flits out of the window. Perhaps this gesture towards surveillance breached an unwritten code. I’m still learning what working by a chiffchaff is like. I hope I did some things right. When I touch the keyboard and resume, all the air seems to have been let out of the room. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryA supermarket in Melbourne’s western suburbs has apologised over a sign on its register that told staff to get help when African people entered the store. The ABC reports the sign at the IGA in Sunshine West had been taped to the register for three years, and it said: “If an African customer comes to the bottle shop presses [sic] the button for assistance immediately! Minimum 2 staffs [sic] in front while we serve Africans.” The sign has been removed after an image of it was circulated on social media. Guardian Australia called the IGA in question and was told “no comment”, but a representative of the store told the ABC he apologised for the sign, arguing the button was for safety reasons and for when the store was busy. “We apologise for what we’ve done. I’m sorry it will never happen again like that,” he reportedly said. A spokesperson for IGA’s parent company Metcash said the sign was “completely unacceptable”. “When we saw the video, we promptly took corrective action with the store in question, including immediate removal of the sign,” the spokesperson said. “It is not reflective of the other 1,300 IGA stores out there, who genuinely take pride in serving their local communities each and every day.” The Metcash spokesperson said training for store staff was under way. Melbourne lawyer Maker Mayek said he was not surprised by the sign. “It has happened numerous times before when African men have been racially profiled, whether by the police or in public spaces,” he said. “So I am not surprised that a supermarket has targeted a community to be watched as if they’re coming to steal. “The sad fact is, it’s happened before, it’s happened now with IGA and it’s definitely going to happen in the near future.” He said the training was “rubbish” used to “deflect scrutiny”. “In our communities, it shouldn’t be happening. It’s as simple as that. It really doesn’t need training,” he said. It has been more than three years since the so-called “African gang crisis” in Melbourne received widespread media coverage and attention from Coalition MPs before the 2018 state election. At the peak of the coverage, Victoria’s equal opportunity and human rights commissioner reported an 129% increase in complaints about racist incidents, which were directly attributed by the commissioner at the time to “inflammatory race-related political statements and reporting in January”. Mayek said the Covid lockdowns had meant there had been a reprieve in media coverage, but said African Australians were still being disproportionately targeted and fined by police because of their race. Data released last year in Victoria revealed people who were born in South Sudan and Sudan were overrepresented in the fines issued for Covid-19 breaches. They made up 5% of the fines but only make up around 0.14% of the Victorian population.The Parkers Arms in rural Lancashire is freezing cold and cannot take bookings over the phone, at least for now. Four days ago, Storm Arwen took out the power lines and telephone wires linking this rural Lancashire gastropub to the outside world. Its ever-optimistic proprietor, Stosie Madi, expects normal service to resume by the weekend at the pub in Newton-in-Bowland. But now – like the rest of the hospitality sector – she has a new worry on her mind: the Omicron variant of Covid-19. “We’re fully booked for the Christmas season and we’re quite pleased with that but we’ve had some cancellations come through,” she says, adding that the bulk came on Sunday after Boris Johnson announced tighter rules in response to the variant. She worries fresh Covid-19 pessimism risks dampening trade, which had been booming since restrictions were lifted in the summer. “People have been making up for lost time but the worst thing that could happen is if we’re stopped from trading,” Madi says. “This year they’ve said they won’t lock us down again but you know what he [Johnson] is like. You never know how quickly he changes his mood. If we had to close down completely, that would be a disaster. I don’t know if I could pull the strength out for that.” Madi is one of thousands of publicans, nightclub owners and restaurateurs dreading a rerun of last winter, when soaring cases and newly identified variant led to a lost Christmas. While hospitality has escaped any new restrictions in Sunday’s announcement, which reintroduced compulsory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport, the uncertainty over whether they will eventually be brought in may already be taking its toll. “There will undoubtedly be an impact as consumers digest the news and take steps to protect themselves,” says Kate Nicholls, chief executive of trade body UKHospitality. “There’s no doubt there will be a chilling effect on confidence, while travel restrictions may mean some bookings are being cancelled.” A second Christmas lockdown would be “catastrophic” for a sector still rebuilding from last year and heavily reliant on the festive period, she says. Peter Marks, chief executive of 46-venue nightclub group Rekom UK, has already had to revive the company from the ashes of Deltic, the firm’s former name before it was rescued from administration by a Scandinavian firm. The nightclub industry has been closed for longer than any other hospitality segment and received less support. “It makes me want to scream at the fact that I’m sat here waiting for the next piece of virtue-signalling from government where they start picking on us, on nightclubs in particular,” says Marks. “If you lose Christmas and new year it would cost millions and mean you would not have the cash to see you through the sparse trade of January and February.” Even restrictions such as having to ask for vaccine status on the door could have a major effect now, he adds. “Slow queues in freezing conditions are not conducive to great trade.” Nicholls argues that any reimposition of curbs on hospitality must come with renewed economic aid. “Last year we had grants, reduced VAT and full furlough but none of those are in place now. Businesses wouldn’t be able to cope. Substantial restrictions should mean substantial support.” At the Old Millwrights Arms in Aylesbury, landlady Liz Hind has been fielding questions from punters about whether masks are coming back to pubs. “People are very confused about what they are supposed to be doing, the story of the pandemic really,” she says, warning the longer-term effect on pubs will be hard to reverse. “The pub industry Facebook chatter is that the people who are more concerned about Omicron were already staying away. We’ve got that long-term change in customer behaviour.”It was one of those rare, almost magical, summer evenings. Warm enough to sit outside in a T-shirt, listening to birdsong; warm enough to stay out late, savouring a meal; warm enough not to notice night settling in, the visitor that slipped into the party unannounced. It was 11 June 2021. Jenny McCann sat in the garden of her home in north London with her twin brother, John Eyers, their parents, Lyn and Derek, and Jenny’s husband and children. It was her son’s 10th birthday party. John and their parents had come down from Southport in Merseyside for the weekend to celebrate. Jenny made Lebanese lamb and parathas. The adults were buzzed on wine, the kids on birthday cake. “Life felt really good,” says Jenny. She can’t remember how the argument about the Covid vaccine started. “John started saying really crazy things that didn’t make sense,” she says. “About how people were only getting the vaccine for free McDonald’s, and there was formaldehyde in it.” The rest of the family remonstrated with him, pulling out their phones to factcheck what he was saying. But John was unmoving. “He kept saying: ‘I won’t be a guinea pig.’” Eventually, he made a joke and changed the subject – that was his way of defusing tension. “He would make a joke about everything,” says Jenny, who is 43 and works as an operations manager. Argument aside, it was a great get-together. “John was on really good, funny form,” says Jenny. They went for dinner at a Turkish restaurant and played darts in the garden. John scored a bullseye with his eyes closed and bragged about it all weekend. There was only one other difficult moment, when the family went to a local health club. John refused to wear a mask. The twins had a fight in reception. “I said: ‘John, put your face mask on,’” Jenny remembers. “‘He said: ‘You aren’t my mother – don’t tell me what to do.’” John eventually acquiesced, then made another easy joke. They went swimming and played tennis and forgot about it. A perfect weekend, then. Twins enjoying each other’s company after the enforced separation of the pandemic. Neither had any idea it would be their last time together. *** John and Jenny were born in Southport in 1978. As children, they were diametrically opposed. Jenny was a bookish goody two-shoes; John was mischievous, good at sport and uninterested in school. Despite their differences, they shared a formidable bond. “When we were very young, we were shadows of each other,” says Jenny. Into adulthood, she always knew when her brother was lying – like the time he told their mother he hurt his shoulder tripping over a witch on Halloween. (He had been knocked off his bike by a lorry.) “He didn’t want Mum to worry,” she says. Jenny left home at 18 to go to university, leaving her brother behind. He worked in their parents’ carpet business for a while, but didn’t enjoy it, then joined the erotic dance troupe the Chippendales, performing all over Europe. “He had piercings in places you don’t want to know about your brother having piercings in,” Jenny shudders. Around this time, he had a child, Macey, who is now 19. The relationship with her mother didn’t work out, but John was a committed and loving father. His stripping days over, he returned to Southport and began working as a product specialist in the flooring industry. He worked to keep the lights on, but sport was his big thing. John had always been a gifted athlete. “He would do something and get obsessed with it,” Jenny says. In his teens, he was a champion pole-vaulter and hockey player. In adulthood, he went through phases. He got into triathlons for a while, then bodybuilding competitions, then mountain climbing. He was a fixture at his local gym, which is where he met his best friend, Jonathan Cohen, 37, a chartered surveyor. “He’d spot me in the gym with a set of weights and it was a natural progression from there,” says Jonathan. “Suddenly, we were going out every weekend together.” John’s dedication to fitness was something to behold. “He really pushed his body to the limit,” says Jonathan. John would be in the gym most mornings at 6am. On a holiday to Marbella in May 2016, John kept getting stopped by other men on the beach – they wanted to know his training regimen. Jonathan cropped John out of their holiday photos. “I wasn’t having a photo stood next to him with his six-pack,” he laughs. “No! Not having that.” John was gregarious and fun-loving. “He was a social butterfly,” Jenny says. “He liked being out, working a room, being charismatic and laughing and joking. He was a big piss-taker – he’d insult you, but in a funny way, so you ended up laughing.” From his first girlfriend, at 10, John was a serial monogamist, prone to the odd grand gesture; he once proposed to a girlfriend at a festive grotto while dressed as Santa. “He was an old romantic,” says Jenny. “He really wanted the happily-ever-after.” (That relationship didn’t work out and John never married.) From January onwards, John struggled with his mental health. Covid restrictions weighed heavily on him. He hated not being able to go to the gym, hated not being able to go climbing, hated not seeing his friends. He lived alone, having broken up with a girlfriend at Christmas, and was lonely. He confided in his sister. “I was really worried about him,” Jenny says. “He was in a bad place. I had to call him every day to make sure he was OK.” Their grandmother died in March. When Jenny saw him at the funeral, she was horrified. “He’d lost so much weight,” she says. Jonathan thinks this is, in part, what drove his friend’s Covid scepticism. “He was frustrated at the way he couldn’t go and do normal things,” he says. “He didn’t want another lockdown, or to be in a situation where he wasn’t able to go and see people.” John felt that Covid was real, but that it had been dramatically overstated by the authorities. Nobody he knew in Southport had contracted Covid. If he got the virus, he would be fine. “It got to the point where he refused to wear a mask at all,” says Jenny. Many of the people in his life tried to argue with him. “I would tell him: ‘Why won’t you get the jab? You’ll need it if you want to go away on holiday,’” says Jonathan. “He kept saying that he wanted to wait. It wasn’t that he would never get it. But it was more the misinformation, really. For whatever reason, he would not listen to whatever message was coming out of the government. I’d say to him: ‘John, why are you listening to that rubbish?’” John was a fan of the pearlescent-toothed Tony Robbins, whose brand of adrenalised motivational speaking has earned him an estimated fortune of $500m (£375m), plus a private island in Fiji and celebrity fans including Serena Williams and Hugh Jackman. Robbins, while steering clear of outright anti-vaccine statements, has made comments throughout the pandemic that play down the severity of Covid, or imply that lockdown restrictions are overblown. (Confusingly, he has also touted a Covid vaccine that is being developed by Covaxx, a company that has received funding from a venture capital firm in which Robbins is a partner. He has made no secret of that financial interest.) In September 2020, Robbins posted a link to an article by the Kremlin-funded news site RT that said lockdowns “achieved almost precisely nothing with regard to Covid. No deaths were prevented”. In September 2021, he appeared at a conference in Florida where he mocked Australia’s Covid restrictions, cast doubt on the efficacy of vaccines and told a cheering audience not to let “fear be the thing that controls you”. “John mentioned to me once that one of his beliefs was that we shouldn’t live in a climate of fear around Covid,” says Jenny. “If you were young and fit and well, you’d be fine.” *** In this assumption, John wasn’t entirely wrong. He was extremely unlikely to die from Covid, as a physically fit 42-year-old with no underlying conditions. The Covid mortality rate for all 40-year-olds is about one in every 1,490 people infected, while for 40-year-olds with no underlying health conditions it is about one in every 28,500 people infected, although these figures vary between scientific papers. But his calculus when it came to understanding the risk-to-benefit ratio of Covid vaccination was off. If infected, someone who is unvaccinated is 32 times more likely to die of Covid than someone who has been vaccinated. While vaccination carries a risk of side-effects, this risk is far smaller than the risk of being unvaccinated during a pandemic. Out of 46.3 million fully vaccinated people in the UK, 77 have died of blood clots thought to be related to a Covid vaccine. “There is a huge asymmetry with risk,” says Dr Tom Stafford, a psychology lecturer at the University of Sheffield. “If you can get away with things that are low probability, you don’t know how dangerous they are until it’s too late.” Stafford uses the example of driving without a seatbelt: most of the time, you will be absolutely fine. But the one time you are in an accident, things might get very bad very quickly. “It’s the same with the vaccine,” says Stafford. “It’s a low-probability event that you will get the virus and need hospitalisation. But if you do, then the vaccine shows its benefit.” Stafford says that decisions about vaccination, particularly for Covid, are some of the hardest that people have to make. “Risk calculus can be particularly hard in certain circumstances,” he says. “Risks where we don’t always see the outcome, so we have to trust people. And new risks. Coronavirus is both of those things.” But why would someone such as John be inclined to take his information about the pandemic from social media influencers rather than scientific experts? In 2009, Stafford co-authored a paper that surveyed people who lived on brownfield sites that might have been contaminated with pollutants. The survey asked the residents whom they trusted to tell them about the risks associated with living on the land. While most of the people trusted scientists to tell them the truth, they were almost as likely to take their information from family and friends, despite their total lack of expertise. “It wasn’t that they didn’t trust the expertise of the scientists,” Stafford says. “They knew that scientists knew about pollution. They just thought that the scientists didn’t have their interests at heart, whereas they knew that family and friends did.” The internet replicates this fundamental human impulse – to trust family and friends almost as much as we trust experts – at scale. “We feel a connection to the people who are telling us things in a way that we don’t feel a connection to the Centers for Disease Control or the Joint Council on Vaccination and Immunisation,” Stafford says. In the age of social media, we don’t even need to have met the people we trust as much as established experts. “That’s why social media is so dangerous,” says Stafford. “Because people share that emotional connection with influencers they might never have met. But it’s an asymmetrical intimacy. I may think I know that vlogger and they are talking to me. But really they’re talking to millions of people – and the advertisers generating them their revenue.” The falsehoods that John repeated to his family and friends in the months leading up to his death are common tropes in online anti-vaccine spaces and easy to find: the vaccine has dangerous levels of formaldehyde in it; the vaccine is experimental; people are only getting the vaccine for free McDonald’s. “The best thing that people can do is realise that social media platforms are fundamentally unsafe environments to gain facts about a pandemic that might kill you,” says Imran Ahmed, the CEO of the Center for Countering Digital Hate. “Social media contains vast amounts of misinformation that mingles seamlessly with good information. The misinformation might kill you.” John was a heavy user of social media. “He was what I’d call a Facebook ranter,” says Jenny. Occasionally, she would challenge him on the content of his posts about Covid. When he was at her house, Jenny told him off for spending too much time on his phone. “He wouldn’t put his phone down,” she says. Ahmed is scathing about the social media companies that profit from misinformation. “They don’t want you to find the truth,” he says. “They want you to keep scrolling. If you find the truth, you don’t need to scroll any more. They want you to keep scrolling and arguing and looking for more bullshit.” *** John tested positive for Covid on 29 June. By 3 July, he was seriously unwell. Amy, the woman who had recently become his girlfriend, had to force him to call 111 for help. Later that day, he was taken to Southport &amp; Ormskirk hospital by ambulance. Jonathan texted his friend as soon as he heard the news. “He said that he couldn’t type, but that he was in hospital with pneumonia,” he remembers. “He wouldn’t admit at that point that it was Covid.” John had a raging temperature and difficulty breathing. Doctors put him on a Cpap machine, to assist his breathing, and swathed him in cooling blankets. On 4 July, John was up all night vomiting blood. He sent Jonathan a voice note the next morning. “It is the worst voice note I have ever heard in my life,” says Jonathan. “I burst out crying halfway through it.” The voice note is a minute and a half long. In that time, John speaks about 12 words. “I will never send it to anyone, but if anyone questioned whether Covid is real, I would play it to them,” says Jonathan. “It is the worst thing in the world. I can hear the fear in him. He is literally gasping for air. This is someone I knew who could run 10k or climb a mountain without struggling.” On 6 July, Jenny was in the supermarket when a feeling of great panic settled upon her. “I just had this feeling that something wasn’t right with John,” she says. She left without doing her shopping. That afternoon, she got the phone call. John was in the ICU. She immediately got a train to Southport, sobbing the whole way. By 11 July, John needed to go on a ventilator. Jenny spoke to him on the phone before he was sedated. She told him she loved him. He couldn’t respond, but he texted her: “Don’t let them give up on me.” It was the last message she received from her twin. On the morning of 27 July, John’s family got the call they had been dreading. He was dying; they should come in right away. They raced to the hospital, but John had stabilised by the time they arrived. Staff told them to go home and said they would call back if there was any change. About an hour later, the hospital called back. The family piled into the car and started driving to the hospital at top speed. Nurses kept calling, telling them to hurry. They raced to the ICU, where staff were waiting with PPE. Jenny could hear the alarms going off in her brother’s room. “I couldn’t stop shaking,” she says. “It felt like a monster was about to come out of my mouth and I couldn’t control it.” When they had finally tugged on the PPE, they ran into his room. It was full of ICU staff, all in tears. John had just died. Jenny’s stepdad collapsed to the floor. Her mum was wailing. “The matron grabbed my mum and was holding her,” says Jenny. “Everyone was crying. The consultant was crying. All the staff were crying. Because he was so young. And they couldn’t save him.” *** How do you explain how a supremely fit 42-year-old man died of a disease typically thought to afflict older people or those with underlying conditions? “Genetics makes the most sense,” says Dr Guillaume Butler-Laporte, a genetic epidemiologist at McGill University. Butler‑Laporte is part of a global research programme to analyse the genomes of more than 100,000 people with Covid, in an effort to understand why some people are more severely affected than others. When he began his research in March 2020, Butler-Laporte “did not expect to find much”, he says. “We thought Covid would affect everyone, but be worse for old people and not as bad for young people. But as we included more patients, we saw a clear story develop. It was surprising.” Butler-Laporte and his colleagues found that people with variants in up to a dozen locations on the human genome were at higher risk of developing severe Covid, should they be unfortunate enough to be infected with the virus. People with variants on the chromosome 3 region alone were up to twice as likely to develop severe Covid as someone without that genetic mutation. Chromosome 3 mutations are carried in about 10% of people of European ancestry, meaning that such people have a 10% chance of being twice as susceptible to severe Covid infection. “There is no question there is a genetic underpinning to this,” says Butler-Laporte. “As to whether genetics is more important than other factors, like age, I wouldn’t want to comment. But it is clear that there are other determinants of severe disease and genetics is one of them.” He is almost certain that John fits the profile of someone with a genetic variation that made him more vulnerable to severe Covid. “It’s impossible to know specifically what genes he carried, but it’s very likely he carried this genetic predisposition,” says Butler-Laporte. Unbeknown to John, his body was primed to react with maximum violence to the Covid virus. When he was unfortunate enough to breathe in infected air carrying infinitesimally small virus particles, his body gradually failed. “Had he been vaccinated, the best case would have been that he developed sterilising immunity, meaning that, when the virus landed in his nostrils, it got picked up by antibodies and never set up an infection,” says Dr Tom Lawton, an intensive care doctor. “If he’d had a lower level of immunity from the vaccine, he would have had non-sterilising immunity, meaning that the virus did start to infect cells, but his body fought it and was able to clear out the virus before it ramped up rapidly.” But John was not vaccinated. The Covid virus infected his cells, replicating in his body. He eventually managed to expunge the virus – but then his immune system went into overdrive. “The virus seems to set something up in the body and the damage comes from there,” says Lawton. “It wouldn’t have happened had the virus not been there.” First, his lungs were affected. “There will have been blood clots forming, as well as a thickening of the membrane that separates the air and the blood in his lungs,” says Lawton. As a result, the blood couldn’t carry sufficient oxygen to John’s organs. Doctors treated him with steroids, to damp down his immune response. But these immune suppressants made John vulnerable to bacterial and fungal infections. He developed infections in his lungs. His liver and kidneys began to malfunction, causing waste products to build up in his blood. Doctors put John on dialysis to clear out the toxins, but by this point many of his organs were failing and he had unsurvivably low oxygen levels. He expended an inconceivably huge metabolic effort to stay alive. “Although it looks like someone is just lying there asleep, the amount of work they’re doing is really impressive,” says Lawton. He compares it to walking a marathon for every day the patient is hospitalised. Eventually, John exhausted his physiological reserve. His body was oxygen-deprived and wrung out. His heart stopped beating and he died. *** Before he died, John told the doctor treating him how much he regretted not getting the vaccine. “The doctor said that he was beating himself up so much before they put him on the ventilator,” Jenny says. “He was saying: ‘Why didn’t I get vaccinated? Why didn’t I do it? Why didn’t I listen?’” It is for this reason that his family has agreed to share his story. “He probably wouldn’t be dead if he’d had the vaccine,” says Jenny. “It’s really quite simple. He made a bad decision. We all make bad decisions all the time. And he paid the ultimate price for it. Which is so unfair.” Jenny says she “just wants people to be vaccinated and, if they have doubts, to get medical advice – not advice from the internet. And to realise that Covid is brutal. It’s just brutal.” She is struggling to adapt to life without her brother. “I don’t know that it will ever feel real,” she says. “How can my healthy, outgoing, silly brother be dead? It doesn’t make sense in my brain. How can I be a twin without a twin?” At John’s funeral, on 16 August, Jonathan delivered a eulogy. He spoke about that holiday in Marbella in 2016. They spent a day drinking champagne at a beach club, laughing, messing around. As the sun set, a rainbow formed over the sea. This is how Jonathan likes to remember John. They are sunburned, drunk, a little unsteady on their feet. Suffused with love for each other. The night is drawing in and Jonathan turns to his best friend and says: shall we carry on? And John says: of course. • This article was amended on 11 December 2021. The Covid mortality rate for 40-year-olds with no underlying health conditions is about one in every 28,500 people infected, not one in every 1,490 people infected as stated in an earlier version; the latter figure is for all 40-year-olds.The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office racially discriminated against a black senior civil servant after launching an inquiry into her sex life, an employment tribunal has ruled. Sonia Warner, a civil servant for 33 years who oversaw government grants given to Nigerian organisations, was the victim of unconscious discrimination when she was “pushed away”, “disowned” or “othered” by colleagues, it concluded. The ruling follows a six-month departmental inquiry that was launched into Warner while she worked in Nigeria. It was alleged that she had formed an intimate relationship with an employee of an organisation receiving UK government cash – a claim she denied. The ruling follows a report last year that found that many black, Asian and minority ethnic men working in development for the government claim to have experienced prejudice at work, including racist jokes and doubts about their legality as UK citizens. The tribunal concluded that Warner had been the victim of unconscious bias by senior colleagues assessing and conducting claims against her. It said: “We have found that the claimant [Warner] was treated with an unwarranted degree of suspicion, that unfair assumptions were made about her, that minds were closed, that she was treated unfairly in the disciplinary process, which took an unreasonably long time. “The explanations that we received from the respondent [FCDO] for this treatment were not just poor or unreasonable excuses. They simply did not adequately explain the degree of unfairness and unreasonableness in the treatment and we infer that the missing part of the explanation is the claimant’s race. “The claimant was ‘pushed away’, ‘disowned’ or ‘othered’ during the disciplinary process in a way that we consider would not have happened were she a white civil servant with equivalent length of service and experience,” the tribunal said. Warner, who had worked across Africa, moved to Nigeria in 2017 as a senior governance adviser, leading on anti-corruption. Her job was to help Nigeria tackle endemic corruption by providing grants to both government and civil society organisations. In 2019, she suggested that a £2m grant given to a Nigerian charity should be subject to closer monitoring. Two days later, people connected to the charity accused Warner of having an affair with an employee of the charity. Warner was subsequently accused of misconduct, which included failing to report a conflict of interest due to a relationship. The allegations resulted in a six-month investigation by an all-white FCDO team that gave Warner a final written warning, legal documents show. The tribunal is yet to rule on any compensation she may receive. A remedy hearing has been fixed for February. Warner said: “After 33 years of dedicated service I felt heartbroken and humiliated by the treatment I received from white colleagues who I trusted to act in a fair and impartial manner, regardless of my race. “It has taken two years to be heard on this issue because conscious and unconscious bias is a real barrier to fairness and equality. This is a victory for racial justice, which I hope will lead to a stronger commitment to strengthening HR systems and processes to protect black staff.” The government’s aid department, the Department for International Development, which merged with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, was severely reprimanded for signing off an anti-sexual harassment campaign that portrayed BAME men restraining white women. The findings, including a survey of BAME staff and published in March 2020, were uncovered as the department faced the merger with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Amanda Hodgson, a partner from the firm Fletcher Day, which represented Warner, said: “This is an important judgment, highlighting the subtleness of unconscious bias, which is very difficult to prove at trial. We are hopeful that the judgment will encourage employers to take a considered approach when disciplining employees in the workplace.” An FCDO spokesperson said: “We are committed to being an inclusive employer for our 16,500 colleagues around the world. We don’t comment on individual cases.”When I was younger, and at war with my own body, I was a sucker for diets. I tried The Rotation Diet (Lose Up to a Pound a Day and Never Gain it Back), The Beverly Hills Diet (a 35-day programme, but I never made it past the first three days) and numerous punitive low-fat regimes involving raw carrots and dry crispbread. None of them lasted long, but each time I broke a diet, I would soon be looking around for another, equally unrealistic, weight-loss plan. No matter how similar the new diet was to the last, it gave me a sense that I was doing something productive about what I saw as the problem of my body. Personal weight-loss diets have a lot in common with obesity policies in England and beyond. For a start, the sheer quantity of these policies is astonishing. Earlier this year, two researchers based at the University of Cambridge – Dolly Theis and Martin White – published a paper showing that from 1992 to 2020, there were no fewer than 689 separate obesity policies put forward in England. Like failed diets, almost none of these initiatives have been realised in any meaningful way. Instead, their main effect has been to remind people with obesity that the government views the mere existence of their bodies as a “crisis”. While England is not alone in failing to reduce the prevalence of obesity – the World Health Organization reports that it has more than tripled worldwide since 1975 – “obesity policy” in England has been strikingly ineffective. (I say England because since devolution, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own separate health policies.) Between 1993 and 2015, obesity among England’s adult population rose from 14.9% to 26.9%. Twice as many adults in the UK are living with obesity as in Italy, Sweden or Switzerland. At the same time, levels of hunger in the UK are some of the highest in Europe. Nearly one in five 15-year-olds live in a household where the adults are “food insecure”, which is a fancy way of saying that they can’t reliably afford enough food. Covid has brought to the surface some hard truths about the British food system, and what a poor job it does of feeding the population as a whole. As the first lockdown hit in March 2020, plenty of better-off British households were able to carry on eating much as before, while millions more were plunged into food poverty. According to data from the Food Foundation, during the first two weeks of lockdown in the spring of 2020, the proportion of households facing food insecurity doubled to more than 15%. Black and Asian people have been twice as likely to suffer hunger during the pandemic as their white counterparts. As Marcus Rashford said in a letter to parliament about food poverty in June 2020, “This is a system failure”. But it is a system failure that existed for decades before the pandemic at long last pushed it on to the national agenda. British politicians, as a rule, have shown little interest in tackling the problem of poor-quality food and its relationship to health. These policy failures go back to the 19th century. Our early Industrial Revolution meant that a larger percentage of the population lost its connection with agriculture at an earlier stage than in any other country. When it comes to food policy, there has long been an attitude of “leave it to the market” (the shining exception being the two world wars, when the constraints of rationing forced governments to join the dots on food and health). Campaigners against the grossly adulterated food supply in Victorian times sometimes complained that the selling of food in London operated on “buyer beware” principles, which meant that grocers were free to sell poisonous pickles and fake coffee to an unsuspecting public without fear of retribution. Not much has changed, except that instead of poisonous pickles, we are sold a surfeit of ultra-processed food. Recent English obesity policies have spoken endlessly of “action” to help people eat healthier diets, but what they deliver, often as not, is another raft of patronising diet information leaflets, such as the bright yellow Change4Life diet pamphlets handed out in schools and GP surgeries. (One uninspiring gem: “If you’re shopping for packaged snacks for your children, try sticking to 100 calorie snacks.”) For three decades, Theis and White found, successive governments have repeatedly proposed “similar or identical policies” and then not done anything to see them through. What counts as an obesity policy could be anything from a plan of action to a statement of intent. Whichever party has been in charge, the most popular policies have been ones placing high demands on individuals to make personal changes (such as the 5 a day campaign) rather than meaningful reforms such as restricting the sale of unhealthy foods, or subsidising fruits and vegetables to make them more affordable. Most of the ideas for structural interventions – for example, that the food industry should reformulate its unhealthiest products – were voluntary. Unsurprisingly, compliance was not high. One of the few exceptions has been the Soft Drinks Industry Levy (AKA Sugar Tax) of 2018, which resulted in a 30g a week drop in household sugar consumption, but I suspect that this will turn out to be a pyrrhic victory given evidence that consuming aspartame, the artificial sweetener used in many diet drinks, also causes weight gain as well as possibly altering the gut microbiome. The almost 700 obesity policies fell under the banner of 14 separate obesity strategies. It is poignant to read the titles of these largely failed and forgotten strategies, which share an air of wishful purpose. Under John Major in 1992, there was Health of the Nation. Next, under Tony Blair in 1999, came Saving Lives. Also under Labour came Choosing Health (2004), Choosing a Better Diet (2005) and Choosing Activity (2004, 2005 and 2005) and Healthy Weight, Healthy Lives (2008). The Coalition government produced Healthy Lives, Healthy People and A call to action on obesity in England (2011). Most recently, under the Conservatives there have been three instalments of Childhood Obesity: A Plan for Action and then, in 2020, Tackling Obesity. Notice how the words “choosing” and “action” keep reappearing in these strategies. Given that poorer UK households would have to spend nearly 40% of their income to buy food for a healthy diet, according to recent data from the Food Foundation, to frame healthy eating as simply a matter of “choosing” is dishonest. It’s not choice if you can’t afford it. Decades of research show that obesity is determined to a large extent by environmental factors such as socioeconomic inequality, the rise of ultra-processed food and the way that cities are built to facilitate car use. But policymakers of England have stayed wedded to the idea that weight is all about personal responsibility: just eat less and move more. The failures of obesity policy in England and the UK are part of a larger problem with food policy in general. As well as being a source of joy and nourishment, food is Britain’s biggest employer, accounting for 4.1m jobs (most of them low-paid). At the same time, poor diet is the country’s biggest cause of preventable disease and the food supply is also one of its biggest drivers of climate breakdown (10% of our greenhouse gas emissions come from agriculture). And yet for decades, a food policy to address any of this has seemed to be missing in action. Fewer than a quarter of the policies analysed by Theis and White (24%) included any plan for monitoring their progress. Nearly a third (29%) of the policies did not include any timeframe, any evidence or any position on who or what is responsible for driving the rise in obesity. It isn’t just that food policies in England have long been ill-suited to improving our diets. It is that very few people, inside or outside government, seems to have the slightest idea what these policies actually are. * * * Earlier this year, the need for a radical rethink of food policy in the UK was set out in Henry Dimbleby’s National Food Strategy: The Plan, an independent review commissioned by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). Dimbleby, one of the founders of the Leon chain of cafes, wrote the report after consultations with more than 300 organisations, as well as town hall meetings with members of the public. It took three years to produce. Unlike all the earlier failed obesity policies, Dimbleby’s plan recognised that how a person eats is not just a question of personal choice, and that healthy food is a basic need for all of us, no matter how much we weigh. It called for a range of ambitious strategies themed around reducing diet inequalities, improving food education, making better use of land and, crucially, setting as a clear goal that the food system of the future must “make us well instead of sick”. It suggested that school inspections should pay as much attention to cookery and nutrition lessons as they do to English and maths, and that meat consumption should be cut by 30% over 10 years, with more investment going to growing vegetables and fruits. Almost everyone I have spoken to in food policy and nutrition circles has showered Dimbleby’s report with praise, relieved that someone close to government was finally recognising the scale of the problem and proposing real solutions. Some public health experts, such as Rob Percival at the Soil Association, have been disappointed that the report still talks about foods high in sugar, fat and salt as the problem, rather than addressing the harm done by ultra-processed products as a whole. But Percival has still praised the report as “important and progressive” in making the connections between farming and health. No sooner had the National Food Strategy (NFS) plan appeared, however, than the government backed away from taking action. The first of the strategy’s recommendations was a “reformulation” tax of £3 a kilogramme on sugar and £6 on salt for use in food processing, catering and restaurants and food processing. But on 15 July, Boris Johnson announced that he would not support the plan’s call for higher taxes on foods high in salt and sugar. “I’m not attracted to the idea of extra taxes on hard working people,” said Johnson, before repeating his belief that weight loss could best be achieved through exercise. His language could have come from any one of the 14 failed obesity strategies. This was a characteristic piece of political theatre from Johnson, who knows he will win points with some voters by positioning himself as a brave warrior against the nanny state. More significant than the fact that the prime minister ridiculed the first recommendation in the NFS plan is the fact that he remained silent on the other 13 proposals. Did this silence imply approval or disapproval (or simply that Johnson couldn’t be bothered to read the whole thing)? The real test will be the government white paper, which is due to be published in January 2022, setting out plans for legislation based on Dimbleby’s report. Will the libertarians in the Tory party ever lose their conviction that it is not government’s place to meddle in how people eat? If they don’t, it is unclear how Dimbleby’s radical policy suggestions can be put into action. * * * The ambitions of the NFS report raise a question: can this new holistic vision of food policy actually be delivered? The final recommendation is the introduction of a Good Food bill, which would commit the government to five-year action plans, and to coming up with a “healthy and sustainable reference diet”: an agreed vision of what healthy eating actually means, to create a consistent approach to food across the whole system, from schools to farms. So far, so good. The problem is that the report handed responsibility for monitoring progress to the Food Standards Agency, a non-ministerial department whose remit is mainly food safety and things such as use-by dates. “Delivery ain’t gonna come from the FSA, no way!”’ said Tim Lang, emeritus professor of food policy at City, University of London, when I spoke to him on the phone recently. Lang, who is most famous for coining the term “food miles”, has long been recognised as one of the leading experts on food policy in Britain. The week after the NFS plan was published, he wrote an opinion piece in the Spectator praising much of the content of the report but suggesting that the FSA was unfit to deliver it. The FSA is, he wrote, a “long-weakened body … a kind of genial facilitator” whose role is purely advisory. Since it is not a government ministry, Lang argued, the FSA lacked the power to get anything meaningful done. “Nothing happens unless you get laws and regulations that get translated into daily cultural values,” Lang told me. Since the war, he argues that the closest that the UK has come to having a systematic food policy was in 2008, under Gordon Brown, when the Food Matters review of food policy was set up (under which the Healthy Weight, Healthy Lives strategy fell). “They integrated environment and nutrition and hospitality all in one document,” Lang said. But when the coalition government came to power in 2010, the review was “shut down by the Tories overnight”. Now, he wonders whether the government really wants a unified food policy, or whether they would prefer “no policy at all”, to keep their friends in industry happy. For years, Lang has decried what he calls the lack of “food democracy”. In the UK, 94.4% of food is supplied by one of the nine leading retailers. Along with his colleagues Erik Millstone and Terry Marsden, earlier this year Lang wrote a paper setting out nine “tests” for food policy in the UK. “How will people be fed and to what standards, from where, produced how, and with which consequences?” the paper asked. Lang feels that Whitehall brushes these questions aside because there is a “naive optimism” that other countries will always come along to feed us. After Brexit, this post-imperial complacency looks dangerously misplaced. As recently as October there were tonnes of broccoli and cauliflower rotting in the fields without workers to pick them, tens of thousands of pigs faced being culled because of a post-Brexit shortage of butchers and empty shelves in the supermarkets because of the shortfall of lorry drivers. In the midst of this chaos, who will actually step in to protect the food supply? Successive governments have been largely happy to leave it to the market – which in practice means leaving it to the supermarkets and the ultra-processed food industry. Dimbleby says that one of the core aims of his report is to break what he calls “the junk food cycle”, in which retailers oversupply us with low-nutrient sugary foods and we in turn demand more of them. At the same time, the report was informed by conversations with many of the biggest food companies including Coca-Cola, Greggs, Tesco and Asda (as well as smaller organic companies such as Yeo Valley). To regulate industry, Dimbleby proposes forcing all food companies with more than 250 employees to publish an annual report. As well as admitting how much food they waste, they would be forced to declare how many healthy foods such as vegetables they sell each year – for some companies, the answer would presumably be “none” – as well as how many unhealthy sugary foods. The hope is that this process of public accounting would enable government to track whether businesses are moving in the right direction. The problem is that it’s currently unclear who would oversee this, or what the sanctions would be for companies that continue to sell us the same old junk. * * * It is hardly surprising that English food policy to date has seemed muddled, given that responsibility for it is spread across no fewer than 16 separate government departments. As well as the obvious candidates such as the Department of Health, the Department of Education and Defra, there are more surprising departments such as the Department of Justice (prison food) and Digital Culture, Media and Sport (food sponsorship and advertising). In 2020, Kelly Parsons, a food policy researcher at the University of Hertfordshire, produced a report identifying which government departments are responsible for which aspects of food policy in England. The meticulous research process confirmed Parsons’s hunch that “there is no single place to go to find out about food-related policy, either for those inside or outside government”. Parsons told me that after she published her map of the different groups and departments a number of people in Whitehall told her how useful it was, because they had been just as much in the dark about food policy as the rest of us. Given the poor state of the average British diet – the Food Foundation found in 2021 that almost a third of British children aged between five and 10 eat fewer than one portion of vegetables a day – it would be easy to assume that Britain must have a poor nutrition policy. But the problem is actually deeper and more nebulous than this. Britain doesn’t actually have a single nutrition policy at all, just a series of different policies on food, often contradictory ones, emerging from different departments at different times. Not only do these departments fail to coordinate their actions on food, but they may have directly opposing agendas. Current agricultural policy in the UK subsidises sugar and red meat, even though dietary advice from the Department of Health recommends eating less of them. Earlier this year, Parsons set out to identify some of the key disconnects in food policy in England, based on interviews with senior officials in key departments in Westminster. One of the biggest contradictions was that different departments have different “client groups” to please. Health officials may wish to restrict junk food being marketed to children, but their counterparts in the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport are more interested in protecting the profits of the advertising industry. “When you have [an agriculture] minister who says, ‘I’m going to be judged on whether I keep the farmers happy’, and a minister of health who has a completely different set of interests, it’s difficult to see how they would work together,” said one of Parsons’s interviewees. The client who tends to get forgotten in all this is the ordinary person simply trying to feed themselves and their family as well as they can on a stretched budget. Another of the disconnects Parsons identified was between nutrition, obesity and income. Through the Department of Health, the government hands out advice on what to eat (through the much-criticised Eatwell guide), but there is no attempt to cross-reference this with policy on welfare and on food access – “specifically, people’s ability to afford the food being recommended for healthy weight”. This clash of departments partly explains why so many obesity policies focus on physical activity as the solution, rather than reforming the food supply. As Tim Spector outlined in his recent book Spoon-Fed, evidence suggests that exercise – while beneficial, especially for mental health – does not reliably cause weight loss. But obesity policies that propose more sport, rather than changes to diet, have always been popular in government because they pose no threat to the junk food industry. We shouldn’t be talking about obesity policy (let alone an “obesity crisis”) at all, but about food quality laws or junk food control. After all, the government does not produce tobacco strategies with titles such as “childhood smokers: a plan for action” or “tackling smokers’ lungs”. Chris van Tulleken, an infectious diseases doctor at University College London hospital, told me that, as with tobacco, the focus should be “on regulating the marketing, not blaming the consumer”. He argues that ultra-processed foods should come with a warning label and that these products should not be marketed to children. But there is still a reluctance within the UK government even to identify ultra-processed food as a problem. As Gyorgy Scrinis, an Australian professor of food policy, has shown, the big food companies have successfully lobbied governments around the world to ensure that official nutrition advice stays focused on individual nutrients in packaged foods rather than on ultra-processed food in general. What would it take for England to have a food policy fit for the task? One obvious solution would be to create a designated minister of food to coordinate food policy, as there was during the war and up until 1955, when the Ministry of Food became subsumed by Agriculture and Fisheries. Another solution would be to say that food is so relevant to every aspect of life that there should be food in every policy. This is the approach favoured by the NFS report, which ruled out the idea of a single food minister, noting that food is not unique in being split across multiple departments. Since the second world war, Dimbleby argued, the purpose of the food system in England has been to maximise the production of cheap food, regardless of quality. This urgently needs to change, but to pivot to a new system that produces nourishing, sustainable food would require radical adjustments all the way through the food chain. There is a need, as Dimbleby notes, for every cog in the wheel of the food system to be designed to “make us well instead of sick”, to be “resilient” and to help “halt climate change”. But where will this shared sense of purpose come from? Having interviewed 23 of the most senior civil servants and politicians in Westminster, Kelly Parsons told me that she realised that at the highest levels of government in England, food was endlessly pushed down the agenda. It simply wasn’t seen as important. * * * The absence of adequate food policy in England reflects a wider culture in which most of the population has been disconnected from food production for a very long time. There is a maddeningly persistent view in the UK that caring about healthy food is snobbish or “middle-class”. (Witness the rage that greeted Jamie Oliver when he dared to try to improve the quality of school meals in 2005.) England is far from the only country where responsibility for food policy is spread across multiple departments. In South Africa, for example, food policy is splintered across 15 different departments. But one of the big differences is that South Africa also has a Department of Cooperative Governance, whose role is to coordinate food polices across all the departments at a local and national level. In 2019, South Africa was ranked as the most effective government in the world for its commitment to tackling hunger and undernutrition by the Hunger and Nutrition Commitment Index. Under South African policy, ensuring adequate food for the population is seen as such an urgent priority that nutrition has its own separate budget line. Compare and contrast this with the UK, where hunger is still not generally recognised as an issue. In England, there is not a single department assigned lead responsibility for hunger, despite the fact that, in 2018, the Food and Agriculture Organisation found that there were more than 2.2 million people in the UK in a state of food insecurity. (The 2021 figures are undoubtedly higher). Last winter, for the first time in 70 years, Unicef stepped in to feed hungry children in the UK. Yet Parsons reported that the government continues to see hunger as an “overseas issue”. If England has fragmented food policies, it is partly because this is a country that does not recognise how much food matters. In modern western societies with an apparently abundant food supply, treating food as trivial is a common mindset, as historian Paul Freedman shows in his short new polemic Why Food Matters. Effective food policies have a better chance of taking root in countries with long-established cultures of cooking, where it is normal for families to gather around a table every day. One example is Brazil, where school canteens are obliged to source 30% of their ingredients from local family farms. In 2014, Brazil totally rewrote the script on nutrition policy when the department of health issued new food-based nutrition guidelines urging Brazilians to avoid ultra-processed food and to eat more freshly produced food. At the time, these guidelines were unlike any other nutrition policy in the world, although similar policies have since been adopted by other countries including Ecuador, Peru and Canada. When I asked Geoffrey Cannon, a British researcher who helped design the Brazilian nutrition guidelines, why Brazilian food policy is so much more ambitious than that in England, he pointed to the prevailing food culture. “In the Catholic tradition, Brazil is still largely family-based and therefore family meals are normal.” Even when people move away from home to the cities, they can still buy cheap home-style food at “per quilo” restaurants selling unpretentious food priced by weight. Cannon felt that people in Brazil still had a sense that homemade food was something normal and delicious – much more so than in the UK with its highly processed diet and long working hours. But it’s also worth remembering that food cultures are not static, and just sometimes food policy can succeed in changing cultural attitudes for the better. In the 1970s, the region of North Karelia in Finland had some of the worst rates of fatal heart disease in the world. A visionary young public health official called Pekka Puska implemented a whole range of measures to address cardiovascular health, all at once. Puska worked with women’s groups to encourage people to cook new versions of traditional dishes, with more vegetables and less meat. He supported dairy farmers in diverting some of their land from butter to berries. He persuaded local sausage producers to take out some of the fat and replace it with mushrooms. And he recruited an army of local people to act as advocates for the new diet to their friends and neighbours. Puska also instigated smoke-free workplaces. By 2012, cardiovascular mortality among men in the region had dropped by 80%. Policy experts still debate which of Puska’s various measures made the greatest difference, but in a sense it doesn’t matter. This was food policy as doing, not talking, and it worked. A good food policy is one that actually makes it beyond the announcement and gets carried out, with adjustments along the way for anything that doesn’t work. The example Dolly Theis likes to give is of the city of Amsterdam, which from 2012 to 2015 brought down rates of child obesity thanks to a series of measures that included increased support for parents, a ban on junk food marketing at sporting events, and a rule that the only drink in schools should be water. “Can you imagine that here?” Theis asks. The hope held out by Dimbleby’s NFS report is that if enough measures can be put in place at once, as in Amsterdam, something fundamental will shift and we will collectively reach a point where we no longer tolerate a system so stacked against healthy eating. Our forgiving attitude to an ultra-processed food supply today might be a bit like attitudes to tobacco 50 years ago, when smoking on trains was normal. There are signs that the pandemic has finally jolted us into new ways of thinking about food. Marcus Rashford’s passionate advocacy has made far more people recognise how unacceptable it is to live in a country where mothers like his struggle to buy “a good evening meal” on minimum-wage jobs. Our great-grandchildren may laugh when we tell them that English schools routinely used to sell sugary drinks for profit, that hospital food courts provided burgers and chips to people who had just undergone heart surgery, and that farmers were paid to produce the very foods that caused the most damage to health and the environment. “That was what it was like,” we will say, “living in a country where the politicians didn’t know that food mattered.” • This article was amended on 7 December 2021 because an earlier version linked to a study cited as “new evidence” that aspartame may cause weight gain. The link was to another study whereas the intended referenced was to a 2016 study. The correct link has been inserted. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.In the Calais museum to the second world war, housed in a former Nazi bunker in one of the town’s parks, there is a room dedicated to people smugglers. A giant map shows the routes by which members of the French resistance spirited Jews, stranded British soldiers and others out of German-controlled territory. The paths stretch from France into southern Europe and out over the Mediterranean – an echo of the dangerous journeys taken by many who seek to reach the UK without permission today. Smuggling people across borders is neither inherently good nor inherently evil. Those who do it can show a callous disregard for human life. Or they can be motivated by a desire to protect and nurture, like when Rob Lawrie, an army veteran who volunteered in the Calais refugee camp in 2015, hid a four-year-old Afghan girl in his van and tried to board a ferry to the UK. (Lawrie narrowly escaped a prison sentence but was found guilty in France of the lesser offence of endangering a child.) Very often, the “smugglers” are the people on the move themselves, helping one another out as they travel. What such efforts have in common – from wartime heroics, to profit-making gangs, to acts of charity – is that they are responses to needs. When people feel compelled to move, they will look for ways to do so. If obstacles are placed in their way, the chances that they will turn to the services of smugglers, or attempt dangerous journeys under their own volition, will increase. After last week’s disaster – the deadliest at the UK’s border with mainland Europe since 39 people were found dead in a lorry in Essex in October 2019 – the British government is under pressure to put an end to the Channel crossings. Its instinct is to reach for yet more border security: on 26 November, Boris Johnson proposed more patrols at sea, more electronic surveillance, more spying and harsher treatment of migrants who reach the UK. But the situation in the Channel is the clearest evidence we have of where an unrelenting focus on security leads us. For more than two decades, successive governments have sought to discourage unwanted migrants, mostly people seeking asylum, from crossing the Channel. During the 1990s and early 2000s, Britain and France set up “juxtaposed” border controls, placing officials at transport hubs in each other’s countries, to stop people taking ferries and trains. When people stowed away on vehicles instead, Britain prevailed on France and its neighbours to increase security at ports and entry points. In 2014, for instance, the UK pledged £12m to help France build fences around the port of Calais to stop people breaking in. As these journeys became more difficult, the use of small boats became increasingly common from 2018, accelerating in 2020 as the pandemic shut down other travel options. We have known for years that border security has deadly consequences. Between 1999 and 2020, according to a report published by the Institute for Race Relations, just under 300 people lost their lives trying to cross to the UK. People have been hit by cars on the motorways of northern France, they have suffocated inside lorries or been electrocuted in the Channel tunnel, and they have drowned. But the shift to small boats is potentially far more dangerous: while market dynamics create an incentive for smugglers to cram people into unsafe boats, many more migrants are simply clubbing together to buy their own, as the UK’s National Crime Agency admits. From the British government, you couldn’t find a response more likely to make the situation worse. Not only does it follow the security-focused trajectory of its predecessors, but this now comes wrapped up in Johnson’s toxic post-Brexit mode of engagement. Its diplomatic posturing has soured relations with France, which makes international cooperation more difficult. Some have noted the irony that Brexit actually seems to have given the UK less control of its borders – by leaving the EU’s common agreement on asylum at the end of 2020, for instance, the UK has lost the ability to return asylum seekers to other European countries they may have passed through. But by far the greater problem is the nationality and borders bill currently making its way through parliament. The bill is an attempt to reshape policy around the Faragist lie that the country is at “breaking point” from unwanted immigration, by introducing a system that punishes asylum seekers who arrive in the UK of their own accord. This, Priti Patel has said, will encourage refugees to use official routes, ensuring that asylum is “based on need, not the ability to pay people smugglers”. Yet the government’s own assessment of the legislation accepts there is “a risk that increased security and deterrence could encourage [asylum seekers] to attempt riskier means of entering the UK” and that “evidence supporting the effectiveness of this approach is limited”. Opponents of the bill argue – correctly – that the UK should instead expand safe routes to asylum, through official refugee resettlement schemes. Even where the government claims to want this, its efforts are sorely lacking: the much-vaunted Afghan citizens resettlement scheme has still not opened, more than three months after the Taliban seized Kabul. (On Thursday, just a day after the disaster in the Channel, a former Afghan soldier was among the passengers of a boat that arrived at Dungeness beach in Kent.) A concerted effort to encourage people to claim asylum by other means could undermine demand for smuggling routes. Safe facilities in northern France where people could stay and claim asylum in either country – or humanitarian visas that allow people to travel to the UK to make their claims – would reduce the need for people to attempt crossings. Yet whether the response is authoritarian or liberal, a common mistake would be to think that there will be a “solution” to Channel crossings in the sense that one or other approach will make this issue disappear entirely. For as long as the UK wishes to maintain border controls there will be people who want to evade them. We can choose to mitigate the damage these controls cause or to ignore it. To go further than that, however, would require a more profound rethinking of our attitudes towards migration, and the way that the UK relates to the rest of the world. Precious little is known so far about the 27 people who died on Wednesday. Yet what we do know already suggests they were not complete strangers to Britain. Maryam Nuri Mohamed Amin, a 24-year-old Kurdish student from northern Iraq, was trying to join her fiance here. Harem Pirot, 25 and from the same part of the world as Maryam, was trying to join his brother in Cambridge. Why did both see a deadly boat journey as their only option to follow these everyday family relationships? And what would it take for our society to see such international connections as these as a strength, rather than a threat? After tragedies like the one last week, our political leaders say they want to stop smuggling. What they really mean is that they want to stop migrants. Those two things are not the same – and the gap between them is a matter of life and death. Daniel Trilling is the author of Lights in the Distance: Exile and Refuge at the Borders of Europe and Bloody Nasty People: the Rise of Britain’s Far RightBritney 11.35pm, BBC One Based on Charly Clive and Ellen Robertson’s comedy show about Charly’s real-life brain tumour diagnosis, this confident BBC Three pilot is a sweet, smart and sometimes refreshingly silly story about navigating life-changing bad news with your best mate. Charly being told to remain completely still during an MRI scan while Hanson’s MMMBop blasts through her earphones on repeat is just one of several very funny moments. Hollie Richardson Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country 8pm, Channel 4 Beeny and her family resume their quest to build a colossal eco-mansion in Somerset. The exterior’s more or less done, so it’s time to get a poured floor in and then think about coving, cornicing and some two-toned limestone tiles. Plus, Beeny wrangles bees with a local called Lionel. Jack Seale Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy Molly balances a work retreat – a carousel of heavy drinking and presentation-giving – with her mum’s stay in hospital. Meanwhile, Issa attempts to reconcile with Crenshawn, and Nathan confronts a permanently late colleague – trying (and failing) to separate their personal and professional lives. Henry Wong Miriam and Alan: Lost in Scotland 9pm, Channel 4 “People are funny about onions,” Miriam Margolyes asserts while munching on an onion like it’s an apple. Her travel companion Alan Cumming looks on aghast. And thus, their journey around Scotland reaches its final episode. But first, they’ve got to meet Alan’s mum. HR Stath Lets Flats 10pm, Channel 4 The excellent third season of Jamie Demetriou’s comedy about a puppyish but inept letting agent wraps up with a big fat wedding. As Steven and Vasos tie the knot and prepare to relocate, the usually daffy Stath broods about loved ones leaving him. That involves laughs, tears, songs and Dean in an unmissable outfit. Graeme Virtue On Assignment 10.50pm, ITV The in-depth foreign current affairs series returns. Tonight, Rageh Omaar reports on Israel’s first budget in more than three years from the country’s first coalition government without Benjamin Netanyahu. Also, Carl Dinnen visits Rome to find out why it’s being reported as “sinking”. HR Live sport Women’s World Cup Football: England v Latvia 6.15pm, ITV4. Group D qualifier from Doncaster. Premier League Football: Newcastle v Norwich 7.30pm, Amazon Prime Video. Relegation contenders meet. Leeds v Crystal Palace is on at 8.15pm.On 25 November, a severe hailstorm hit Klerksdorp in South Africa, damaging businesses and homes alike, during what is their late springtime. Hailstones, the size of golf balls in places, pummelled the city, bringing some drifts. Intense downpours also brought significant flooding across the city with icy rivers. Exceptionally cold air has been spilling into Scandinavia over the past week. Consequently, low temperature records are being broken for this winter across mainland Europe. Kevo, in Finland, started the week with -29C on 23 November, which was quickly replaced by an observation of -32.2C two days later at the same station. Meanwhile in Buresjön, Sweden, the minimum temperature fell to -34.7C on the night of 26 November, the lowest temperature for that month since 2010, and also the lowest temperature in mainland Europe of the winter season so far. Meanwhile the Australian capital, Canberra, has experienced its wettest November on record. As of 26 November, almost 150mm had been recorded with between 30 and 50mm falling across the city in just one day on 25 November. Australia is on course for its wettest spring since 2016 thanks to the La Niña weather phenomenon with New South Wales and South Australia the worst affected.The British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) is adopting a stricter position on the use of racist language in programmes, saying “attitudes had shifted” towards the use of outdated and offensive behaviour or language. The UK regulator said programmes featuring the N-word should not be classified lower than 12A/12 unless in exceptional circumstances, such as a documentary or biopic with a clear educational value and appeal to younger audiences. The move follows new research commissioned by the BBFC into racism and discrimination in films and TV shows, which asked people – including those who have been directly affected – their views on the classification of such scenes. Seventy participants were asked to answer questions about clips from different films and series including Breakfast at Tiffany’s, Won’t You Be My Neighbor?, Race, Young Sheldon, Call the Midwife, Crocodile Dundee and Looney Tunes. They were then required to watch a feature film from a selection that included Hidden Figures (2016), Selma (2014), Blinded By the Light (2019) and I Am Not Your Negro (2016). “Of all the language considered, the N-word was the most contentious, evoking the strongest response from the community,” the BBFC said in its report, adding that it was one of the few instances where “zero tolerance” attitudes emerged. The BBFC said the Jesse Owens’ biopic Race, which was classified PG in 2016, would likely be classified as 12A/12 if it were to be resubmitted today. In the film, a white man uses the N-word in a derogatory manner in relation to Owens and other Black athletes. Despite the film’s positive messages about overcoming adversity, respondents said because the use of racist language wasn’t explicitly and clearly condemned, they didn’t think it was acceptable at PG. While the majority of respondents agreed with the BBFC’s classification decision for each feature film, there were discrepancies in response to the clips. The community gave lower ratings than the BBFC for documentaries and comedic intent, and higher ratings where there was a lack of condemnation and a darker tone. “We must always assess the context in which content appears,” said David Austin, chief executive of the BBFC. “Violent and threatening behaviour, or use of particularly offensive language, will always aggravate an instance of discriminatory or racist behaviour. “However, clear condemnation, sympathy with the victims, or a documentary or historical setting can all work to help frame the sequence and potentially give the content educational value for younger viewers.” Respondents did not think older films and TV shows necessarily need higher age ratings if they contain outdated behaviour or language, but they wanted to be warned about potentially offensive words or portrayals. The BBFC said that while people understood “some older films and TV shows are a ‘product of their time’, it’s clear attitudes have shifted over the years.” In particular, parents wanted content warnings so they could make informed decisions about whether to allow their children to watch a particular programme. Lord Kamlesh Patel, vice-president of the BBFC, said: “Movements dedicated to raising awareness and combating discrimination and racism have gained important traction in the last two years. “In response, we wanted to see how this has impacted the views of people in the UK, and particularly to hear from and listen to those who have been directly impacted by discrimination and racism as their voices are important.”Top story: Don’t drop guard, experts warn over Omicron Good morning, I’m Warren Murray with today’s big news. Ministers are targeting a return to half a million UK Covid jabs a day in a bid to try to outpace the Omicron variant. Confirmed cases rose to 11 in England and Scotland yesterday. From today, masks will be mandatory on public transport including airports and stations, and in shops including hair salons and takeaways – but not pubs or restaurants. The NHS is set to confirm an expansion of the vaccine programme this week after the government’s advisers said all adults should be offered boosters and recommended only three months’ wait before having one instead of six. More countries have imposed travel restrictions on visitors from other parts of the world. Hong Kong has widened its ban to include non-residents who have been to Australia, Canada, Israel or six European countries in the past 21 days. China has pledged to send 600m vaccine doses to Africa. Keep watching our live blog for all the developments. Some are seizing on anecdotal reports from South Africa that Omicron may cause only mild illness. But it would be dangerous to assume it is less dangerous, experts say. Unben Pillay, a GP practising in Midrand on the outskirts of Johannesburg, said: “We are seeing patients present with dry cough, fever, night sweats and a lot of body pains. Vaccinated people tend to do much better.” According to officials, in the South African city of Tshwane, where Omicron was detected, 87% of hospital admissions were unvaccinated people. This morning in our Lost to the Virus series, Sirin Kale relates the story of super-fit John Eyers – triathlete, body builder, mountain climber – who refused the vaccine and espoused conspiracy theories about it. He tested positive for Covid on 29 June, and died a month later. * * * All change under Starmer – Keir Starmer’s surprise reshuffle of his Labour shadow cabinet brings Yvette Cooper back to the frontbench as shadow home secretary. David Lammy is elevated to shadow foreign secretary, while Lisa Nandy will face Michael Gove as shadow levelling-up secretary. The shakeup, which left almost no senior role untouched, is viewed at Westminster as accelerating Labour’s shift to the centre. Starmer’s deputy, Angela Rayner, was blindsided – speaking as the reshuffle got under way, she said: “Six months ago I said again we need some consistency in how we are approaching things as an opposition and I want to see us as a government in waiting, doing that job.” Starmer’s team believed the time was ripe, with the prime minister under pressure after backbench revolts and the vaccine bounce in the polls apparently waning. * * * Just quitting my Twitter – Jack Dorsey has stepped down as boss of Twitter and will be replaced by its chief technology officer, Parag Agrawal. Dorsey has been criticised for being chief executive officer of both Twitter and Square, his digital payments company. Dorsey, 45, co-founded the microblogging site in 2006 and posted the world’s first tweet: “Just setting up my twttr.” Agrawal, who has been with the company for 10 years, is a 37-year-old immigrant from India who comes from outside the ranks of celebrity CEOs. He is a “‘safe’ pick who should be looked upon as favourably by investors”, wrote Angelo Zino, an investment analyst. * * * ‘Round them up’ in Xinjiang – Excerpts from previously unpublished documents directly link China’s crackdown on Uyghur Muslims and other minorities in Xinjiang to speeches by the Chinese leadership in 2014. The documents – including three speeches by the president, Xi Jinping – cover security, population control and the need to punish the Uyghur population. Some are marked top secret. Xi calls for “a crushing blow” against “Xinjiang’s violent terrorist activities” while Xinjiang’s party secretary, Chen Quanguo, personally commands officials to “round up all who should be rounded up”. Separately, security officials in China’s Henan province have commissioned a surveillance system they want to use to track journalists and international students among other “suspicious people”. * * * ‘Pushed away, othered’ – The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office racially discriminated against a black senior civil servant after launching an inquiry into her sex life, an employment tribunal has ruled. Sonia Warner, a civil servant for 33 years who oversaw grants to Nigerian organisations, was “pushed away”, “disowned” or “othered” by colleagues, it concluded. The ruling follows a report that found many black, Asian and minority ethnic men working in development for the government claim to have experienced prejudice at work. A further hearing has been fixed for February on any compensation Warner may receive. An FCDO spokesperson said: “We are committed to being an inclusive employer for our 16,500 colleagues around the world. We don’t comment on individual cases.” * * * They’re multiplying – Researchers say they have found that clusters of frog cells built to order in the laboratory can replicate in a way unlike plants or animals. The spherical clumps, known as xenobots, can give rise to “offspring” by sweeping up loose cells and swashing them into yet more clusters like themselves. Xenobots were first announced last year – these “living robots” are made by taking a few thousand cells from frog embryos and assembling them into computer-designed clusters about 1mm in size. It is hoped such self-replicating, short-lived machines could eventually be developed to do useful work or, if made from our own cells, perform medical tasks like clearing cholesterol build-up from human arteries. Today in Focus podcast: Queen bade farewell On Tuesday, Barbados replaces Queen Elizabeth II with president Sandra Mason – and while some are celebrating, others ask if a symbolic change is really enough to reckon with the legacy of colonialism. Michael Safi visits Bridgetown to ask if the country can free itself from the history that got it here – and what Britain owes to the people of its former colonies whose ancestors were enslaved. Lunchtime read: ‘Break the junk food cycle’ From ultra-processed junk to failing supply chains and rocketing food poverty, there are serious problems with the way the UK eats. Will the government ever act? Sport Ralf Rangnick has claimed Manchester United can still make a success of this season after being confirmed as the club’s interim manager. Postponement is not an option for the European Champions Cup as rugby union finds itself on the frontline in dealing with the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Alexia Putellas and Lionel Messi have been crowned winners of the 2021 Ballon d’Or during a glittering ceremony in Paris. Tiger Woods has admitted he will probably never make a full-time return to professional golf and feared his leg would be amputated following a car crash earlier this year. Twenty-five of the biggest names in golf have committed to play the 2022 Saudi Invitational, potentially placing them on a collision course with their home circuits. Katie Taylor, Ireland’s world champion boxer, has spoken to the Guardian about her faith, her family’s hard journey and why the potential mega-fight with Amanda Serrano will be worthy of making women’s boxing history. The British Horseracing Authority has denied a claim by former trainer Charlie Brooks that Chris Watts, the authority’s former head of integrity assurance, left his position after an “Oliver Reed-style bender” in Newmarket earlier this year. Joe Salisbury and Neal Skupski will provide welcome back-up in Great Britain’s bid to reach Davis Cup semi-finals when they face Germany in Innsbruck. The former England captain Ray Illingworth has revealed he is receiving treatment for cancer. And Lee Elder, the pioneering golfer who broke several of the sport’s colour barriers, has died at the age of 87. Business Lego is giving its 20,000 employees an extra three days off and a cash bonus after seeing its profits rise 140% to £700m in the first half of this year as the enforced lockdowns boosted sales for the world’s biggest toymaker. The Danish company said it had been “an extraordinary year for the Lego Group and our colleagues have worked incredibly hard”. With Asian markets bouncing back overnight, the FTSE looks like opening up a fraction while the pound is worth $1.332 and €1.178. The papers Our Guardian splash today: “Race to return to 500,000 UK jabs a day as Omicron concern grows”. The picture slot goes to the beginning of Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial for allegedly procuring young girls to be sexually abused by Jeffrey Epstein. The Daily Mail says Maxwell, who has pleaded not guilty, was described in court as a “predator who served up young girls to be abused”. The Metro has “Booster drive to beat Omi” and the i’s front-page headline is similar. The Times says it’s a “Scramble to get jabs in arms” and oh no, it’s another “save Xmas” headline in the boosterish Express. Joe Biden is at risk of looking and sounding a bit Dad’s Army in the Telegraph: “No cause for panic”, he says of Omicron. “Rush jab” says the Mirror, and it took me a few seconds to get that this is a play on “rush job”. Boosters are on the front of the Financial Times too, along with Jack Dorsey leaving Twitter and this basement piece: “Pressure mounts for tightening of ECB policy as German inflation surges to 6%” – that’s the European central bank, of course, not the England and Wales Cricket board.A former Australian human rights commissioner has called for a widespread audit of the use of automated software in debt collection after a scathing report found the New South Wales government had for years unlawfully taken money from financially vulnerable people. Labelled “Robodebt 2.0” by the state opposition, the NSW Ombudsman report revealed the state’s debt recovery agency unlawfully used automated technology to issue garnishee orders over the accounts of thousands of people during a three-year period from 2016. The report, tabled in the NSW parliament, found some vulnerable people’s bank accounts had been “emptied” by the scheme, which used automated technology to issue the orders to recoup unpaid fines. “In a number of cases, the complainants had been left with a zero balance in their account. Some of the complainants were welfare recipients, whose bank accounts had held the funds they were receiving from Centrelink as their only source of income,” the report said. The use of automated technology led to an explosion in the use of garnishee orders by the state government. In 2010 the agency responsible for the program, Revenue NSW, issued 6,905 orders. By 2019 it had increased to 1.6m. “As the number of garnishee orders issued increased, we continued to receive a significant and increasing volume of complaints about their administration and impact,” the report said. But the scheme was unlawful. Under the NSW Fines Act the power to issue the garnishee orders is discretionary, meaning machine technology cannot be used “in a way that would result in that discretion being fettered or effectively abandoned”. The report, and its echoes of the Robodebt scandal, has prompted calls for a widespread audit of the way the technology is used by government agencies. Former head of the Australian Human Rights commission, Edward Santow, labelled the ombudsman’s findings “very concerning”, and said the Revenue NSW program suggested a failure to apply fairness in decision making. In his former role Santow headed a landmark report from the commission looking at the use of artificial intelligence and human rights. Released in March this year, the report called for, among other things, “an independent audit of all current or proposed use of AI-informed decision making by the government”. While the report was focused on the federal government, Santow says the recommendation would “100% apply” to state governments. “What came from our consultation is the Australian public are actually really, really clear on what they want when governments use AI. They want it to be fair, accurate and accountable,” he said. “Where the Revenue NSW program went wrong was on all of those things. It wasn’t fair, it wasn’t accurate and it wasn’t accountable.” The Ombudsman says it intends to do just that. In a statement following the release of the report, the NSW Ombudsman, Paul Miller, said the agency would seek to “comprehensively map the use of machine technology in administrative decision-making processes across the state”. “We are concerned that other agencies may also be designing and implementing machine technologies without appreciating all the risks, without transparency, and without getting appropriate legal advice,” Miller said. The Ombudsman started investigating the scheme in 2016. “My office began to receive a spate of complaints from people, many of them financially vulnerable individuals, who had discovered their bank accounts had been stripped of funds, and sometimes completely emptied,” Miller said. In one case, a young pregnant woman in rural NSW had her account frozen while the bank complied with a garnishee order. The woman had two children and was left without access to any funds, leaving her unable to pay rent or buy food. Another woman on a disability support pension had her account emptied after a garnishee order. The woman had been a victim of a crime and had received a payment from Victims Services, but less than two weeks after the money was deposited in her account the entire amount was withdrawn to pay a fine. After the Ombudsman raised its concerns with the program, Revenue NSW made a number of changes to the way the garnishee orders were made. It introduced a minimum protected amount clause which meant at least $523.10 would be left in an account subject to an order, and it began using a formula which it said meant vulnerable people would not be targeted. In 2019, it also introduced a level of human oversight. The so-called “traffic light” system saw a human staff member have to sign-off on garnishee orders before they were issued. But, as Miller said, Revenue NSW did not follow up on its recommendation to receive legal advice on the program. The Ombudsman did, and the advice revealed that even with those changes the program may still be unlawful because the so-called “human in the loop” was not exercising a genuine discretionary function. Instead, they were merely ticking off on the advice provided by the algorithm. “Where you’re using a discretionary power you need to preserve the space for judgement and this type of harvesting was just too rigid,” Darren O’Donovan, a senior lecturer in administrative law at La Trobe University says. “The use of public power needs to be justified and reflective and a machine is never going to deliver that. Even in the reformed system, the human decision-maker needs to properly reflect on what the ‘green lights’ on a person’s file indicate and what they don’t indicate.” The case has prompted comparisons to the Robodebt scandal, which saw the federal government illegally raise $1.5bn in revenue from people who had accessed Centrelink. NSW Labor’s shadow minister for finance, Anoulack Chanthivong, labelled the program “Robodebt 2.0”, calling the use of automated technology to issue garnishee orders “completely wrong and immoral”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “How many people have been left penniless and hungry, with no means to support themselves or their families? It is disgraceful that our most vulnerable – many already in severe financial distress – have been treated so appallingly,” he said. But the government rejected those comparisons, with NSW finance minister Damien Tudehope saying “any suggestion these processes bears any resemblance to ‘robo-debt’ are wrong”. “Garnishee orders are a last resort – we encourage anyone who has received a fine or has a debt to reach out and work with us to resolve it. Don’t put it in the drawer for another day, contact us now,” he said. “For those who have chosen to ignore our notices and simply don’t want to pay, the community has an expectation we take action to recover what is owed to the people of NSW. A garnishee order is one option available to the chief commissioner to do exactly that.”Prince Akishino, the first in line to the Japanese throne, has lambasted the country’s media for their treatment of his eldest daughter, Mako, accusing them of saying “terrible things” about her in the run-up to her marriage. Mako married Kei Komuro, a non-royal whom she met at university, on 26 October, almost four years after their engagement was called off following revelations about a minor financial dispute involving his mother. But they made only a brief public appearance before moving to New York, where Komuro works for a law firm. Critical coverage of their engagement has left Mako, who relinquished her royal status when she married Komuro, suffering from a form of post-traumatic stress disorder. “If you read the tabloids, well – I’m not sure how to say this exactly – but there’s a lot of things in there that are fabricated, although there are also some opinions we should listen to,” Akishino said in unusually frank comments at a press conference held to mark his 56th birthday on Tuesday. Akishino’s broadside was a departure from press conferences customarily given by members of the imperial family, whose answers to questions submitted in advance are usually designed to ruffle as few feathers as possible. Weekly magazine reports that Komuro’s mother, Kayo, was in a dispute over a ¥4m [$35,000] “loan” from a former fiance led to intense media scrutiny of his family, online abuse and questions among some members of the public about his suitability as the future husband of the emperor’s eldest niece. “As for articles on the internet, there are also lots of comments ... and some of them say really terrible things,” Akishino said in explaining the media’s role in Mako’s mental health problems. “There are people who are deeply hurt by this slander.” Akishino, the younger brother of Emperor Naruhito, suggested that the traditionally taciturn Imperial Household Agency (IHA) could have done more to counter inaccuracies in media coverage of the couple. “Libel, whether in a magazine or online, is unacceptable,” he said. “If you are going to argue against an article, you have to set proper standards and then protest when those are exceeded. Negative coverage may continue, so I think it is necessary to consider setting such standards in consultation with the IHA.” Akishino decided the couple should forego traditional ceremonies associated with imperial marriages, and offered only lukewarm support for their union. On Tuesday, he said his “judgment” had affected the wider imperial family, since it gave the impression that important events and ceremonies involving its members were “extremely trivial”. Akishino was aware of public unease about using taxpayers’ money to pay for celebrations while the financial dispute remained unresolved, while Mako refused a payment of around ¥150m ($1.3m) – also from the public purse – traditionally given to women who renounce their royal status when they marry. Japan’s male-only succession laws mean Mako can never be a reigning empress. If she has a son he will be raised as a non-royal and will not ascend the Chrysanthemum throne. The couple, both 30, had initially planned to give a press conference after registering their marriage, but concern over Mako’s mental health was reportedly behind their decision to make a brief statement and hand out written answers to pre-submitted reporters’ questions rather than respond verbally. “Up until the last minute, Mako had wanted the press conference to be a two-way one, but it was difficult due to her complex PTSD,” Akishino said, according to the Kyodo news agency. He added that he would have preferred Komuro to have been given the “opportunity to speak and answer questions directly” about his mother’s financial affairs. Japanese media reported that Komuro had repaid his mother’s former fiancé earlier this month.For years, wine glasses got larger and larger; the hospitality protocol was to fill them to the widest point of the glass, which was about a third of the way up, typically 250ml. The home drinker might fill them halfway, which was more like half a bottle. Everybody knew they weren’t very practical, but there was a double jeopardy in that, if you’d just necked half a bottle of wine in a single glass, you would forget they didn’t fit in the dishwasher and break them trying. Then you’d have to buy more, and the next generation of glasses would be even larger. Post-lockdown, according to John Lewis, there has been a surge in demand for smaller glasses. Instinctively, I wouldn’t call the John Lewis glassware shopper the barometer of the national mood; like the Marks &amp; Spencer underwear-shopper, these are people who have looked ahead to a time when they might need a glass, or some pants, and carefully balanced quality against value for money. Regular people wait until they have run out of these things, then buy them on an emergency footing, in a garage. And yet, John Lewis was the first retailer to report a run on ironing boards in 2020, and it was only much later that it was discovered that young people were using them as a desk. It won’t, on its own, make you drink any less; the deterrent of more trips to the fridge is no match for a powerful thirst. But if it signals an intention to drink less, that foundation alone might change habits. The only person on record who has successfully fooled their brain with a trick like this is Liz Hurley, who said she kept her weight down by eating with children’s cutlery. It was never clear to a fascinated public whether that was because the small cutlery made the food look bigger, or the infantile mood sapped the adult pleasure of overeating. If you’re trying any of this at home – you’ve bought your bistro mini-glasses and are still powering through gallons of wine a night – maybe swap to a sippy cup.Volumes of goods shipped directly from Ireland to the EU on new Brexit-busting ferry routes have rocketed by 50% in the past six months as exporters seek to avoid travelling across land through Great Britain, according to official data. Figures published by the Irish Maritime Development Office (IMDO) show significant traffic diverted away from the traditional routes between Dublin and Britain to some of 32 new ferry services direct to ports such as Le Havre, Cherbourg and Dunkirk in France and Zeebrugge in Belgium. The IMDO report shows freight volumes from Dublin port to Liverpool and Holyhead in Anglesey down 19% in the first three-quarters of 2021 compared with 2020 and down by 30% on the two routes from Rosslare in south-east Ireland to the Welsh ports of Pembroke and Fishguard. “It is clear that the new trading arrangements between Ireland and the UK have had a significant and negative effect upon ro-ro [roll-on roll-off lorry haulage] freight traffic between the two countries,” the IMDO report said. “Underpinning all of these trends are the new customs and trading arrangements between Ireland and the UK that came into force on 1 January 2021,” it added. “One-third of all ro-ro in the Republic of Ireland now operates on direct routes to ports in the European Union, up from a 16% share in 2019,” the IMDO said. Traffic for the second and third quarters of this year show Irish Republic to EU traffic is already up by 52% compared with the entirety of 2019, it added. The decline in demand for the ferry services to Wales and Liverpool has also seen Northern Irish ports receiving a Brexit dividend, with freight volumes hitting “unprecedented highs in 2021”. Historically, Northern Irish hauliers have preferred the Dublin-Holyhead route as the quickest way to access markets in the south and south-east of England, but some have now eschewed the route “to avoid the new customs requirements involved between Ireland and UK ports”, the reports said. It has meant an uplift in traffic in Northern Ireland’s three ports, with a 15% rise in Belfast, 18% in Larne and 20% at Warrenpoint. The rise in the number of ferry services going direct to France, from 12 before Brexit to 44 in 2021, along with concern about possible delays over customs checks in Dover and Calais, has helped fuel the diversion of trade from the Republic direct to the continent. Rosslare Europort has benefited most. It is now taking 49% of EU traffic, with another 49% going through Dublin and 2% via Cork. On Saturday, Rosslare Europort said, it had its busiest day in its history. Its general manager, Glenn Carr, put the increased demand down to the desire to avoid the UK, but also a reduction in trade with Great Britain because of Brexit red tape and cost. “In particular industries, we’re definitely seeing where traditionally a lot of goods were sourced in the UK or exported to the UK, there’s been a switch to Europe,” he told journal.ie. “We definitely see it in the port in terms of the mix of goods that are there now – ingredients, food, dairy, pharmaceuticals.”Q I’m just coming into the final year of my five-year fixed-rate mortgage (it ends in January 2023). With interest rates looking likely to rise, is it worth me remortgaging now and taking the 1% hit on early repayment in the final year to bag a good deal, or should I wait until the fixed term ends? I owe about £90,000 on a house worth about £220,000 and my current rate is 2.14%. CL A It might be worth remortgaging now but a lot depends on whether the potential savings you could make would cover the costs of switching. As well as the early repayment fee from your current lender of £900, these include the new lender’s valuation fee, legal fees (if the new lender doesn’t cover these) and any arrangement fee – typically in the region of £1,000 – for taking out the new fixed-rate deal. The sums don’t seem to add up, even if you go for the cheapest deal currently on the market. Cutting your current interest rate by one percentage point could mean an annual saving of just under £500 which is well short of being enough to cover your switching costs. On the plus side, because your mortgage represents less than 60% of the value of your home, the rates available when your current fixed-rate deal comes to an end may not be as bad as you fear. For example, if the best rates available now were to go up by one percentage point by January 2023 you would be looking at 2.24% for a two-year fix, 2.39% fixed over three years and 2.36% fixed over five.I cancelled my McAfee anti-virus subscription earlier this year when I discovered it had been double charging me. It refunded only the current year and led me on a wild goose chase to recover the previous two years’ money; I eventually gave up. Now that my subscription period has ended, it is bombarding me with renewal demand emails several times a day. This weekend I received 15. Unsubscribing doesn’t work and, in fact, seems to generate more. MN, by email I asked McAfee about your experience and, in fairness, it came back very quickly to explain that it had, in fact, repaid you for the previous year’s overcharge. You were adamant that it hadn’t, but after many emails, and much checking of accounts, we were finally able to establish that the money had been paid into your bank. The confusion was that your statement showed it as coming from F/Flow Sutherland, rather than the more obvious McAfee. In terms of the emails, the company has confirmed that the messages you are being sent are not from it. Instead, they are from scammers posing as McAfee, trying to gain your bank card details. Your email system should block or treat them as spam if you ask it to. • Last week’s letter on driving licences has predictably prompted a wave of similar ones. Sadly, I can’t take up every complaint as much as I would like to help. Instead, I would urge readers whose licences are stranded in Swansea to contact their MP. Until MPs start putting pressure on ministers, this ridiculous situation won’t get resolved. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsWe welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.We are huddled close to the radiator while the wind howls outside, driving flurries of snow and scraps of cloud past the window at an alarming speed. One of the meteorologists stationed at this outpost in Slovenia’s Julian Alps tells us that the outside temperature is -5C, “but with wind chill, more like -15C.” In summer this mountain hut is crowded with families having lunch before hiking the final 350 metres of Mount Triglav, Slovenia’s highest peak at 2,864 metres. Every table in the large, timber-clad main room, with its bar and food counter, would be occupied. Behind the bar are dozens of small bunk rooms, and they would all be full – despite the name “hut”, this place can sleep 500 people. But now, in winter, an older more traditional role emerges: offering shelter. The front door remains unlocked and anyone can take refuge from the elements in the company of like-minded wayfarers. There are thousands of such places across Europe, and I’ve seen many types – from homespun shacks in Croatia’s Velebit mountains to Mont Blanc’s Refuge du Goûter, a €6m palace. Some of the larger, busier places have given up pretending to be log cabins in the wilderness, but most still do it. There will be wooden tables and panelled walls, perhaps a collection of antlers, a relic from when the place was a hunting cabin. Next to a large logburner, you maight find a black-and-white photograph of the founder, often a hearty chap with walrus moustache and comical trousers. His descendants might still serve food from a simple counter across the room. If you get talking, it often transpires that the original founder climbed to this lonely spot in the hope of healing himself physically and spiritually, frequently after a devastating war. Richard von Meerheimb, for example, was wounded in the Austro-Prussian war and helped found the superb Rifugio Nuvolau in the Dolomites in 1883. In nearby Cortina d’Ampezzo, a climbing club called Gli Scoiattoli (the squirrels) threw themselves into exploring and building after fighting in the second world war. What they wanted were places of peace and good humour surrounded by awesome peaks. And by and large that is what they achieved. Every European country with mountains has a dazzling array of huts, often run by Alpine associations (joining the British Mountaineering Council can be a helpful way to access them). And they are always a joy to visit – not least because of the physical effort required to get there. Open the door, take off your boots, share a table and make friends. Warm up with food, drink and laughter. There are no first-class cabins or VIP lounges. Equality and fraternity rule the interior. In Planika Triglav, Dean and I sit and eat large bowls of jota, Istrian-style bean and sauerkraut soup topped with an enormous sausage. Jota is typical of the food you find in mountain huts: nourishing, sloppy and simple. Bacon and cheese are deployed in force. Puddings are sugar-laden. It’s the kind of food you can eat contentedly when you’ve earned it. To get here, we climbed 1,600 metres, the last few hundred in deep snow with ice axes and crampons, the sweat pooling in my lower back while icicles formed on my beard and eyelashes. Our plan is to sleep in one of the unheated bunk rooms and head for the summit in the morning. Outside the light is fading and the wind seems ever stronger. It is then that the door swings open and a man comes in. He grunts a greeting and heads for the darkened end of the room, where he begins to remove his outer layers of clothing. I look at Dean and make a questioning face. He shrugs. The man takes a thicker jacket and ice axe from his rucksack, then shoves it under a bench. He walks past us with nothing more than a nod. The door slams. “Is he going to the summit?” “Sure.” I go to the window. It is almost dark now. For a second, I catch sight of a headtorch beam heading towards the menacing face of Triglav. In summer this is a fun scramble, assisted by via Ferrata cable and well-worn steps. But not now, not in winter, and in the dark. To the uninitiated, the mountain huts can be intimidating. Climbers and skiers, in particular, can seem dauntingly proficient. Scandinavian huts in winter are filled with people who have been cross-country skiing since before birth. No joke: heavily pregnant women ski, and parents drag their swaddled newborns on sleds behind them. But once inside the hut, inclusivity usually prevails. Conversation begins, experiences and information are shared. In Mont Blanc’s Refuge de Tête Rousse, I remember two South Korean lads shaking with cold and fatigue – they had never been on a mountain before – chatting with a group of French alpine experts, veterans of Himalayan expeditions. At Rifugio Lagazuoi in the Dolomites, I talked to hut owner Guido Pompanin, whose father had started the place after retreating to the mountains in the 1960s. Now the hut is connected by cable car to the valley and serves fabulous food in a beautiful canteen where tourists with unsuitable footwear can taste, for a short time, the conviviality of the hills. And some of them return, with proper boots. Despite advances in comfort, connectivity and cuisine, despite the vastly increased number of visitors, Guido has kept the faith, the mountain hut is for everyone, as long as they accept the mountain ethos of its founders. Back on Triglav, it is now totally dark outside and the wind is screaming. Our mystery climber has not returned. I try to imagine him on the narrow ridge to the summit, a thousand metre drop on either side. Then the door swings open and two women enter. They recognise Dean and give him a hug. “You see, we are like family up here,” he tells me, between trading news in Slovenian. “And the huts are family houses on mountain tops.” One of the women, Simone, has come straight from work. “Tomorrow will be the 86th time I’ve climbed Triglav.” The two meteorologists come in and embrace Simone. A minute later the mystery man enters, having come down from the summit in total darkness, zero visibility and a howling gale. He embraces the meteorologists. “How was it?” asks Dean. “Very good,” he says. “A little breezy on top.” He sits down with us. We share mountain stories. He is clearly a hugely experienced and proficient mountaineer. He eats a bowl of jota, then fetches his bag, reattaches his head torch and, with a quick goodbye, leaves. I’m stunned. “He’s going out again?” Dean shrugs. “Of course. He has another mountain to climb.” The trip was provided by I Feel Slovenia. A two-day guided climb of Mount Triglav with Geko Adventures starts at €219pp. Other hiking and cycling tours available from local experts Visit Good Place. Accommodation in Bohinj was at Hotel Sunrose 7 (doubles from €163) and Bohinj Eco Hotel (doubles from €120)With her second book, French anthropologist Nastassja Martin seeks to tell us what happens when an unstoppable force meets an immovable object. In August 2015, when living among the Even people of Russia’s Kamchatka Peninsula, she – the immovable object: a headstrong, combative woman – met the unstoppable force of a large brown bear. Her story to begin with is simple, and beautifully gruesome. She writes of “the bear’s kiss on my face, his teeth closing over me, my jaw cracking, my skull cracking” – but, impaled by a well-placed ice axe, he changes his mind, departs, and leaves her with “features subsumed beneath the open gulfs in my face, slicked over with internal tissue”. And so this short but chewy book thickens up into a stew of memoir, drama, anthropology and metaphysics – or how the immovable object moved, and changed. This change is in some sense literal: not just the physical legacy of the bear attack following Martin’s miraculous survival, but her sense that she is what the locals call medka, that is, “marked by the bear” in such a way that she is half-human, half-bear. But the more we read, the more we can see that Martin always had something wild in her spirit. She is lifted to hospital; the scenes that follow are sometimes funny – the Russian authorities want to know if she is “a highly trained secret agent sent by France (or, worse, by the US)” – and sometimes horrifying: a replacement jaw plate leads to an antibiotic-resistant infection. She is not a model patient: not yet fully recovered, she returns to Kamchatka, to the source of her suffering. She quotes Pascal Quignard: “Freeing ourselves not of the existence of the past but from its ties: this is the strange, sorry task to be performed.” This time, she is there less to study others than to learn about herself, and what comes across repeatedly is Martin’s contrariness, her refusal to fit: “I’ve never sought to bring peace to my life, far less to my encounters with others.” In returning to the peninsula – where her medka status sees her shunned by some – she wants to “stop thinking”, but that is not her way. And so we get a fascinating, ambitious exploration of animism – the border between human and animal – and how she sees her encounter with the bear as a manifestation of a breakdown. “I am inside out.” The book represents both a collapse and a rebuilding. The language, in Sophie R Lewis’s elegant translation, is often seductive (“The water is rising the piers are flooded we must raise the anchor batten the hatches; we have everything we need to face the ocean; farewell we’re going to sea”), though sometimes strains for epigrammatic effect: “Life pushes us out of the belly, but bears go back underground to dream.” Martin, however, doesn’t seek sympathy from the reader; she simply wants us to share in her attempts to understand what has happened to her. What more could we ask for from a book? • In the Eye of the Wild by Nastassja Martin, translated by Sophie R Lewis, is published by New York Review Books (£11.99)Desperate families in flood-ravaged villages in South Sudan are spending hours searching for water lilies to eat after another summer of intense rainfall worsened an already dire situation. People have no food and no land to cultivate after three years of floods. Fields are submerged in last year’s flood water and higher ground is overcrowded with hungry people, in what is quickly becoming a humanitarian crisis. Fangak, one of the worst affected of the 31 counties devastated by the floods, continues to lose ground to the rising water. But the communities displaced along the banks of the White Nile River have nowhere to go to escape the high waters. Nyanyang Tong, 39, on her way to the Action Against Hunger centre with her one-year-old son, Mamuch Gatkuoth, in Paguir “We have been chased out of our home by the flood water and now we’re heading to Old Fangak to look for a place to sleep tonight … [but] I don’t know any other place where we can go after tonight. If so, we will make a small grass island and sleep above the water,” says Nyadut Gatkuoth, a woman migrating with her relatives to the central market area in Old Fangak, one of the few areas on higher ground. A cow eats the remains of a collapsed roof. Cattle often become ill after eating grass in standing water Last year people left behind their collapsed mud homes and slept in the open under trees and in abandoned school buildings, but this year many of these areas have also been flooded. An estimated 1.7 million people are displaced within South Sudan, and migration has increased this year, with people reporting being forced to seek higher ground at least twice in the past few months. Others have given up and crossed the border into Sudan. The UN says that more than 780,000 people have been affected by flooding so far, and this number is expected to rise in the coming months. In counties like Fangak the number of people affected by the floods was expected to jump from 75% to nearly 100% by the end of October, according to Action Against Hunger. Meanwhile the country as a whole has 8 million people in need, says the UN. People have not been able to cultivate the land in many areas since 2020. Many of those who lost this year’s harvest also lost their livestock to diseases caused by the animals grazing on flooded fields. Without the milk and meat traditionally provided by cattle to fill the gaps in times of need people are scrambling to find wild food. In the absence of fishing nets or canoes, entire families are dependant on collecting water lilies by the dozen to grind into a small day’s meal. A shortage of fishing nets and canoes means entire families now depend on collecting water lilies, which they grind up to make a small daily meal “We are not used to collecting water lilies but the flood water forces us to. We can spend close to five hours looking for them in the water,” says Bol Kek, a mother of seven children living on the higher ground of Paguir, “[but] when you eat water lilies it feels like you didn’t eat at all.” Families wade through crocodile-infested waters for hours searching for water lily bulbs to eat The cumulative impact of the loss of harvests, cattle deaths and floods have led to the collapse of traditional livelihoods, according to scientists in the region. Water lilies and fish are not sustainable food sources in the long term because access to wild foods will be reduced in the rainy season, especially for poor households without canoes, once again triggering acute food insecurity. Though efforts have been made in preparation for this year’s floods, humanitarian food distribution has been hampered by insufficient funding. Distributions have been delayed and food rations cut to prioritise those who need it the most, at the cost of other communities. An estimated 2.5 million people are facing severe food insecurity and more than 100,000 are considered close to famine. ‘These water lilies that we eat don’t have nutrients. We eat them because we need to fill our stomach, but soon after you eat them you will start feeling hungry again,’ says Nyawech Giel, 53 Nyadiang Gak, a mother who migrated to higher ground in the hopes of cultivating this year, says: “We used to plant maize and sorghum at the same time, so when the maize was finished we could harvest the sorghum. Now it is time to harvest sorghum but we couldn’t even plant it … I planted maize next to my home but when the second flood came it destroyed it and I didn’t even get to harvest it … Now we are hungry.” ‘Before these two floods I had a kitchen garden that put food on the table, and I was also able to send my children to school in Old Fangak. But because of these floods they can’t go because I don’t have anything to support them with,’ says Nyadiang Gak More communities are now cut off by the floods, while travelling to other areas comes at the risk of attacks or food supplies being looted. The increase in violence against humanitarian workers that led to four deaths this year coincides with food prices soaring. In September 2020, the price for 3.5kg of sorghum powder, a staple food of the country, was approximately 800 South Sudanese pounds (about £4.50) but this year it has increased 60% to 1,300 SSP. The trend is likely to continue, with South Sudan’s economy expected to contract by 4% in 2021, according to the World Bank. South Sudan is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to climate breakdown, according to the Global Climate Index. Food insecurity, conflict, diminished human rights and financial problems aggravated by Covid-19 have eroded its capacity to cope with recurring extreme weather events such as flooding. The heavy rainfall that caused three consecutive floods will only get worse in South Sudan and the wider region if global temperatures continue to rise, a recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicted. Volunteers fight to push back flood waters, including from a football pitch, where it’s hoped food aid could be delivered Scientists currently working on the floods in Fangak county point out that the disproportionate severity of the floods is not only caused by rainfall as evidenced by the unusual flooding in January 2021 that happened outside of the rainy season. Though floods occur each year during the rainy season from May to October, scientists say that the recent flooding in Fangak county has been exceptional in terms of intensity, geographic extent and duration. The leading theory on the cause of the flooding, with the caveat of an absence of data before 1980 and the lack of a larger-scale assessment involving neighbouring countries, is that upstream water saturated local swamps, which have likely absorbed water in previous years. In the remote towns and villages of the most affected states, life is dire. Old Fangak has no electricity, while parts of the town have no potable water. Dirty water has contaminated the boreholes and sits in paths with sewage. People cook with the same flood water in which children play and animals graze. ‘Pushing this mud out of the house is painful on my knees,’ says Par Both, 34, from Paguir “It is a real struggle being here with this water. There is a lot of disease around. This child and I both have a cough, and all of this because of the water,” says David Deng, who is blind and being led through the flood water by his granddaughter, Angelina, in Old Fangak. Since last year entire villages have disappeared underwater. In their place float small islands made of dry grass, where dozens of people sleep in the open. Cases of snake bites have risen dramatically. David Deng, who is blind, navigates his way through the floods with the help of his nine-year-old granddaughter, Angelina Nyagok Children are constantly being pushed farther away from schools because of the encroaching water. In many remote areas of the country children have been without education for two years due to the pandemic and the floods. Where homes still stand, communities flush water out every hour and repair mud dykes that break almost daily. Nyapini Yiel, a mother of two children who lost her home two weeks ago, voices the plight of the communities living on the frontline of the climate crisis. “I’m tired of building dykes all the time and flushing water out all the time … so when it broke that night I couldn’t do anything because it was dark and my children and I were alone at home, so we just went back to sleep. We slept on top of the bed even while the water was coming inside the house.” Nyapini Yiel, 23, lies in her bed, surrounded by flood water • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to clarify that only parts of Old Fangak are without potable water, rather than the whole town as an earlier version said. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:As an obstetrician, I know first-hand the highs and lows that women experience when having a baby. It can be hugely rewarding for many and a daunting experience for some. Over the past months, the pandemic has added a great deal of uncertainty to the experience of pregnant women and those considering becoming parents. We know how dangerous the virus can be for pregnant women. The data published over recent months has been heartbreaking. Between July and October in England, one in five Covid patients receiving NHS treatment through a special lung-bypass machine were pregnant women who had not had their first jab. Around one in five women who are hospitalised with the virus need to be delivered preterm to help them recover – and one in five of their babies need care in the neonatal unit. New data from England shows that of those pregnant women in hospital with Covid, 98% are unvaccinated. Senior doctors and healthcare professionals from across the health system, including the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the Royal College of Midwives, have been clear that the Covid vaccines are the best possible way pregnant women can protect themselves from the virus. Real-world data from the United States, where the vaccines have been given to more than 177,000 pregnant women, has also been reassuring that they’re safe for this group. Now, we have even more evidence to back the safety of the vaccines – with new data from the UK Health Security Agency showing there is no impact on newborns. The rate of stillbirths, low baby-birth weights and premature births is very similar for vaccinated women as it is for all women. It’s also incredibly reassuring to see the proportion of women giving birth who had received the vaccine increasing steadily over time – from 3% in May to 22% in August. Given that most pregnant women would have become eligible for the vaccine around June, in line with advice from our independent experts, this shows that more and more pregnant women are taking up the offer. Vaccine coverage at birth is expected to increase even further over the coming months. Boosters are also available six months after a second dose to pregnant women who are aged 40 and over, are health or social care workers or are in an at-risk group. We know there is more to be done, though – particularly to make sure that we reach pregnant women from all ethnic groups and from all backgrounds, as vaccine uptake varies by ethnicity and deprivation area. The government and the NHS are continuing to work closely with experts from medical organisations and community and faith leaders to provide information and advice at every possible opportunity to those in these groups, as well as pregnant women more widely. Every contact counts between a pregnant women and a healthcare professional. This new data on pregnancy outcomes provides important information to help pregnant women feel more confident about having the vaccine. The message I want to give is this: if you’re thinking about pregnancy, already pregnant, a new mother, or know someone who is pregnant or concerned about fertility, get your vaccine and stay safe. Professor Lucy Chappell is a chief scientific adviser for the Department of Health and Social Care and honorary consultant obstetrician at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation TrustI’m a man in my early 20s and I’ve been in a stable, loving, monogamous relationship with my girlfriend since we were in secondary school. While she is fully aware of my bisexuality (and seems completely fine with this), I would also consider myself polyamorous – which she finds much harder to accept. I frequently have strong sexual and romantic feelings for other people, which I once brought up with her in an attempt to be as open as possible. I wanted to emphasise that this did not detract from my feelings for her. She was initially (and understandably) upset, but seemed happy to stay with me as long as we remained “faithful” to each other. This leaves me in a situation where we are happy together, but where I am left feeling incomplete. I have never been in a serious relationship or had sex with anyone except my girlfriend. The whole world of casual sex and dating is alien to me. I want her to feel as loved and valued as she deserves, but I want more for myself, too. I don’t know whether to feel greedy and ungrateful, repressed and frustrated, or all of these things at once. Labels can scare people, especially if they do not truly understand what they mean. You are both in the very early stages of your sexual journeys, so it could be useful to recognise that you have a lifetime of adult exploration and experimentation ahead of you. Clarification is important. Ideally, you might share more of your thoughts and feelings about your sexual styles and identity with each other, but be careful to do it in a non-threatening way, always affirming your positive general feelings for each other. Try to clearly express your own feelings and beliefs about who you are sexually – taking into account that, while you can be very sure about your sexual orientation quite early in life, when it comes to sexual styles there can be a meaningful difference between fantasy and what you are prepared to act out in reality. Encourage her to express her feelings about whatever you share, and listen carefully to any concerns she might have about your compatibility. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.In 2001, exactly 50 years after the Iraqi national team was formed, I made a discovery. I was reading a comment on the old sports forum about a player named Saeed Easho. It was the start to unearthing the story of Iraq’s first national team. Many years later I contacted the ex-footballer, and through him it seemed as if everything fell into place. He had spent the best part of 60 years living outside Iraq so no one knew what had happened to the centre-half of Iraq’s first national side. This is how it all began: the sons of a former British army officer, an Eastern Orthodox priest, and an Assyrian Levy soldier were the three men who shaped the side. The team was formed like the modern-day nation of Iraq, shaped from the old Ottoman vilayets of Baghdad, Basra, and Mosul. There was the outside-left Percy Lynsdale from Baghdad, Basrawi centre-half Saeed Easho and the Mosul-born inside-left Aram Karam. Saeed was the son of an Eastern Orthodox priest who retired at the age of 23 to pursue a career in engineering. Only four months after pulling on the Iraqi jersey, Saeed left to study at Loughborough College in Leicestershire, England. He enrolled in September 1951, and at the time there were teachers from Sheffield taking courses at the college. They had heard about the Iraqi national team player and, knowing the management at Sheffield United were searching for players, they got in touch with the club and informed them about the centre-half. During the Christmas holidays, Saeed received a telegram from the Sheffield club. They had offered him a trial. So off he went with a fellow Iraqi student and they travelled 52 miles north to Bramall Lane. On Christmas Day, the Sheffield United ‘A’ side were at home and took on Barnsley in the Yorkshire Football League. The 23-year-old Iraqi electrical engineering student from Loughborough College played the 90 minutes as they won 5-4 and after the game the management called him over and asked if he would join. As it meant he would have had to leave college to take a risk on a professional football career, Saeed politely declined. The Second Division club had offered him a good salary compared with what players were earning during that period and more than he would have ever earned in his playing career in Iraq. However, it was not enough to make him change his mind. Sheffield United paid the cost of Saeed’s trip from Loughborough and they parted ways. The talented Percy Lynsdale was one of only a handful of British footballers at the time playing for Iraqi teams in Basra such as Al-Minaa and B.P.C. However, Iraq-born Percy, being the son of an Iraqi-naturalised father of English origin and an Iraqi mother, was eligible to play for Iraq. He became Iraq’s very own Tom Finney, the famous outside-right of Preston North End, who played for England in the 1950s. Percy had not been forgotten by officials from Baghdad’s ministry of education when he had captained the Baghdad College team in his senior year. He had studied at the Jesuits Baghdad College on the east bank of the Tigris river, with Percy having been one of the first names on the school team. He had been one of the boys who had spent his afternoons kicking a ball on school grounds, throwing down their jackets as goalposts, which were later replaced with benches. It was only after the intervention of one of the physics professors, who feared students would start taking chairs from classrooms for goalposts, that actual goalposts were built with a football field. In his senior year, Percy, the team’s top scorer and key player in attack at inside-left, captained the side and was one of six players that year inducted into the school’s hall of fame. At the age of 23, Percy, a regular with the B.P.C. side and Basra Select team, was called into the Iraqi national team and played in every one of Iraq’s four matches in 1951. But after a season with Al-Minaa, Percy, like his teammate Saeed Easho, decided to retire from football and return to the land of his forefathers to study. Percy arrived in England in 1952 and after dropping out of college he eventually settled in Manchester, where he worked as a self-employed market trader. He died in Chorley in 1997. The third player was Habbaniya-based Aram Karam, an extraordinary footballer known for his uncanny ability to score from whatever angle or distance with either foot. He was a player, a coach, team captain and goalscorer – rare in any part of the world. Aram was an ethnic Assyrian, a descendent of the original inhabitants of ancient Mesopotamia. His ancestors originated from Zangelan in the village of Qatouna, in the north-west of what was then the Persian Empire (now west Azerbaijan province of Iran). His father’s family were forced to flee their home to seek refuge under the protection of the British army stationed in Hamadan after Russian forces withdrew and the Ottoman army entered the region and massacred thousands of Assyrians and Armenians. The son of a Levy soldier, he was brought up in the Levy Family Lines on RAF Station Hinaidi, the second eldest in a family of seven children. Aram was the footballer’s footballer, forming his own football team on the RAF base in Habbaniya. Aram was a talented and technically gifted outside-left who had the vision and ability to dictate any game. When called up by the Iraq Football Association, he had earned a reputation as an outstanding goalscorer in Habbaniya and teams would travel to the RAF base to get the player to guest for sides as kind of a hired gun. Aram was regarded by many who saw him play as one of the finest and most accomplished finishers of the 1950s and on Iraq’s tour of Turkey in 1951 he scored four goals in the team’s second international game against an Ankara Select side. The story of the first Iraqi team and its players is now a distant memory. As revolutions, wars and sanctions passed, Iraqi football’s subsequent generations had forgotten their triumphs and defeats and even their names. That did not seem right. This is an edited extract from Birth of the Lions of Mesopotamia. Click here to order a copy.A suburban South Australian shopping centre has created a buzz after it falsely attributed a quote about bees, written on a plaque in a bathroom hallway, to the famous British naturalist Sir David Attenborough. The plaque, labelled “honeybee propaganda”, has now been removed after Attenborough himself intervened. It all started in July when wildlife sciences graduate Heath Hunter spotted a honeybee mural on a wall in a hallway leading to toilets at the Westfield Tea Tree Plaza shopping centre in Adelaide’s north-east. Alongside the mural was a 10cm plaque with a quote attributed to Attenborough that read: “In the last five years the bee population has dropped by a third. If bees were to disappear from the face of the Earth, humans would have just four years left to live.” Hunter immediately recognised the quote, which had been popularised in a meme on Facebook. Internet sleuths have traced the origin of the quote to The Life of the Bee, a book published by the Belgian playwright, poet and essayist Maurice Maeterlinck in 1901. “Remove the bee from the earth and at the same stroke you remove at least one hundred thousand plants that will not survive,” Maeterlinck wrote. For a century the sentiment would be repeated in various forms before it spread through the internet. There it has also been falsely attributed to Albert Einstein in reference to declining bee populations in Europe and North America caused by colony collapse disorder. “It’s honeybee propaganda,” Hunter said. “When people talk about wanting to save the bees, they think about the European honeybee, which is a livestock species. “People don’t think about all the native bees that need help. Some of these are critically endangered.” Hunter alerted the shopping centre’s management via the mural’s artist – who had no responsibility for the plaque – and was told that management would “look into” replacing it. “Whilst the plaque may have misrepresentation it is not causing any harm [and] promotes the [importance] of bees globally and for the local community to be appreciative and considerate of them and their habitat,” they said in an email. When he returned a few months later, however, the plaque remained. Hunter then wrote directly to Attenborough, explaining the situation and including a photograph of the plaque. “I thought, bugger it, I’ll send a letter to the great man himself and see what he says,” Hunter said. “Then I forgot about it for a bit, and it was probably about a month later I got a letter back from him. “He said in a very David Attenborough way that ‘I didn’t say those statements and I believe that’s false’. He said he doesn’t use email, so would you mind forwarding that letter to the people at TTP (Tea Tree Plaza).” But when Hunter passed the message on to the shopping centre’s management, nothing was done, and the plaque was only removed after a local reporter called. A spokesperson for Westfield Tea Tree Plaza confirmed the removal. “We appreciate the customer bringing this to our attention. The plaque, including the quote, has been removed,” they said. Hunter, who volunteers his time as a conservationist, said he never wanted to go to the media but the plaque contributed to the spread of misinformation. European honeybees that have escaped captivity compete with native bees for pollen and evict native wildlife from tree hollows, sometimes killing them in the process. He said hoped people learned to dig deeper as “Facebook memes are not reliable sources of information”. “Honeybees don’t need help, they don’t need saving,” he said. “There’s a few hundred species of bee in South Australia alone but people don’t know that. When people think of bees, they think of honeybees. “When people say save the bees, I wish they’d say save the native bees instead.”That’s where we’re going to wrap things up today. Thanks for sticking with us. Here’s a recap of the day’s big stories: A long-awaited review of parliamentary workplace culture has recommended better leadership, a crackdown on boozing, a better gender balance, and codes of conduct. The Jenkins review found more than half the people working in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces have experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault. The review was sparked by the alleged rape of the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, who responded to the review today, saying: “I want to thank the many brave people who shared their stories which contributed to this review. I hope all sides of politics not only commit to but implement these recommendations in full”. Members of federal parliament didn’t exactly cover themselves in glory this afternoon, though, with “dog noises” and “growling” heard in the Senate and opposition leader Anthony Albanese telling Peter Dutton to “sit down, boofhead” in the House of Representatives. Speaker Andrew Wallace warned the parliament “the Australian public does not want to see this place descend into a political coliseum” and cited the Jenkins report’s focus on respect. The senator accused of barking, David Van, later offered an apology for his interjection, but he said he hadn’t been making an animal noise. National cabinet met this afternoon to discuss the response to the Omicron variant. NSW and Victoria announced 14-day quarantine requirements for arrivals from selected African countries and NSW increased fines for noncompliance, just hours after Scott Morrison urged premiers to “not get spooked” by the new variant. We still don’t know about the level of vaccine effectiveness with regards to Omicron. All six people who have been confirmed so far to have the variant in Australia are fully vaccinated returned travellers. Victoria’s controversial pandemic laws are set to pass parliament after the crossbench MP Rod Barton agreed to support the legislation, securing amendments to give parliament power to disallow pandemic orders. Debate was scheduled to begin at 3pm this afternoon and expected to run late into the night. Westpac has admitted it broke the law and agreed to pay penalties totalling $113m after the Australian Securities and Investments Commission hit the bank with six lawsuits over shoddy treatment of customers that included charging dead people fees and lambasted the bank for a “poor compliance culture” that needs urgent improvement. Human remains have been found in the search for missing Victorian campers Carol Clay and Russell Hill. The remains have not been formally identified yet but they were found in the bushland near Dargo that’s been the subject of an intensive search over the last few days. Amy Remeikis will be back with you tomorrow morning. Enjoy your Tuesday night! This post was amended on 1 December 2021 to correct a reference to the NSW and Victorian 14-day quarantine requirements, which apply only to certain African countries, not all international arrivals. The royal commission into defence and veteran suicide has been running again today, and heard that young defence force recruits trained to become fearless warriors are sometimes left tortured by the experience. AAP again: Psychiatrist and PTSD specialist Andrew Khoo on Tuesday told the commission that military training aimed to make people “totally emotionally disconnected” so they could survive combat. “But having done that, they were absolutely terrible at taking that warrior ... and making them a human again,” Khoo said. Under questioning from counsel assisting the commission, Kevin Connor SC, Khoo said the “breaking down process” was a critical part of the training for young recruits who were routinely deprived of sleep and water, overexercised and demoralised. The psychiatrist said at least one in four veterans would later suffer PTSD, and every one of the 2,000 veterans he had treated suffered from anxiety, the legacy of having shut down their emotions to survive. “There is a culture in the military that you can’t show weakness ... you can’t talk about the terrible anxiety ... What they do is shut it all down,” Khoo said. Mental health treatment for veterans, especially those with PTSD, remained patchy and inconsistent, due to a lack of specialist training among GPs, psychologists and psychiatrists, the commission was told. The Liberal senator who was accused of making animal noises during question time, David Van, has apologised for his interjection but says he wasn’t growling or making dog noises. From AAP: Labor senator Penny Wong sought to have the remarks withdrawn at the time but no senator claimed responsibility for the noise. Van later came back to the chamber and owned up but rejected the characterisation of his interjection, inferring he did not make any growling or dog noises. “I reflected on my behaviour in question time and I acknowledge that interjections are always disorderly,” he said. “I also acknowledge I was making interjections when senator Lambie was asking a question during question time. I commit to holding myself to the highest standards in the future.” Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young said it was not appropriate for the noises to be made while a female member was on her feet, especially on the same day a damning review into the culture at Parliament House was released. “If we are going to change culture from the top, that means all of us,” Hanson-Young told the Senate. The question on everyone’s lips for the last 24 hours – or at least everyone with an eye on social media politics – answered by the excellent Matilda Boseley. A former Australian human rights commissioner has called for a widespread audit of the use of automated software in debt collection after a scathing report found the New South Wales government had for years unlawfully taken money from financially vulnerable people. Labelled “Robodebt 2.0” by the state opposition, the NSW Ombudsman report revealed the state’s debt recovery agency unlawfully used automated technology to issue garnishee orders over the accounts of thousands of people during a three-year period from 2016. The report, tabled in the NSW parliament, found some vulnerable people’s bank accounts had been “emptied” by the scheme, which used automated technology to issue the orders to recoup unpaid fines. Read the full story here: The former prime minister Tony Abbott is heading on another trade trip to India, to “advance the significant Australia-India economic and trade relationship under the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership”, according to a press release from the office of the trade minister, Dan Tehan: Mr Abbott will travel to India to meet valued stakeholders across business and government, further strengthening Australia’s trade and investment relationship with India. The Australian government has supported Mr Abbott’s travel to India. Mr Abbott will not be remunerated for his work. Here’s some background from Daniel Hurst on Abbott’s previous trip, for which the former Liberal leader signed a conflict of interest declaration, due to his role as a trade adviser to the British government: Further to the case of the worker that was hit by a car today at a Victorian Covid-19 testing clinic: These basically mirror the requirements for international arrivals just announced in NSW, minus the bit about massive increases to fines. Basically, everyone who arrives in NSW who has been in South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini and Malawi during the 14-day period before their arrival must enter hotel quarantine for 14 days, irrespective of their vaccination status. Everyone else coming from overseas must complete a PCR test and isolate for 72 hours. They can only leave isolation after 72 hours if they have received a negative test result, and then they must complete an additional PCR test on day six. NSW has also increased penalties for non-compliance with the isolation, testing and quarantine requirements to $5,000 for individuals (up from $1,000) and $10,000 for corporations (up from $5,000). This will take effect tomorrow. The government says the first step will be consultation with the opposition, minor parties and independents, followed by provision of “every necessary resource and support required by the multiparty approach”. The “existing supports” within parliament will continue: this includes the dedicated support unit, the independent complaints mechanism, the 24-hour support line and workplace safety training. We’ve heard a bit from Scott Morrison this afternoon already on the Jenkins report, but the PMO has just released an official statement about it: The Government welcomes the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces, and thanks Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins for her leadership of this important review. We thank the over 1,750 individuals and organisations who contributed to the Jenkins Review. These experiences, observations and insights will be crucial to driving the positive change that is required. It is an important review with a series of findings and recommendations that the Government, Opposition, minor parties and crossbench must all carefully consider and respond to. These are problems we all own. And we all have a responsibility to fix this. The Review was established with cross-party support because everyone believes the Parliament of Australia should set the standard for the nation and reflect best practice in the prevention of and response to any instances of bullying, sexual harassment or sexual assault. Every single Australian has a right to feel and to be safe at work. However, the report highlights that people, particularly women, in Parliamentary workplaces have experienced bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault. It is clear that practical and cultural changes are necessary to make our Parliamentary workplaces safer. Good evening. Thank you as always to the excellent Amy Remeikis. I’m Stephanie Convery and I’ll be with you for the next couple of hours as we await the outcome of this afternoon’s national cabinet. It’s been another rough day in the parliament, where it hasn’t exactly covered itself in glory. There are two days to go. The lovely Stephanie Convery will take you through the evening, like the absolute trooper she is, while I once again go question my life choices. Let’s hope tomorrow is better. Given the history – doubtful. The House has yet to get to voter ID, so if they don’t get there tonight, that will be one for tomorrow – the government wants it passed before the sitting rises. There is also the national cabinet meeting which Steph and the Canberra team will take you through – Scott Morrison is determined that the domestic borders stay open. Tasmania has already announced it is closing its border to returned travellers (outside of the NZ south island) so there are some little moves afoot, but let’s hope there are no major changes coming our way. A very big thank you to Mike Bowers and Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst for all the work they do, as well as everyone in the Guardian team who keep everything ticking over. And a very big thank you to everyone who followed along with us today – and all days – you do, I can not stress this enough, make it all worth it. There have been some meaty issues covered off today – I hope you are all taking some space for yourselves. It can be very rough, and it is OK to take a break, or not look. This is real life, not a game, and we all have to watch out for each other. I’ll see you again tomorrow for the second last day. In the meantime – take care of you. NSW Health has just issued this statement: NSW Health can officially confirm the traveller who recently arrived in NSW and is isolating at home on the Central Coast has been infected with the Omicron COVID-19 variant of concern. The number of people with the Omicron COVID-19 variant of concern is now five. The person, who is fully vaccinated, arrived in Sydney on flight QR908 from Doha to Sydney on 25 November and travelled by private car to the Central Coast. They had been in southern Africa. NSW Health reiterates that everyone on the flight is considered a close contact and will need to get tested immediately for COVID-19 and isolate for 14 days, regardless of their vaccination status. NSW Health is contacting all passengers and flight crew to advise them of their isolation requirements. They can also call NSW Health on 1800 943 553 for further advice. Two more people who had been on the same flight, QR908, have now been confirmed as COVID-19 cases. Urgent genomic testing is underway for these travellers to determine if they have also been infected by the Omicron COVID-19 variant of concern. Neither of these two travellers had spent time in southern Africa. NSW Health is awaiting the final results of genomic testing on a case now residing in Broken Hill, who also arrived on the same flight QR908. However, initial results indicate this person is unlikely to have been infected with the Omicron variant. This person is fully vaccinated and isolating at home. The results are expected tomorrow. Mike Bowers was in the chamber as Sharon Bird was farewelled: Labor’s Stephen Jones is asked on the ABC about whether Anthony Albanese calling Peter Dutton a “boofhead” was appropriate and he says that today’s question time was a particularly a mess, but on the whole, no, the language isn’t appropriate. Independent MP Helen Haines has also responded to the Jenkins review into parliamentary culture: After working as a nurse and midwife and as an academic, working outside politics, I was shocked by the lack of structure, guidance and management systems in place for the offices of Members of Parliament. I am glad to see that addressed in this report. ... Australia is better served when the Parliament reflects the true diversity of our society. And for years the power imbalances, lack of accountability, entitlement and exclusion and gender inequality have meant this place has not reflected the community at all. Acting on this report will ensure we can work to becoming a more representative Parliament that people can be proud of. Here is just some of what parliament looked like today (thank you to our amazing video team for quickly pulling this together): Labor has responded to the Kate Jenkins review: Labor welcomes the report on the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces by Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins. We sincerely thank Ms Jenkins and Australian Human Rights Commission staff for their diligent work. We also thank all former and current staff, former and current parliamentarians, other building occupants, experts, and volunteers who made submissions to the review. Labor called for the review and supported the participation of current and former parliamentarians and staff. We are committed to working across the Parliament to improve working conditions for staff, parliamentarians, and other building occupants, and changing the culture of the parliamentary workplace. Now the report has been tabled, Labor will carefully consider its findings and recommendations, and most importantly – we will consult with our staff on our response. This is their workplace, and they deserve nothing less than a safe, respectful, and supportive environment. Simon Birmingham was asked about the dog noises and growling in the Senate in response to Jacqui Lambie asking a question this afternoon while on Afternoon Briefing. He tells Patricia Karvelas that Anthony Albanese also engaged in name calling today (he called Peter Dutton “boofhead” while Dutton accused Albanese of having “a glass jaw”). Which isn’t exactly the same thing. For one “boofhead” isn’t gender specific like dog noises tend to be when directed at women. And it also doesn’t answer the question. Sharon Bird, the member for Cunningham, is delivering her valedictory speech to the House. She was first elected in 2004. National cabinet is meeting at 4.30 this afternoon, so we should hear more about the domestic reaction then. Tasmania has closed its borders to overseas arrivals. From the Tasmanian government website: ***Any traveller who has spent time in any overseas location (not including the South Island of New Zealand) on or since Sunday 28 November will not be permitted to enter Tasmania at this time. Any traveller intending to travel to Tasmania and who has spent time overseas in the 14 days prior to Sunday 28 November, will not be permitted to enter Tasmania unless approved as an Essential Traveller. To be assessed for Essential Traveller status, travellers must provide evidence of having returned a negative Covid-19 test result in the 72 hours before they are due to arrive in Tasmania. If approved, quarantine is required, other conditions also apply. This measure is in addition to national restrictions and requirements in relation to travellers who have been overseas. See travel restrictions and exemptions for more information on Australian arrival information.*** International arrivals in Tasmania (other than from New Zealand) include international workers who are in Australia to work within the agricultural sector, Antarctic expeditioners who are transiting to Antarctica and people who return via repatriation flights. Between 1 November and 14 December 2021, travellers who are approved to arrive in Tasmania within 14 days of being overseas (other than direct flights to Australia from low-risk areas of New Zealand, or approved Australian Antarctic Division travellers), will be required to meet the same requirements as domestic arrivals from high-risk areas. Read more about Travel to Tasmania under Tasmania’s plan to transition our Covid-19 response. Every precaution is being taken to make sure that international arrivals can be managed safely in Tasmania and our community can remain protected. The “growling and dog noises” Jacqui Lambie was subjected to happened during her second supplementary question to Simon Birmingham. Sarah Hanson-Young stood up on a point of order and was the first to call it out: It happened. I don’t know who is responsible for it, but it is inappropriate and we are going to change culture from the top. That means all of us. Penny Wong backs her when the president of the Senate, Slade Brockman, said he didn’t hear anything: Well, I did because I in fact said who’s growling. And I would ask one of the senators at that end helps to do the right thing and withdraw. At least fess up. Come on. Gee you are tough aren’t you. ... Growling, Mr President. Brockman said he “did not hear it”. Wong replies emphatically: I did”. Brockman: I’m not challenging what you heard. I certainly did not hear. I cannot ask someone to withdraw something I did not hear. Members of the chamber interject, causing Brockman to again say: I did not hear the particular incident that you have raised. If it occurred, I would ask the senator involved to reflect upon it and to withdraw if they did do what has been stated. However, I did not hear the particular interjection myself. The Senate moved on. The Law Institute of Victoria says it now supports the Victorian government’s proposed pandemic management laws after amendments were introduced to increase parliamentary oversight. The Public Health and Wellbeing (Pandemic Management) Bill 2021 is currently being debated before the Victorian upper house. The LIV had previously opposed the legislation. But president Tania Wolff said the latest suite of amendments, which cover many of the concerns the LIV had about the bill, have tipped the balance. She said: The LIV believes that the proposed amendments to the bill are an improvement and the government has come a long way in addressing the concerns raised by the LIV and other bodies who have been consulted. There are notable changes in important areas of independent oversight, scrutiny and review proposed. Given what we are seeing in these additional amendments, this is an improvement, and, on balance, the LIV would support this bill. An executive from the cohealth community health centre in Melbourne, where a nurse carrying out Covid testing was hit by a car, has released a statement: Nicole Bartholomeusz says: I am distressed to report that this morning at the cohealth community health centre at 365 Hoddle Street, Collingwood, a testing clinic coworker was hit by a car as they were helping clients queueing for a Covid test. The incident occurred outside the Easey Street entrance. Emergency services attended the scene, and the coworker involved is now in hospital. We are providing support and counselling to staff who were present when the incident occurred. We are also reaching out to clients and neighbours who may be affected to make sure counselling is available to them. We have also made the decision to close the Collingwood Covid testing clinic until Thursday, though all other health services at Collingwood clinic will remain operating. This is an incredibly distressing event, and our thoughts are with the coworker and their family. As a police investigation is now under way, we are unable to comment further, however I can say that this incident has sent shockwaves through the cohealth community. We hope to reopen the Collingwood Covid testing services soon and resume our work as a vital health partner of the community. The cohealth community is strong and resilient, and we are rallying together through this difficult incident. Sarah Hanson-Young is speaking on what happened in the Senate now. She says the noises “came from the government side of the chamber”. I was appalled that only after a matter of hours that the prime minister was on his feet, growling was coming from his side of the chamber. It is a disgrace. That was quite the question time, and a lot happened during it (and around it). But it is worth revisiting what happened in the Senate. On the same day the Kate Jenkins review into parliamentary culture was handed down, where the sex discrimination commissioner made a point of speaking on the issues that women in particular face because of the environment they work in – and her shock at what some women, including parliamentarians, were subjected to, Jacqui Lambie was subjected to dog noises in the Senate, while asking a question. This is not normal workplace culture. A woman, in her workplace, doing her job, was greeted with growls and dog noises. And it was other women who had to call it out and ask for something to be done. Scott Morrison spoke on the review at 12.15pm. Jenkins held a press conference on it at 1.15pm. It was still going when question time started at 2pm. And then, not even an hour after Jenkins finished speaking, someone was making dog noises at a female senator as she asked a question. We don’t know who it was – no one was identified. But that it even happened, and that so many people within the chamber were prepared to sit there in silence until women spoke up, speaks volumes about why the report was needed in the first place. Just before question time, Labor’s Justine Elliot has just given a 90-second speech about the cashless debit card, which she described as a “cruel and unfair” measure that directs welfare recipients “where and when to spend their own money”. Apparently, 45,000 people have now signed a Labor petition to scrap the card, a promise which it has attempted to enact with a private member’s bill by Julian Hill. Elliot said: We know the Morrison government wants to roll the cashless card out nationally. We know the Liberals and Nationals have already started forcing pensioners onto the card. ... At the next election – make your vote count. Vote Labor – because only a vote for Labor will scrap these cruel cashless debit cards for good. The social services minister, Anne Ruston, has completely rejected the suggestion pensioners could be moved onto the card. The Morrison government has ruled it out. But Elliot keeps saying it – just will not be deterred from this scare campaign. It’s going to be a brutal election. And for those who didn’t see question time (I assume most of you, because you are normal people with actual lives, who value how they spend their time), here is when Peter Dutton and Anthony Albanese went each other at the dispatch box: Our video team has put together a quick video on how the Kate Jenkins review was handed down and greeted: The CPSU, the public service union, has responded to the Jenkins report: The CPSU welcomes the publishing of the Jenkins review, which lays bare issues that CPSU members have been consistently raising for years, such as the need for improved supports, mandatory training, and an independent complaints process. The work our members do for our democracy is so important, but as reflected in this report the parliament has significant power imbalances, which allows bullying, sexual harassment, and sexual assault to fester and go unpunished. Implementation for the review is in question, as zero funding was announced today by the prime minister, it is essential that there is practical application of key recommendations, and this requires more than words. Many of the recommendations are the very same recommendations that CPSU members have been calling for, including: Training on respectful workplace behaviour, people management and inclusive leadership for all parliamentarians. Establishment of an independent human resources mechanism to oversee employment practices. Formation of an independent complaints process for informal/formal and anonymous complaints free from political interference, with ability to enforce code of conduct and sanctions including in relation to parliamentarians. Develop capability and professionalisation of MoPS workforce. Improve representativeness and inclusiveness of parliament and MoPS workforce. Proactive and preventative approach to worker health and safety. AAP has some more information on a nurse who was hit by a car at a Melbourne Covid-19 testing site: The man, aged in his 50s, was taken to hospital with non-life-threatening injuries after the incident that occurred just before 9.30am on Tuesday. Police say he was hit by a white Holden station wagon near the corner of Easey and Hoddle streets and the driver then fled the scene. A nearby nurse provided first aid to the Tarneit man until an ambulance arrived. A short time later, police found the station wagon and arrested the male driver in Carlton. He is currently being questioned by police. It’s believed witnesses saw the vehicle driving erratically near the Melbourne CBD. Police have called for anyone with information or dashcam footage to contact Crime Stoppers. CoHealth, who runs the Collingwood testing site, has been contacted for comment. While the first-glance reporting suggested Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions were on the slide, a closer look tells a different story. Yes, national pollution is down if you look at the year to June and compare it with all previous years in the survey, the trajectory is lately, and the electricity sector has done most of the work. However, if you take the quarterly data, the recent trend has been upwards. So the year to June was up about 2% from the year to March, and preliminary data for the September quarter suggest a slight increase or at least stabilising in the pollution. And odds favour the December quarter likely having a further increase as private transport in the half of the country that was locked down probably increased, as did other activities in the economy. Any increase in emissions, of course, is going the wrong way if we’re serious about heading towards net zero by 2050. The Therapeutic Goods Administration [TGA] has fined someone $7,990 for allegedly advertising ivermectin and zinc lozenges to treat Covid-19 despite no strong evidence that the treatments work. Ivermectin is a prescription-only medicine and cannot be advertised to the Australian public. The TGA has previously warned consumers and advertisers about illegal advertising relating to Covid-19. The individual allegedly claimed on their website that ivermectin and zinc lozenges are effective in the treatment of Covid-19. It is also alleged that the individual claimed that ivermectin is “safe” when used for Covid-19. Under the Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code the advertising of products for therapeutic use in humans must not claim they are safe, cannot cause harm or have no side-effects. Stepping outside parliament for a moment, Victoria police have issued a statement: Victoria police has located human remains in bushland near Dargo as part of their ongoing investigation into the disappearance of Russell Hill and Carol Clay. The remains are yet to be formally identified and it is expected this process will take some time. As this matter is now before the courts, we will not be facilitating any interviews in relation to the investigation. We ask that you respect the privacy of the families at this time. Here is some of how Mike Bowers saw question time: The great Yolŋu actor David Dalaithngu is being honoured by both Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese in the parliament. There are two more left in the year (and possibly until after the election). Question time ends. Luke Gosling to Scott Morrison: Does the prime minister’s model of a national anti-corruption commission have the power to investigate a cabinet minister’s decision to grant visas to au pairs for mates? Morrison: These questions go to the very heart, Mr Speaker, of why the model we have put forward in 349 pages of draft legislation – it is there, it is publicly available, Mr Speaker, on the attorney general’s website – to the issue of why, Mr Speaker, it’s important that an integrity commission which is introduced not to be used and weaponised for the sort of political stunts and game playing that we’re seeing here from the Labor party. They don’t want an integrity commission, Mr Speaker, they just want to engage in the slurs. Mr Speaker, criminal corrupt conduct is the sort of conduct, Mr Speaker, that sent the former minister Ian MacDonald, Mr Speaker, to prison, which the leader of the opposition was a keen supporter of his ... Anthony Albanese gets very, very angry and demands the prime minister withdraw. Peter Dutton says he can make a personal explanation at the end of question time. Andrew Wallace asks the prime minister to be careful, while also pointing out the question flies close to the wind. Morrison continues, using the word ‘visa’ to talk about immigration more widely, so he can segue to the case of the disgraced former Labor MP Craig Thomson: In relation to Mr Thomson, Mr Speaker, and what the leader of the opposition had to say about, Mr Speaker, he said he had complete confidence in Mr Thomson. Mr Speaker, as we know, we saw him on the beers with Mr Thomson. Mr Speaker, this is, Mr Speaker, the standard that the leader of the opposition said, Mr Speaker, when he was in government, they were indeed, the leader of government business in this House seeking to secure the vote of Mr Thomson, Mr Speaker, who has been shamed by his own actions. Mr Speaker, those opposite talk a big game on this issue. As I said, more of their members are in the Silverwater branch of the Labor party ... It is not the first time Morrison has used the Silverwater prison line – which is one of the reasons his attacks on Icac haven’t made sense, because Icac investigations were what led to some of the cases he has spoken about in QT being eventually found guilty in a court. But this time, Wallace asks him to withdraw the comment. He does. While Alan Tudge muddles his way through this dixer, Ben Butler has a titbit for you: Two NSW men have been charged over allegations of involvement in a Ponzi scheme that took almost $200m from about 590 investors, mostly from Sydney’s well-heeled eastern suburbs. Tony Iervasi of Tweed Heads, who was the sole director of Courtenay House, and Athan Papoulias of Brighton-Le-Sands, a contractor employed to promote investment in the business, appeared before the local court at Sydney’s Downing Centre today. The charges follow a four-year investigation by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. Iervasi is charged with nine criminal counts of dishonest conduct and one of carrying on a financial services business without a licence while Papoulias faces one charge of dealing in the proceeds of crime. Dishonest conduct carries a prison sentence of up to 10 years while the maximum jail term for dealing with the proceeds of crime is 25 years. Tanya Plibersek to Scott Morrison: Does the prime minister’s model of a national anti-corruption commission have the power to investigate the energy minister’s use of forged documents to attack the lord mayor of Sydney? Peter Dutton tries to stop the question, but is not successful. Morrison sends the question to Paul Fletcher, who speaks about the ‘349-page’ exposure draft again, but the short answer is no, it does not. Peter Dutton continued his attempt to tar Labor as weak on national security in the lead-up to the election. The defence minister took aim at the Fremantle MP, Josh Wilson, branding him “Comrade Wilson” over his comments about the potential impact of Aukus on the international non-proliferation regime. Dutton was taking aim at Labor’s Josh Wilson over his comments about the potential use of a loophole in the international nuclear safety regime to acquire the submarines. The AFR quoted Wilson as saying at a committee hearing on Monday it was an “interesting interpretation” that the government would try to qualify for an exemption from the International Atomic Energy Agency’s inspection regime by claiming military submarines, which will be fuelled with weapons-grade uranium, were for peaceful purposes, adding: “If it was determined that was acceptable, we will have broken new ground in weakening the existing non-proliferation regime.” Dutton was not amused, suggesting it was just Russia and China that had raised such concerns. Fact check: Indonesia has also raised concerns about the impact on the non-proliferation regime. Anthony Albanese evidently had had enough of this, standing up and seeking leave to move a motion expressing support for the US alliance. Dutton declined to grant leave, saying he would not “grant leave to stunts”. In the Senate, the independent Jacqui Lambie has asked a series of questions about public housing and homelessness, prompting growling and dog noises from someone in the chamber. The Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young alerted the president to the interjection, arguing that making “growling and dog noises” while a female senator is on her feet is not consistent with achieving “change from the top”, on the day the Jenkins report has been released. Penny Wong also asked whoever was responsible to withdraw. The Senate president, Slade Brockman, said at first he can’t ask senators to withdraw something he did not hear. Then Brockman asked them to “reflect and withdraw if they did do what was stated”, adding that he did not hear the interjection. Senate question time continued – nobody has owned up so far. Peter Dutton has just done his daily defence dixer, which is just an excuse to call Labor “weak”. This time, he refers to the Labor MP Josh Wilson as “comrade Wilson” and Anthony Albanese as “weak leader”. Daniel Hurst will bring you more on that. But Albanese is prepared and asks to move a motion saying the House “declares its support for our alliances with the United States and the United Kingdom”. Dutton denies leave, saying: We don’t grant leave to stunts, Mr Speaker, and I’ll tell you what, you could [speak] here all day and you wouldn’t convince the Australian public you’re strong. So everything is going really well. Just for context, here is part of the constitutional expert Prof Anne Twomey’s conclusion on the government’s 349-page exposure draft (from her submission to the call for consultation on the draft): In general, the bill is absurdly long and complicated. It is currently 347 pages in length. The definitions in Part 2 of the bill run to 10,765 words. That is around the same length as the Commonwealth Constitution, as originally passed … It is … evidence of a lack of conceptual clarity behind the bill and an attempt to make it do both too much and too little. The excessive length, complexity and duplication also leads to mistakes. And she concludes: ... If it is seriously being proposed that there be a Commonwealth Integrity Commission which cannot investigate most public sector corruption, and in those few areas in which it can, it has to hold all its hearings in secret, and then issue secret reports that the public may not know about, then you can expect justifiably high levels of public distrust in, and contempt for, the system. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: The 2022 parliamentary calendar the Morrison-Joyce government has in place only 10 sitting days for the House and five for the Senate before August. Doesn’t this show the prime minister has no intention of establishing a federal anti-corruption commission before the election? Morrison: The leader the opposition knows full well that we have 349 pages of legislation (it is an exposure draft, not legislation) and $150m, Mr Speaker, committed to this measure. All it takes is for the Labor party to support it (again, the opposition doesn’t have to support legislation for the government to introduce legislation – something which happens all the time), which they don’t, they have a two-page policy. Mr Speaker, we have 349 pages of legislation (exposure draft) which if they wish to support, Mr Speaker, we would welcome that, but I’m asked also about the parliamentary calendar, which is I know a topic that the leader of the opposition has been putting keen interest in now, Mr Speaker. As the leader of the opposition may not be aware that in order to prepare a budget, Mr Speaker, next year, the normal practice is to ensure there are a set number of weeks before the preparation of that budget before the budget is delivered. Now Mr Speaker, I’ve personally delivered three budgets as a treasurer and there have been three budgets as prime minister, Mr Speaker, and I have served seven years on the expenditure review committee, Mr Speaker. Now I can understand why the leader of the opposition would be unfamiliar with the time taken to prepare a budget because he’s never delivered one, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, there are people who have been serving refreshments in the expenditure review committee longer than this person, Mr Speaker, the leader of the opposition spent in that chamber, Mr Speaker. The answer then goes to the economy, manufacturing, economic management and other places – none of which are relevant, but here we are. Tony Burke gets up for a second time to tell the speaker that the time on the prime minister’s answer expired “some time ago”. Andrew Wallace does not look impressed. Uh huh. We are back to the ‘30,000 Australians would have perished’ line from Scott Morrison. That is based on an OECD report about Covid deaths based on population (if there were no lockdowns or border closures). So the prime minister, who has spent the last month telling people that the government needed to get out of people’s lives, is again crowing about how the government being in people’s lives saved Australians. It is a little hard to keep up at times. Peter Dutton, who sued over a tweet, which was deleted (and won his defamation case), was just yelling “glass jaw” at Anthony Albanese across the chamber. Mark Butler to Scott Morrison: My question is to the prime minister. In her national review of quarantine published this month, the prime minister’s handpicked quarantine adviser Jane Halton told him some quarantine settings, such as quarantine in a purpose-built facility, are better able to mitigate transmission risks, especially for high-risk travellers and in respect of variants of concern and further that, quote, the Centre for National Resilience at Howard Springs was not purpose-built for quarantine. Why has the prime minister failed to establish a single purpose-built quarantine facility? Morrison: The member will be aware that that was a report that I commissioned, Mr Speaker, that I commissioned. And Mr Speaker that led to the process to developing that report, to the decisions that were taken for the additional facilities, Mr Speaker, that are being completed in Victoria, in Queensland, Mr Speaker, in Western Australia. Mr Speaker, those facilities are important, not just for what we may have to face next year for the more severe cases that might have to be taken. And as we’ve discussed those with state governments, but for future pandemics that might present in the future, and that’s why we have invested in those facilities. So Mr Speaker, I would only encourage those opposite, as Australians continue to push through this pandemic. And as we continue to face these new variants of concern, and Omicron is a variant of concern, but we’ve dealt with many before. What I do know, from certainly the premier of NSW, and I appreciate the measures that they’ve taken in relation to this most recent variant, and I believe the view was also headed by the Victorian premier, that we don’t want to return to those arrangements that were put in place for those quarantine facilities. That is in hotels, Mr Speaker, that they are moving now to home quarantine, home quarantine and isolation. And that is how we live with the virus and we live together with the virus. Now those opposite have been playing politics with this pandemic for 18 months. Mr Speaker, Australians know that our government has worked closely with others to ensure that we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. We are one of the strongest economies coming through this pandemic of the economies in the world. And we have one of the lowest fatality rates, Mr Speaker, of any country in the world from Covid. So what part of those three results, what part of those three results, Mr Speaker, that many other countries, in fact most around the world, would happily exchange places with Australia to achieve? Why is it that this opposition constantly throughout this pandemic has not sought to support but has only sought to undermine for their petty political benefit? We told you he was back on that line. Josh Frydenberg still hasn’t worked out how microphones work. Or that he doesn’t need to read out the LinkedIn profile of every backbencher who asks him a dixer. The Greens leader Adam Bandt asks a question on emissions reduction and Scott Morrison turns it into a bit on a ‘Labor-Greens alliance’. Eventually, Anthony Albanese gets up on a point of order and Peter Dutton gets up at the same time, but Albanese has the call and tells Dutton to “sit down”. So there is an argy-bargy at the dispatch box, before Dutton sits down. Albanese doesn’t really have a point of order though, so then Dutton is back, but he also doesn’t have a point of order (it’s on ‘glass jaws’ if that gives you any indication) so he is also sat down. Morrison returns to his bit. Brendan O’Connor to Scott Morrison: The home affairs minister said today we do not need purpose-built quarantine because hotel quarantine had worked very effectively. How many state borders have been closed and how many lockdowns have occurred because of the prime minister’s reliance on hotel quarantine, instead of purpose-built quarantine facilities? Morrison: The commonwealth government has established and did establish the national resilience facility, Mr Speaker, and so that the questionnaire is an urge to the commonwealth has not established those embassies. We indeed have, Mr Speaker, and they were there to support. They were there to support, Mr Speaker, the broader quarantine arrangements that were put in place necessarily with all the states and territories because the sheer volume of arrivals that would come back to Australia and needed to be accommodated in that way. The Labor party seems to think that we would have somehow established facilities to accommodate 100,000 people around the country, Mr Speaker, and that’s simply absurd. So we came up with a practical, innovative solution, Mr Speaker, a solution that was actually followed by the New Zealand government. And I don’t hear those opposite criticising the Labour government in New Zealand about having hotel quarantine, Mr Speaker, but they’re happy to criticise their own government for doing it, Mr Speaker, they’re happy to criticise the Australian government for taking exactly the same response to the New Zealand government. Which tells you everything about this Labor opposition when it comes to the handling of the pandemic. Tony Burke has a point of order on relevance: I put it that we’re at the point now, where it’s quite a deliberate breach of the standing orders from the prime minister. That he knows there’s no reference to alternative policies or alternative approaches. And every single time he has to pivot to an attack on the opposition. Wallace tells Morrison to stay relevant to the question. Morrison: Mr Speaker, the leader of the opposition may wish to reflect on the chair and those comments. Mr Speaker, he may wish to reflect on the chair, Mr Speaker, that that goes to the nature of the leader of the opposition, Mr Speaker, happy to play political games in here every other day of the week. Burke returns to the dispatch box: Standing order 91, the prime minister’s disregarding your ruling. Wallace tells Morrison to stay relevant to the question. Again. Morrison: I will resist responding to the sneering interjections of the leader of the opposition, Mr Speaker, because what Australians know is as a result of the response to this pandemic, Mr Speaker, more than 30,000 lives have been saved by the very arrangements we put in place with the states and territories. Now those opposite might want to sneer at that and not support it, Mr Speaker. But this country has come through this pandemic and continues to move through this pandemic, particularly, Mr Speaker, in response to new variants, and we’re dealing with Omicron. Now in a common sense and sensible and balanced way we’ll deal with other governments on these issues. Because we know when it comes to the pandemic, the Labor party always plays politics before putting forward the national interest. Barnaby Joyce is back and still attempting to make words seem like sentences, but he is very stuck on how the opposition ‘sneers’ at regional areas, but he can’t quite get there. Mark Butler to Scott Morrison: The home affairs minister said today that Australia doesn’t need purpose-built quarantine because hotel quarantine has worked very effectively. Can the prime minister confirm that there have been almost 30 breaches of hotel quarantine which have led to closed state borders and statewide lockdowns? Morrison launches into how Labor hasn’t supported the government during the pandemic and this is another example of that, going over his well-trodden ground, which doesn’t actually reflect reality, but then we are used to that. Labor raises a point of order on relevance – Andrew Wallace, who I think has decided he will be sitting towards the Bishop end on the scale of Speakers, says he is being relevant, so we get three minutes of it. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: Kate Jenkins has made shocking findings in her report today. Does the prime minister agree that everyone working in this building, including staff, deserve a safer and more respectful place at work? Morrison: I’m sure I join with the leader of the opposition and the leaders of all parties represented in this chamber, including the members of the crossbench, the independents, the leader of the Nationals, in answering that question on behalf of all of us, which is yes, Mr Speaker, of course we do, because in this place, Mr Speaker, we are not just members. We are also employers individually, each and every one of us are employers, and we have responsibilities as employers to make this workplace as safe as it possibly can be. And so today, the report that commissioner Jenkins has provided to all of us, to the government, Mr Speaker, and happy to table that report, Mr Speaker, this report, I think, goes to the root causes here that we have had to address in our workplaces. This is a challenge that, for those of us who have been in this place a long time, have known have been experienced over that course. And it deals with the issues of power imbalances. It deals with the issues of gender imbalances. It deals with the issues of accountability. And independent complaint mechanisms, which I’m very pleased we have already taken action on as we have with the counselling support and other services. We didn’t have to wait, Mr Speaker, for this report. Before taking the action. I commend again commissioner Jenkins and indeed have already commended Brittany Higgins, Mr Speaker, because it was her speaking up that has led to this chain of events, Mr Speaker, that has brought parties together in the multiparty process that has been working together to produce this set of recommendations, and I now look forward to us continuing to work together in a multiparty process. The recommendations cover the full terrain, I think, of the issues that need to be addressed. And we need to come together now and work to those together to ensure that this place becomes a safer place and sets standards, Mr Speaker, for all who work in this building. The surveys that are in this report don’t just relate actually to the staff of members of parliament and senators. They, in fact, relate to all people who work in this building, whether it’s in the press gallery or elsewhere, Mr Speaker, amongst members, senators, and so it is important that we read this, reflect on it carefully to understand what commissioner Jenkins has rightly set out as the drivers. I said earlier today, we have the great privilege to work in this place, and all of those who are here also have that privilege. But the significant matters of state and the importance of our work and the stresses that we work under are no excuse whatsoever, Mr Speaker, for inappropriate behaviour, for bullying, for harassment, for any of these things, Mr Speaker. There is no place for that in this workplace or any other, so I join with all members of this House, and I’m sure the leader of the opposition, in condemning that behaviour and doing all we can, Mr Speaker, to make this a safer workplace for everyone in this building. And that that is also the truth for those who worked outside this building as well. Both the Prime Minister and the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, urged MPs to have a break over Christmas before the election in the new year. Joyce told MPs that voters did not want to see them between Christmas and Australia Day, and urged them to connect with constituents before the summer break. Joyce said there is “no such thing as a safe seat” and he had seen “tenacious” MPs hang on to seats by a small number of votes, and losses in safe seats when there are “massive swings.” ”So ask yourself, what’s my relationship with my electorate? How am I going with my volunteers? How am I going with my local mayors? Have I sent my Christmas cards? Have I rung them up? Don’t take anyone for granted because by the time the election is called, if you haven’t done the work, it is too late and they are highly cynical of you if you turn up just before the election.” Morrison also told MPs to have a break over Christmas to come back feeling refreshed for “a fight we can win”. “We need to get around each other and respect each other and the contributions that we all made. “We will have a fight that we will win in the new year. So we need to take your time to reconnect and recharge over Christmas. “Election results change the course of nations.” The Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, recounted a conversation he had at a recent dinner with senior members of the Carlton Football Club in which he was told the most important thing for success was the “character of the team over individual talent and a sense of purpose”. “It’s no difference to politics. There are a lot of stars out there, but unless we pull together as a team and look after each other then we don’t have the successes that we should have.” Scott Morrison has spoken to MPs about focusing on the issues of concern for Australians, saying the government had a “deep responsibility” to represent those who had elected the coalition.He said the pandemic would be here for the foreseeable future, and keeping Australians safe would remain his focus. He said this would give “the Australian people confidence in a time when they’re quite concerned and they’re uncertain and worried about their futures.” He said MPs had supported Australians through the “greatest crisis since WWII”. He also spoke about the importance of freedom, saying it was “a time when those freedoms cannot be taken for granted.” The prime minister also spoke about the Jenkins review, saying it was a “serious problem that needs to be addressed. “The issues and recommendations raised so need to be carefully worked through and responded to make this a better workplace for everybody.” The transcription service, Tveeder, has been down since the prime minister’s press conference, so bear with me while I muddle through QT. Question time is about to begin, so we will have to leave the Kate Jenkins press conference there. We’ll come back to it once the worst of the hours is over There was a lot in the question which was just asked, and repeating it might actually break some brains/re-traumatise people, so I won’t. In response though, Kate Jenkins speaks on the toll speaking out has on victim-survivors. Jenkins says it is time for the community to step up. I think the momentum is that as a community, we’ve got to stop asking these people to step up to share their trauma with us. We need to provide that if they want to speak we want to support them. Is the parliamentary culture different to what we see in corporate Australia? (Scott Morrison had said the cultural issues were some that many workplaces across Australia struggled with.) Kate Jenkins: We talked about the systemic risk factors that exist in parliament. So if I just give you kind of the overview of the five of them, you realise that it’s actually more risk factors than exist in many corporate workplaces. So the first was just multiple workers in this one workplace, but we’ve unclear or inconsistent standards, so there wasn’t sort of one code of conduct or one clear standard expected in the workplace. Second was the leadership or really a lack of people leadership skills, the lack of focus of particularly parliamentarians on their job as an employer, their focus absolutely on their job of representing us and as parliamentarians, so that’s the second. Another one is the workplace dynamics that feel loyalty and particularly that sort of political dynamic that exists inevitably in parliament. Other things were the social conditions of work, so this is a fly-in fly-out, 22 weeks you’re in Canberra, the rest of the time you’re at your location, irregular hours, high pressure, high scrutiny, lots of focus, really quite unusual. You can’t really compare it to many other industries in that sense. And then the final thing was the employment structures. So in the main if you’d like to say the bosses are actually elected parliamentarians – they’re not employed, they’re not senior executives. And then you have a whole category of people that are the members of parliament staffers who are employed and under their own act with their own particular circumstances. And then you have the press gallery and you have the public servants. Everyone’s employed them to different arrangements that have come about over time. So I know I’m giving you the long version, but there is just a bucketload of risk factors there that in combination particularly put young people, I would say young staffers, particularly the what’s called the mob SEC staffers, and in practice the female parliamentarians and women across the board at high risk – the need to sort of maintain your relationships and your reputation to get ahead when doing that can put you at personal risk. Is Kate Jenkins confident the recommendations will be implemented, en masse as she has asked? One of my key observations about this is we were engaged to do this, with both the support of the government the opposition, the Greens and the crossbench. We have had full parliamentary support as we have gone about the investigation which has been an incredible privilege, and I think unusual because of the nature of how government normally works. And our recommendations really add to the whole parliament. So we wouldn’t look to an expectation that and we’re being informed that all parts of the parliament are taking these recommendations seriously. So I guess I’m an optimist, but I’m also really certain that this pace of work reflects the voices of the people that work in there, including that 147 current and former parliamentarians who participated so there’s a really good ground for this to be implemented. And I will look forward to the response in due course. Kate Jenkins on the gender imbalance in the parliament: What we have recommended is what we know works in terms of advancing diversity. So to really underpin this, we did find the four key drivers in of this misconduct were power imbalances, gender inequality, lack of accountability and really a lack of diversity. So when you look at those, there’s an urgent need to change. And that’s why one of the case shifts is to get about bring to the Parliament, better diversity. The reality is Parliament should match the community if there’s one workplace that should represent the community it absolutely is our parliament. In considering what the best practice is, we did look at the name for targets and also public reporting so that we can both in the workplace and externally understand what’s happening, particularly also looking at positions so not only for parliamentarians, but within locks at staff so their parliamentarian staff is when you look at the spread of the workplace and that’s in the report. You will say that whilst there are more women as parliamentary staff as their men, the majority of the senior roles are held by men so there’s a real imbalance. Kate Jenkins: So the issue of alcohol use was very consistent thing that came up across the inquiry. We have made a recommendation that the parliament sets for itself, policy and particularly looks at harm minimisation and work health and safety obligations. Now, what would that look like in practice, we did hear some officers actually have a no alcohol policy. We also did hear that whilst alcohol was consumed in the premises, some of the most concerning conduct was pressure to drink outside of parliament in in social environments. So we have given some guidance that there should be some restrictions and some governance around that relating to bring it in line with what happens in most workplaces in Australia now. So those we’ve asked parliament to recommend what those standards will be. We’ve made a pretty clear picture on how that might work. So we didn’t come up with no alcohol because we this conduct isn’t caused by alcohol. It is one of the risk factors at play. Kate Jenkins said she was “to some degree” shocked by some of what she learnt – particularly about what was happening with younger workers, and she was also shocked by what women, including female parliamentarians experienced. (Scott Morrison said he was appalled but wish he found the results more surprising) Jenkins: Because I know what happens across Australian workplaces so that one in three Australian workers is actually experienced sexual harassment last five years, so to some degree, I wasn’t shocked. But those 500 or so interviews that we did made us really hear in real terms how that works in practice, and then statistic of more than half have experienced one or more of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault was really concerning. If I come to this specifics, to some degree, I was shocked at how the young workers who perhaps arrived really positive and enthusiastic and feeling privileged to work there, how quickly they become in an environment where this bullying and harassment is normalised. I would say I was a little shocked even though I expected women to experience a more difficult situation, but certainly it’s really clear that our female parliamentarians have a much tougher time in that place. Whether it’s through online abuse, direct sexual harassment, the rates were amongst the highest in the reporting and that was really shocking to me. Kate Jenkins finishes her introduction with this: Asking that our nation’s parliament should do no more than it expects from all Australian workplaces. This report describes how Parliament can create safe, respectful and inclusive working environments to ensure it can attract the best who can deliver the best for us. This is a firm basis for an historic legacy this parliament can leave creating a stronger parliament for the future. Kate Jenkins warns that the recommendations “not be cherry picked for implementation” as they work in conjunction with each other: In making our recommendations, we’ve sought to balance the need for better support with robust accountability, better support and includes systems and processes to guide people and set them up for success. Improved accountability is achieved by clear standards and an independent report and compliance buddy to create a safe reporting environment and enforce those standards. Drawing on lessons from other Parliament’s as well as high pressure high profile workplaces in sporting military business and education settings. The report breaks our proposed solutions down to five shifts that are required. The first is leadership. recommendations have focused on strengthening leadership to foster safe and respectful work environments. This includes both institutional leadership and individual leadership with parliamentarians office holders and party leaders. Leaders set the tone and leadership from the top is particularly important to set clear expectations and role model safe and respectful behaviour. The second is diversity, equality and inclusion in line with corporate Australia all parties need to set targets and take specific actions for gender balance and diversity in the parliament and ratio regularly measure and publicly report on progress. We know that what gets measured gets done the 30 systems to support performance. Our recommendations are focused on ensuring parliamentarians and their staff have human resources, systems, processes and advice tailored to the specific needs of their context to support their important work and help them perform at their best The fourth is standards reporting and accountability. We recommend establishing clear and consistent codes of conduct alongside an independent complaint body where it is safe to make a report. Standards are enforced and people are held accountable through sanctions. The final shift is around safety and wellbeing. This includes a proactive approach to safety and well being including a focus on prevention to meet applicable withheld work health and safety duties. It also involves developing policies to restrict alcohol use, in line with harm minimisation and safety principles. The woman who triggered the Jenkins review, Brittany Higgins, has made a short statement via the Global Institute for Women’s Leadership at The Australian National University. Higgins said she was pleased to see the review deliver its report and hoped it “inspired immediate action”. Brittany Higgins: I want to thank the many brave people who shared their stories which contributed to this review. I hope all sides of politics not only commit to but implement these recommendations in full”. The main message here is there is nothing to stop the parliament from upholding the standards we would expect in any other workplace. Kate Jenkins: Misconduct is often dealt with as a political problem, rather than as a people issue. As a result, we heard that people are often punished for reporting misconduct, while others are protected, rewarded or even promoted for engaging in misconduct. This permissive environment is reflected in the data from our review. Over half that is 51% of all people currently in come along parliamentary workplaces have experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault. Gender plays a significant role in shaping these experiences in these workplaces. Across all parliamentary workplaces 40% of women have been sexually harassed compared to 26% of men. Some cohorts in the parliament are particularly involved were vulnerable with staffers and women parliamentarians at highest risk. Women we spoke to told us they felt lucky when they had not directly experienced sexual harassment or sexual assault. Kate Jenkins continues: We heard that offices function better where their parliamentarians or chiefs of staff prioritise people leadership, ensuring people were clear on their roles and responsibilities and expected behaviour and felt safe to report misconduct. However, parliamentarians and their staff largely do not come into these roles with the skills to lead teams effectively and are not set up for success. High performing teams are essential to the important work of the parliament. Yet people leadership skills are not valued and systems to support people are inadequate, combined with the lack of accountability to make consistent standards and enforcement of those standards, and the absence of a strong human resources system to support performance. All these factors create a permissive environment where misconduct can and does occur. Kate Jenkins on what she learnt from the parliamentary review: There is sometimes a temptation to say that because of its role in national life, it is an exceptional workplace, to say that parliamentarians and their staff not like the rest of us that they live and work in a different world. But this does them and us a great disservice. Being exceptional, does not mean we should make exceptions. Our report sets out clearly what we heard about working in the hundreds of parliamentary workplaces across the country without identifying anyone. We heard that there are unique characteristics in this workplace that create risks for bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault to occur and go unreported. We heard that parliamentary workplaces are characterised by the intensity and inherently political nature of the work, the pursuit of political power and advantage of win at all costs. [Also] the frequent blurring of personal and professional life and an expectation of intense loyalty to political parties. Parliament is inherently about power, and that power runs in multiple directions. We heard that power imbalances and the misuse of power is one of the primary drivers of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault, gender inequality and a wider lack of diversity, particularly evident in the low representation of women in leadership roles, means women are more likely to experience misconduct. Brittany Higgins has responded to the review: The sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, is now holding her press conference on the report she has handed to the government. She thanks Brittany Higgins as well as everyone who engaged with the report. Jenkins: We heard that there is no single parliamentary workplace or culture. There are many individual workplaces and workplace cultures within the parliamentary system. This includes a wide array of workers beyond parliamentarians and their staff. There are ComCare car drivers, Parliamentary Library staff, staff who work with parliamentary committees, public servants, journalists, security, planning, events and catering staff. We made every effort to ensure that we heard from people in as many of these different settings as possible and overwhelming sentiment shared by review participants was that working in these workplaces is an honour and a privilege, participants told us of both positive and concerning experiences. Many people shared distressing experiences of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault, sometimes for the first time they said these things could never be shared with anyone else. Most of the pieces in the Gross Domestic Product pie are now in the public domain with the release today of the trade stats and a couple of others. In short, net exports (that is exports minus imports, not actually nets) have ballooned thanks to rising demand for our minerals and farm products while supply-chain snarls curbed what we imported in the September quarter, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said. The result is a record $23.9bn for the current account surplus, up about $1bn. The larger surplus magically will add about 1 percentage point to the GDP figures due out tomorrow. That will come in handy because the market has already pencilled in a contraction for the quarter alone, or about 3%, the worst quarterly dive save for the 7% plunge in the June quarter of 2020 when the Covid chaos first descended. Also out on Tuesday was data on public demand. According to Westpac, such demand expanded by 3.1%, an upside surprise compared with the bank’s forecast of an increase of 1.2%. The result will be a 0.8 percentage point addition to the GDP growth number when it lands. Still, with a bigger drop in September quarter inventories reported yesterday chipping off some of the growth propellant, Westpac is predicting a 2.5% quarterly contraction for GDP, while on a year-to-year basis the growth will come in at 3.2%, it predicts. Of course, eyes are largely turned to the current quarter since the Victoria, NSW and ACT lockdown distorted so much of the July-September period. Dwelling approvals in October extended their slide, dropping 12.9% for the month, compared with a 3.9% fall in September. Still, the October result remains a third higher than pre-pandemic levels in October 2019 thanks to government stimuli and record low interest rates, the ABS said. NSW Health also confirmed a very likely fifth Omicron Covid case in NSW – as well as the reports the woman had been on the Central Coast before she was diagnosed – the woman arrived back in Australia BEFORE any restrictions were put in place (you can find a list of places which were visited on the Central Coast, here) NSW Health can confirm initial testing strongly indicates one more overseas traveller, who recently arrived in NSW and is isolating at home on the Central Coast, has been infected with the Omicron Covid-19 variant of concern. When confirmed, this would bring the total number of confirmed cases of Omicron in NSW to five. The traveller, who is fully vaccinated, arrived in Sydney on flight QR908 from Doha to Sydney on 25 November and travelled by private car to the Central Coast. The traveller had been in southern Africa. Everyone on the flight is considered a close contact and will need to get tested immediately for Covid-19 and isolate for 14 days, regardless of their vaccination status. NSW Health is contacting all passengers and flight crew to advise them of their isolation requirements. They can also call NSW Health on 1800 943 553 for further advice. NSW Health advises a number of venues were visited by the traveller in Sydney and on the Central Coast before NSW Health directed travellers from southern Africa to go into isolation. While that presser was going on, the former South Australian attorney general (she stepped down last week) Vickie Chapman has been suspended from the SA parliament for six days. Scott Morrison also says he will be urging premiers to “hold their nerve” on borders when the national cabinet meets later today. Kate Jenkins will be speaking at 1.15 from Sydney. Scott Morrison says “parliament awaits” and finishes the press conference. The NSW premier has said that he will be welcoming 250 international students next week. How is that consistent with the ‘pause’ the prime minister and his government have put in place? Scott Morrison: That is a separate matter that, because that is a pilot program that was already in place. We are not ceasing things we were already doing. ... The pilot programs we had discussed this with the premier yesterday, so that is entirely consistent. It’s entirely consistent because it was already a measure that had been taken and it is under very controlled circumstances. And as part of of that process, what we have done is not taken the next, we are just delaying postponing temporarily for two weeks. And indeed if the information allows us to bring that forward again, great, tremendous, because in Australia we’re moving forward. We’re not going back when it comes to this virus. We’re going to keep moving forward into Christmas and into 2022 and we’re going to open safely and we’re going to stay safely open. Scott Morrison moves on to the response to the Omicron Covid variant: This is a prudent and temporary pause. We don’t know enough yet about it. And the advice that I received at the National Security Committee of cabinet for Covid, which my colleagues joined me on last night, was that this temporary pause will provide the opportunity to understand and learn more about this. It is not a reason to step back. It is just [reasonable that we] momentarily pause and we seek further information before taking that next step, and that next step is obviously skilled migration. Students coming as well as those on working holiday maker and humanitarian programs. We will continue, obviously, in areas where we already have exceptions, like under the Afghan program and so on. But that said, this is just about a prudent and temporary pause. Scott Morrison again, on how the solution is one for everyone: This is a multiparty process. This is just not a response of the Liberal party or the National party or indeed the government. This is a joint project because we have a joint problem when it comes to these issues of bullying and abuse and sexual harassment. It is a problem in this building of all parties. It is a problem of the Labor party, the Liberal party, the National party, the Greens party, all the parties that are represented here. We have been here a long time, we know that we all have a problem that we all have to own and we all have to deal with. And I hope that we can deal with this in the most multipartisan, good faith way that we possibly can. And that that will enable us to move as we can on what is set out here. And I don’t want to prejudice that approach. Because I want to engage with everybody around the table in good faith to make sure that we can make that progress. I don’t want to see this fall into camps. I don’t want to see this fall into any sort of partisan approach. I want us to stay around the table and get it done. How will any of the victims see justice? Scott Morrison: Well, we will continue to support the work of the Australian federal police and the courts, as the states and territories do. And this is a challenge not just for us, but all levels of government. And of course we want to see offenders brought to justice. Now that is done through our justice process and you won’t find a stronger supporter of Australia’s justice system than me. Does Scott Morrison think politics needs to change? Morrison: Well, look, I think we all have a role to play in that, don’t you? There’s great interest in the conflict of this place. And that is something that many of you write about constantly, and on occasions, perhaps ... encourage, perhaps. That’s been the nature of politics, not just in this place, but many parliamentary democracies and we’re a robust democracy. But we’re all accountable for how we engage in the affairs of politics and how we report them and the environment in which we seek to communicate. Was Scott Morrison shocked by the findings in the report – one in three having experienced sexual harassment, while more than half of workers faced some form of harassment? Like anyone who works in this building, I find the statistics that are presented there, of course appalling and disturbing. I wish I found them more surprising. But I find them just as appalling. And that’s why the actions I think that are recommended do cover all the territory, that they’ve been able to take us forward. And what I’ve seen in has only reinforced my view about the actions that we’ve already taken. What Kate Jenkins also recommended here, it is not just the accountabilities that are necessary for employers in this building, but supports and resources for employees to be better employees. And that is a practice that employers are getting support from right across the country in the private sector and the public sector. And I think that’s a good thing. And the report notes that one in three figure that you mentioned is similar to figures that we’ve seen in other workplaces. Now that doesn’t excuse it by any sense of the imagination. That’s not my suggestion. It’s simply to say that we’re dealing with issues here that are quite specific to this building. In particular, that idea I was talking about before that just because we sit here and deal with national matters of state that in no way condones behaviour of that nature ever, under any circumstances, and care what your job is, or what you think your responsibilities are. Nothing justifies that. I always take the approach, particularly when I deal with my own team, but also the members of the public service who I deeply respect in this place. You’ve heard me say expect and respect. That is, I think, the right way to approach the engagement in this place with the work that we do. So it is a challenge I think all workplaces are dealing with but I want, as my colleagues do, and I have no doubt the leaders of the other parties in this place, to want this building to be a [new] standard set. Does Scott Morrison support gender equality within the political parties, given that is one of the recommendations, and how does the parliament police that, given it is a political party decision and not one of the parliament? And what of the new bodies for the independent HR process, which is separate to political actors – such as political parties, ministers, MPs and the prime minister? Scott Morrison speaks about the women he has appointed to cabinet, and how he will be pushing for more women candidates to be preselected (he does not commit to gender quotas though, which is how Labor got to gender equality once it began addressing the issue in the 90s – the Greens do it as a matter of course). As for the independent HR process, Simon Birmingham says: The office of parliamentarian staffing and culture is supposed to essentially operate as a human resources function to take on many of the current functions and responsibilities of the Department of Finance in that regard, to report and be responsible to parliament, rather than to the executive wing of government and to essentially oversee the operation of the Mops Act (the act which covers staffers) which is recommended for some particular changes as well as broader review under commissioner Jenkins’ recommendations. The independent parliamentary standards commission is proposed to be the oversight mechanism to handle consistent responses and independent investigation in relation to complaints bullying, sexual harassment, sexual assault and other misconduct practices. Scott Morrison is again saying that fixing the culture is the job of everyone in the building – there is no one action which can make the changes spoken about in the report. This government has taken actions on this issue like no other government has prior and that has been led by the events that took us to this place, and rightly it’s taken us to this place. Has he spoken with Brittany Higgins since the report came out? In relation to specific individuals in their briefing of the report, we have been taking advice on how this should be appropriately handled, as I’ve always had the view always happy to meet with people on these issues should they wish to but I don’t presume upon that. And that’s why the briefings have been provided through the Human Rights Commission to [Brittany] and a number of others as I understand it, and we stand ready to work with anyone on this issue as we go forward. But the appropriate actions we’ve taken and how we’re handling this report is we’ve been following the advice we’ve been receiving from the commission and how it’s released. Should they wish to have further discussions certainly with me or my ministers, then I’m sure they would only be too happy to do so. Meanwhile, back in the Senate (the press conference has not moved to questions and answers yet, so we are moving between the two issues) the assistant minister, Amanda Stoker, has told the Senate no one is saying corruption is a good thing. Stoker, opposing Rex Patrick’s attempt to suspend standing orders to bring on a debate and vote on an integrity commission, tells the chamber: “Senator Patrick says he’s motivated in bringing this suspension motion by the accusation, the frustration that the government is running out of time to deliver its commonwealth integrity commission by the end the year. So in order to give effect to that frustration, he decides to attempt to derail the government’s legislative program in a game of competitive one-upmanship about who around this chamber most stands against corruption. The reality is there’s nobody in this room saying corruption is a good thing … everyone in this place stands against corruption.” Stoker said the government had engaged in a detailed consultation to “deliver an institution that has the teeth it needs” while “learning the lessons” from other states where “they have gone horribly awry”. Stoker is going through all the greatest hits. She talks about injustices “inflicted by a star chamber” in some states. She talks about slurs levelled in the “coward’s castle of parliamentary privilege”. “Can you bear it? The hypocrisy of those around this chamber makes my eyes water.” Earlier, Labor’s Katy Gallagher told the Senate that if a federal integrity commission were in place, “this government is at most risk from having that body”. Gallagher also took aim at the government for next year’s sitting calendar: “The Senate will sit for three days in the first half of next year … They are worried that they will continue to lose votes, because they have lost their way, they have no agenda and they have managed to divide this parliament.” Back to the press conference, Simon Birmingham is now addressing the media. He again points to the supports in place and thanks those who took part. This is a landmark document reflecting decades of problems, some of the findings and many of the stories that are told are distressing and reflect completely unacceptable behaviours. To affect change, there are lessons for all of us to lead to accept responsibility to set the example and Commissioner Jenkins’s recommendations reflect those approaches. The report provides a positive roadmap for change in behaviour, culture and practice. Over in the Senate, the independent senator Rex Patrick has moved to suspend standing orders to bring on debate about legislation to set up a federal integrity commission. The Greens senator Larissa Waters welcomed the move, saying her party has been pushing for a federal corruption watchdog since 2009. “We don’t mind whose name is on the bill so long as it’s a bill with teeth.” Waters took aim at the government for a lack of progress: “They are using shame consultation as a delay tactic. “It’s just One Nation and the Coalition standing in the way of a watchdog with teeth.” The Labor senator Katy Gallagher said Labor would also support the motion. Marise Payne, as the minister for women, is also addressing the report at this press conference: I also want to say today that I know from the many conversations that I have had around this place and more broadly, since the beginning of this year, that the release of this report today may have an impact on people inside and outside this place. On members, on senators, on staff and on others who work or who have worked in this building. Please, if this is a difficulty for you, please seek the support that the prime minister has spoken to. Payne also thanked Brittany Higgins. Scott Morrison on the response: I’ve asked the minister of finance and special minister for state to consult with the opposition, minor parties and the independents on a way forward to respond to Commissioner Jenkins’ review. Secondly, I’ve instructed my department to provide every necessary resource and support required by the multi-party approach. This multi-party approach with the coordinating support of the department has already served the parliament will this year in implementing the significant reforms recommended by the foster your view. And the success of this approach through the Foster review has delivered positive outcomes. Third, the government will continue the existing supports that we already have in place the dedicated units support staff within the parliamentary workplace support service and the independent complaints mechanism 24-hour support line and the continued workplace safety training. These important supports will keep running and adapt as necessary as parliament responds to these recommendations. We did not wait to receive this report to take action. We took action through the parallel commissioning of the foster report and implementing those recommendations. So we now address these not from a standing start, but already underway, taking action together to respond to the very serious issues that have been highlighted in this place. A long-awaited review of parliamentary workplace culture has recommended better leadership, a crackdown on boozing, a better gender balance, and codes of conduct. The review, sparked by the alleged rape of former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, found more than half the people working in commonwealth parliamentary workplaces (CPWs) have experienced at least one incident of bullying, sexual harassment or actual or attempted sexual assault. The Australian Human Rights Commission review found 37% of people had experienced some form of bullying, one in three some form of sexual harassment, and 1% actual or attempted sexual assault. The commission made 28 recommendations, including better leadership at many levels and a leadership “taskforce” to implement the recommendations. It called for an acknowledgement of the harm done by abuse, an independent review of progress, targets to achieve gender balance, an increase in diversity and respect, better measurement and public reporting, better support, and tighter alcohol policies. There should also be a new office of parliamentarian staffing and culture, a code of conduct for parliamentarians and one for their staff, as well as standards for others who work there including the press gallery. The commission heard that “power, including power imbalances and the misuse of power, is one of the primary drivers of misconduct in CPWs” and that bullying is not only top down, but lateral and upwards. Gender inequality was found to be a key driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault. “The experiences of Grace Tame, Brittany Higgins, Chanel Contos and others, as well as a national conversation about consent, have also prompted renewed calls in the Australian context for an end to gendered violence,” the report noted. One participant said: “It is a man’s world and you are reminded of it every day thanks to the looks up and down you get, to the representation in the parliamentary chambers, to the preferential treatment politicians give senior male journalists.” The review, led by commissioner Kate Jenkins, began in March and spoke to 1,723 individuals and 33 organisations. Scott Morrison says a multi-party response has already begun and he has ordered his department to provide any resources needed. Scott Morrison: The power imbalance, the gender imbalance, the lack of accountability for behaviour as well as understanding the challenging and demanding work environment using this building, but I want to stress just as I think Kate Jenkins does and I’m sure my colleagues support and people across this building, just because this is a challenging and demanding environment just because we work under great stress and strain and long hours had to deal with issues that are of great importance for the future of our nation ... but this is no excuse whatsoever, to normalise, inappropriate, unhealthy and unprofessional behaviour. Just because what you do is important and stressful and demanding [it is never OK] to never normalise that behaviour [or to think it] has been somehow OK. It’s not OK and we all need to understand the drivers here – of course we do important things in this place. It’s a great privilege to be here and do those things. That should only stress upon us the need for those highest standards. “We all share in the ownership of the problems which are set out in this report, but we all share in the solutions as well,” Scott Morrison says. In the Senate, Rex Patrick is trying to bring on the federal Icac bill for debate again. Daniel Hurst is watching that for you. Scott Morrison also thanks Brittany Higgins for her advocacy work (stressing he has no comment on the criminal case). The prime minister is speaking on the Kate Jenkins review. He starts with thanking her and her team for the “incredible sensitive way in which they undertook the review”. He then thanks those who participated in the review. There are 25 recommendations in that review. Here are the top five: Recommendation 1: Statement of Acknowledgement The Presiding Officers should convene party leaders and the heads of the parliamentary departments to come together, agree and deliver a joint Statement of Acknowledgement to the Parliament. This Statement should acknowledge the harm caused by bullying, sexual harassment, and sexual assault in Commonwealth parliamentary workplaces and a commitment to action and shared accountability. Recommendation 2: Institutional leadership To demonstrate institutional leadership to ensure safe and respectful Commonwealth parliamentary workplaces, the Houses of Parliament should: establish a leadership taskforce, with oversight by the Presiding Officers, chaired by an independent expert and supported by an Implementation Group, to oversee the implementation of the recommendations made in this Report. It should have the following responsibilities developing and communicating an implementation plan with specific timeframes defining and communicating common values which can drive cultural change across parliamentary workplaces preparing an annual public report of progress made in the implementation of recommendations tracking, on a quarterly basis, key measures of a safe and respectful work environment to monitor progress in implementation. Recommendation 3: External independent review of progress The Australian Government should establish a follow up external independent review to examine the implementation of recommendations made in this Report within 18 months of its tabling in the Parliament. Recommendation 4: Individual leadership To strengthen individual leadership to ensure a safe and respectful work environment: parliamentarians and senior Members of Parliament (Staff) Act employees, including chiefs of staff, should: engage in regular discussions to set expectations of conduct and champion the Codes of Conduct create a safe reporting culture, including supporting people who experience misconduct take responsibility for discharging work health and safety obligations attend training on respectful workplace behaviour, people management and inclusive leadership support employees to attend relevant training office-holders, parliamentary party leaders and leaders of parliamentary departments should: engage in regular discussions to set expectations of conduct, champion the Codes of Conduct and create a safe reporting culture demonstrate and reinforce the message that those individuals who engage in misconduct will not be protected, rewarded or promoted parliamentarians, party leaders and office- holders should report annually to the Parliament on the actions that they have taken to ensure a safe and respectful work environment. (b) convene an annual parliamentary discussion in both Houses of Parliament for office- holders, parliamentary party leaders and parliamentarians to share progress on the implementation of recommendations. Recommendation 5: Diversity among parliamentarians To advance gender equality, diversity and inclusion among parliamentarians, parliamentary party leaders should lead and champion a 10-year strategy which includes the following elements targets to achieve gender balance and specific actions to support the achievement of the targets specific actions to achieve gender balance and diverse representation across all parliamentary roles and portfolios specific actions to increase the representation of First Nations people, people from CALD backgrounds, people with disability, and LGBTIQ+ people. The Kate Jenkins review has been released. You can find it here. Anthony Albanese will hold Labor’s first campaign rally on Sunday, telling MPs that the opposition is kicking goals ahead of an election early next year. “I said we would kick with the wind in the fourth quarter, well we are in the fourth quarter and we are kicking with the wind,” Albanese said. “The government is fracturing to the right and to the left. This is a government that has run its course.” Albanese said the party would continue to work on the three themes of a better life for working families, secure jobs, and a future made in Australia. MPs will meet again on Friday to discuss the party’s campaign strategy. He compared federal Labor’s standing to other opposition parties in Australia and around the world, commending MPs for their discipline. The government does not deserve a second decade in politics. If elected, we will be the most experienced incoming Labor government in history. Speculation is mounting that an election will be held in May after a revised sitting calendar scheduled a budget for March. Albanese criticised the sitting calendar for 2022 and the limited sitting days planned for the first half of the year, and said a March election was still a live option. We reported two weeks ago that the department of prime minister and cabinet had breached freedom of information law by dragging out a request for documents related to the alleged rape of Brittany Higgins.The department had repeatedly missed legally-imposed deadlines and claimed the FOI request was “voluminous” and overly complex. The request was, in fact, highly targeted and narrow, and identified only 20 documents in the department’s systems. The information watchdog, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) made a series of recommendations to improve the department’s compliance with the law. One of those was to appoint an information champion, tasked with providing “leadership, oversight and accountability necessary to promote and operationalise the department’s compliance with the FOI act”. That was to be done by 5 November.But newly released documents strongly suggest the department has not acted on that recommendation. An FOI lodged on 11 November asked for any document held by the department related to the OAIC’s recommendation that an information champion be appointed. The department told the FOI applicant that they held no such records. “I have decided to refuse your request under section 24A(1) of the FOI Act, on the basis that the Department has taken all reasonable steps to locate the documents you have requested, and those documents do not exist,” the department told the applicant. Labor caucus has determined its position on the religious discrimination bill: Labor will not adopt a final position on the bill until a parliamentary committee has completed an inquiry; In the unusual event the government attempts to bring the bill on prior to the inquiry completing, Labor will “pursue procedural measures to defer such a vote until Labor has adopted a final position on the bill”; In the event that the government succeeds in bringing the bill on for a vote in the house prior to Labor adopting a final position - Labor WILL NOT OPPOSE the bill in the house, while making clear the principles that will guide Labor’s position and the need for the government to deliver on its 3-year old commitment to protect LGBT students from discrimination. The caucus discussed concerns including the implications of the bill on outsourcing government services to religious organisations; and how to ensure minorities within faith communities are heard. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said Labor should encourage submissions to the inquiry, but it is set to only have three public hearings. Dreyfus said he was “disappointed” the government had not used this moment for harmony and bringing people together; and that the government had let many communities down when it attempted to amend 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act. Keep in mind that journalists have not seen the review – it has been given to the government, but no one has seen it as yet, so asking questions will be a little tricky Simon Birmingham will be standing up with the prime minister at 12.15 – so take that as confirmation that it will be on the Kate Jenkins review. (as the finance minister, Birmingham is the minister responsible for parliamentary staff) Parliament is due to sit at midday today (it is always later on Tuesday because of the party room meetings). The prime minister has announced a press conference for 12.15pm. It’s in the courtyard. That is presumably on the Kate Jenkins report into parliamentary culture, which has been handed to the government. The ABC has reported a fifth case of the Omicron variant of Covid has been confirmed in NSW – a woman who arrived in Sydney before the travel restrictions were in place. The ABC says the woman had visited several venues on the NSW central coast. Ben Butler has more on Westpac: Westpac has admitted it broke the law and agreed to pay penalties totalling $113m after the corporate regulator hit the bank with six lawsuits over shoddy treatment of customers that included charging dead people fees and lambasted the bank for a “poor compliance culture” that needs urgent improvement. The bank has admitted the allegations in the lawsuits, filed in the federal court by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and in addition to the penalty will pay customers $80m in remediation. Tens of thousands of customers were improperly charged tens of millions of dollars as a result of Westpac’s misconduct, Asic said. The Labor caucus has made at least one decision This is coming very soon: In the parliament, Simon Birmingham, as the minister who has carriage of parliamentary staff, is expected to take carriage of the report, although it would be expected that the prime minister also say something. Either way, it will be an issue in question time. The political parties have broken from their meetings – we will bring you the updates on what was said in the rooms very soon NSW Health has put out its release on the latest case numbers, which includes this: NSW Health is investigating two Covid cases who arrived in NSW on flight QR908 on 25 November. Both are isolating at their respective homes. Urgent genomic sequencing is underway to determine whether these cases have been infected with the Omicron Covid-19 variant. All passengers on this flight must be tested immediately, regardless of previous test results and vaccination status, and isolate until a negative result is received. Activists have stopped an Adani train carrying a load of coal towards the company’s export port in north Queensland. Adani says it will be exporting its first shipment from the Carmichael coalmine by the end of the year. But the company remains cagey about the specifics and whether the train (which is branded with the logo of Adani’s subsidiary, Bowen Rail Company) stopped by activists near Bowen – on the line to the Abbot Point port – contains a first load. The moment will be significant – and heavily stage-managed by both the company and climate activists – given the decade-long controversy about the mine’s construction and the unprecedented campaign to stop it proceeding. Activists from the group Frontline Action Against Coal claim they have stopped the train on the outskirts of Bowen. Two activists have locked themselves to the railway line. Another two activists, a mother and daughter, used steel pipes to lock themselves to train wagons. Police are in attendance at the two separate sites. Images shared with Guardian Australia show the wagons fully laden with coal. Earlier this month a Bowen Rail Company locomotive broke down on the shared section of railway, near Collinsville. Adani said that the train was undergoing testing. The company says: “Testing and commissioning on the trains has been underway for several weeks which has included transporting coal. “As is the usual process for new pieces of equipment and infrastructure, this is expected to take a period of time as the new machines and infrastructure are tested. “The Carmichael mine is on track to export coal in 2021.” The House of Representatives’ daily program for Tuesday is out. A draft circulated on Friday suggesting the religious discrimination bill would come on for debate on Tuesday afternoon, but it has now been bumped down the program. CORRECTION: An earlier post suggested it had been removed from the program. In fact, it has been bumped down the program (but not removed). https://twitter.com/Paul_Karp/status/1465473698182287363 Well this is a change: The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has announced an extension of the state’s vaccine mandates. Workers on the list will have to be fully vaccinated by 23 January (with at least one dose by 17 December). Outside parliament and GetUp has organised a couple of events on the lawn. One is calling for the government to pass a cultural heritage protection act and the second is on the hand over of a petition for a federal Icac. The joint human rights committee has announced some details of its inquiry into the the three religious discrimination bills. As Guardian Australia revealed yesterday, the chair, Anne Webster, is keen to keep the inquiry narrowly focused on the religious discrimination bills – not religious exemptions to other discrimination laws, such as the Sex Discrimination Act. The committee said: “The committee has resolved that it will accept submissions strictly addressing its terms of reference: that is, relating to the religious discrimination legislative package.” So, in effect, submitters are being told they can raise concerns about the effect of allowing religious schools to discriminate on the grounds of religious ethos, but should not raise the bigger concern about sacking gay teachers and expelling gay students, powers contained in the SDA. The committee has set a deadline of 21 December for submissions, and announced public hearings on 21 December, 13 and 14 January. Merry Christmas stakeholders, MPs and senators. Anyone who isn’t very online may have missed the whirlwind of conspiracy theories that swirled around this photo – were the steaks actually cooked on the barbecue, when was it taken, it’s cold in Melbourne, where are the jumpers, the gas isn’t on ... it was a ride (that at least one federal government MP jumped on). Anyways, now Daniel Andrews has addressed it in a press conference, because this is what Australian politics is about now: The committee looking into the religious discrimination review is due to report back on 4 February. Which means it needs submissions by 21 December, with public hearings scheduled for mid-January (when most people are still on holidays/switched off). Probably not a surprise to anyone paying attention: You can set your calendar to it. The Morrison government is required to release national emissions figures within five months of the end of a quarter. So, lo and behold, on the final day, here we have the June quarter and fiscal year data on our greenhouse emissions. Given the nature of the release, it’s perhaps apt that fugitive emissions fell the most in the June quarter, dropping 8.7%. That’s a little bit surprising, though, as it implies gas and coal production was reduced during the April-June months by some margin. Be that as it may, the headline figure is probably that for the year to June, Australia’s total emissions were under 500 million tonnes of carbon-dioxide equivalent. That looks like the lowest annual rate since records have been kept, and was down 10.8m tonnes, or 2.1%, from a year earlier. The government has made much of the fact national emissions are now at 20.4% below levels from 2005 – the baseline year for the 2030 Paris Agreement target. Once again, emissions from the electricity sector led the falls. The surge in renewable energy, which arguably has been in deviance of many of the federal Coalition’s policies, helped shave 7.7mln tonnes, or 4.5%, from that national total. If you exclude land use changes, the national story is a lot less rosy. The government booked a net sink of 24.4 mln tonnes - little changed from a year ago. Excluding that sector, then Australia’s national emissions were 523.3m tonnes, the lowest at an annual rate since 2003. As Guardian Australia has reported, there are good reasons to be sceptical about Australia’s emissions savings from the land sector. In short, Australia’s emissions are probably on the downward trajectory, thanks mostly to the advance of zero carbon solar and wind farms but the rest of the economy is largely still chugging along. The ABC is reporting Hobart woman Susan Neill-Fraser has lost her second appeal against her murder conviction. She has always maintained her innocence. She was allowed a second appeal after a change in Tasmanian law. Under the original sentence, Neill-Fraser is eligible for parole next August. More than half of all Ambulance Victoria employees have experienced bullying at work and almost one in five experienced sexual harassment, an independent review by the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission has found. The first part of the review, which included a survey of more than 2,000 Ambulance Victoria employees, was released on Tuesday. It found that 52.4% reported experiencing bullying, 47.2% said they had experienced discrimination in the workforce, 34% had experienced victimisation, and 17.4% had experienced sexual assault. Commissioner Ro Allen said these experiences had a “profound” impact on many of the 255 who spoke in depth to the inquiry. Allen said: “The Victorian community rightly hold Ambulance Victoria in high regard, due to the incredible dedication and care that so many of us have experienced from the service. “It is vitally important that that same level of care be extended to all who work for Ambulance Victoria, and that those within the organisation treat each other with the same level of respect and compassion that they give to the community.” The report found that many members of Ambulance Victoria do not feel safe or valued in the workplace. One respondent told the commission: “This organisation’s culture is unsafe for people who are not white males. It’s really bad.” Ambulance Victoria’s chairman, Ken Lay, said the report was “both painful and confronting” and revealed a depth of discrimination, bullying and harassment in the workplace that was “deeply disturbing”. The report made 24 recommendations, all of which have been accepted by Ambulance Victoria. In a statement, health minister Martin Foley said the behaviour and culture outlined in the report was “simply unacceptable and in no way meets the standards this government, and the broader community, expect of a workplace”. Foley said: “To anyone in Ambulance Victoria who has experienced discrimination, sexual harassment, bullying and victimisation of any kind – please know we hear you, we believe you and there will be immediate action taken.” Volume two of the final report will be released in March. Daniel Andrews says the Omicron variant, at this point, doesn’t change anything. Daniel Andrews is holding a press conference after his government secured the votes it needed to pass its amended pandemic legislation. He is asked about the vaccine mandates: They won’t be here forever but they’re based on health advice and we’ll continue to follow health advice. Whilst we review all the rules and, because of the rules and the vaccinate rates, we’ve been able to achieve, just over a few weeks ago, we took all the rules off pretty much except for masks in a number of sensitive settings, really. But we will continue to review continuously all of the rules and that includes the way the vaccinated economy operates. But I will say this, we’ve got to get boosters done, we’ve got to get the paediatric vaccine done, and the last couple of days show us that this virus is not static. It’s going to keep changing. And our response will need to be nimble. And the inherent protections that come from encouraging everyone to get vaccinated, well, the hospitalisation numbers tell you all that you need to know. There are very, very few people, a handful in fact, that are in hospital, double jabbed, really sick. The political parties are holding their party room/caucus meetings today, which means the next few hours will be a little more quiet. And so ends the press conference. Does the federal government have any idea on when the national plan will move from the third stage to the fourth, given the new variant? Greg Hunt: The position at the moment is right now we’re in the process of moving through the stages of border reopening. The last part of it would be up vaccinated arrivals. We’re not at a point yet to make that decision. We’ve always set out the time frames for decisions and that will be considered at a later time. Right now we have to work with the states and territories and we’re working with them cooperatively. The national cabinet is meeting today and the health ministers are meeting collectively today and so the national plan is always under constant review at this point in time. The next phases are the students and the workers. Then double vaccinated tourists and the progressive bubbles and then we’ll continue to follow the medical advice and when we believe that that’s safe we would look at unvaccinated arrivals. That’s not today. Prof Paul Kelly on the issue of boosters: We need to be cognisant of the international evidence and international decisions but remember the northern hemisphere is in winter so boosters in winter make a lot of sense. We’re more than six months away from winter. We know that respiratory viruses circulate a lot more in winter. It’s likely that that’s when we would want the boosters to to be totally actively working. There are some significant reasons behind the day of a booster more than three months but it’s a balance and that’s exactly the sort of issues that I discussed this morning with Atagi and they’ll look at that now. Karen Andrews goes through the declaration requirements of returning travellers: Internationally, we have very high expectations and requirements of international travellers coming into Australia. That requires them to have a negative PCR test before they are uplifted and there are quite heavy penalties for airlines should they choose to uplift someone who does not have the appropriate vaccination or does not have a negative PCR test. So we have those protocols in place. On arrival, well, passengers are required to have filled in an Australia travel declaration indicating what their vaccination status is and the countries through which they have travelled to come to Australia. A number of those requirements have been mandated now and there are significant penalties for false declarations, so that’s over $6,000 can be applied as a fine but also up to a 12-month prison sentence for people who do not declare and appropriately on the [arrival card]. In addition, if it is fraudulently filled out, then potentially there are offences under the criminal code that may well be enforced should they be determined to be appropriate and, of course, when passengers arrive here, the Australian Border Force takes a very active role in compliance to make sure that all the proper authorities are in place including the negative PCR test before they were uplifted and vaccination status. How are vaccination rates going in Indigenous communities? Greg Hunt: We’ve seen a strong spike in Indigenous vaccinations over recent weeks. There was a significant hesitancy. That’s the honest answer. We’re now, as of today, at 74% Indigenous first dose and 62.6% Indigenous second dose and so I want to thank all of the Indigenous community leaders. They’ve really stepped up. They’re working with commonwealth, state and territory governments as an implementation partnership signed with all states and territories for co-leadership in this space. We’re seeing that initial hesitancy falling away. Northern Territory in particular is doing a great job. Western Australia is where we have to do the most work. That’s just a fact, not a reflection, and all the states and territories are absolutely doing their best to provide encouragement. There has been some, I think, fairly malicious targeting by some anti-vaxx groups of Indigenous groups and we’ve been fighting against that for a long while but we’re beginning to win that fight and I think the Northern Territory has been the model in the way in which we’re beginning to see very significant growth in Indigenous communities. The change in Indigenous communities is because of the work so many Indigenous people have been doing to combat vaccine misinformation and anti-vaxxer campaigns, as well as working with community leaders to get to the people who need the information. The work they have done to protect their community has been above and beyond and needs to be acknowledged by anyone reporting on this issue. Then we get to the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly: In terms of what we know, we now have five cases that have been diagnosed in Australia. They’ve all been diagnosed quickly. They’re all in quarantine, one in the Northern Territory at the centre for national resistance and the other four in New South Wales. What do we know about those cases? And it’s similar to travellers in other countries in the world, almost all of them directly linked with southern Africa – they are young. They’re doubly vaccinated. Several of them have had infection previously, either known or on serological testing. And they have very mild or in fact no disease. That’s what we know so far. In terms of transmission on from those people, the only case we really know about is the one we talked about on Saturday in hotel quarantine in Hong Kong where there was someone who had come from southern Africa and transmitted to another person from another part of the world across the corridor. So we know it’s transmissible. We don’t know still about the vaccine effectiveness. We don’t know about severity and there’s mixed reports on that from South Africa itself – and I would echo Minister Hunt’s view that this has been a difficult time for them and their neighbouring countries, one of which, Malawi, I worked in myself, so I feel for that country and I still have links to there. It’s difficult but they’ve been extremely open and helpful in relation to what they know. Karen Andrews is also at this press conference, where she speaks about the decision to delay the border reopening for skilled worker visa holders and international students (as well as the travel bubble with South Korea and Japan). So this 14-day pause, as I’ve indicated, was taken as a result of the briefing by Prof Paul Kelly last night. It wasn’t a decision that the Australian government took lightly. We have been very focused on doing all we can to open our international borders as safely and quickly as we possibly can do. I want to stress that this is a 14-day pause and we will be working to ensure that we will open our borders as soon as we possibly can. We are acutely aware of the impact this will have on individuals, families and businesses here in Australia but I stress this is a 14-day pause. I would also like to commend the state and territory governments for their response to the issues relating to the Omicron variant. They have been calm, measured and responsible in their approach and I thank them for doing so. As is his habit, Greg Hunt goes through information we already know – vaccination updates, what the government is doing, announcements which been made in the last little bit – before moving on: I want to particularly single out and thank South Africa. South Africa has been very cooperative and transparent, both internationally and directly with Australia. Our High Commission has been working with South Africa, the deputy chief medical officer, Prof Michael Kidd, has been working being South Africa. And the advice is that this may – may – turn out to be a milder variant ... has come very much from the field evidence on the ground in South Africa. We want to acknowledge and recognise it’s a difficult time for them but everybody is working together. Australia’s dealt with challenges and we’re ready for this. We’re able to deal with this and we want to give Australia that confidence. Greg Hunt has called a press conference to give the Omicron update – he’ll be up in just a few minutes. As Calla Wahlquist has been reporting, the Victorian government appears to have the votes to pass its amended pandemic legislation (by one). The other crossbencher the government was negotiating with has said no: NSW and Victoria have reported their Covid data for the day: The nine deaths across Victoria and NSW show that, for many, the virus is still having a massive impact on people’s lives. It’s that time of year again – when everyone argues over whether they have ever heard the word of the year. In case you missed this yesterday: Sarah Martin has a story on an independent challenger for Liberal MP Fiona Martin in Reid: A high-profile NSW Liberal woman is quitting to run as an independent at the next federal election, partly to protest the handling of an internal complaint in which she alleged “inappropriate” behaviour by some senior men within the party and government. Natalie Baini, a lawyer and sports administrator who nominated as a Liberal candidate for the marginal Sydney seat of Reid in May, is withdrawing from the preselection process and quitting the party to run as an independent. Her decision is also due to her concerns about the preselection process, with expectations growing the Liberals will not allow a ballot of members in the seat that would have seen her compete against the sitting moderate MP, Fiona Martin. Baini, who advised the party on Monday that she would be withdrawing from the preselection race and cancelling her membership, told Guardian Australia she had initially decided to nominate after being approached by party faithful unhappy with their representation in Canberra. Transport Matters MP Rod Barton has agreed to support the Victorian government’s pandemic laws in exchange for amendments including giving parliament the power to disallow pandemic orders. In a statement released this morning, the Andrews government said the emergence of the Omicron variant showed the continued need for pandemic powers. They said: Over the past fortnight, we offered negotiations to the entire crossbench, giving them the opportunity to work with us on changes to this bill that would ensure Victoria has such a framework in place. These were rigorous negotiations – and we thank Rod Barton who came to the table in good faith. If this bill passes, we will have strengthened parliamentary oversight, with an independent joint investigatory committee and the ability for the parliament to revoke pandemic orders. The amendments negotiated with Barton include creating a cross-parliamentary committee with the power to recommend the disallowance of pandemic orders. They also state that if such a recommendation is made, the orders can be disallowed by an absolute majority in a joint sitting of both houses of parliament. It also replaces the current detention review officer panel with a new independent merits review for detention orders, and clarifies that complaints made about detention can be filed with the ombudsman. The government will also remove the aggravated offence clause, and require that independent experts conduct a review of a pandemic declaration after 18 months of it being in operation. Again, you’ll hear a lot about “wedge politics” in the coming weeks and months – the religious discrimination bill is just one example. “Wedge politics” refers to an issue which one side of politics raises in order to push the other side into a decision, in order to expose divides. It’s an issue for many reasons – one, it treats politics as a game, when it has real world impact on actual people, and two, it shows politics as being about staying in power, rather than trying to make lives better. The issues used for wedge politics – climate, religion, sexuality, etc – have real world effects that are very important to a lot of people, not as some ephemeral concept, but for their life and identity. They should be treated with the respect they deserve. Paul Karp also has an update on Labor’s position on the religious discrimination bill: Labor will aim to sidestep the religious discrimination stoush by reserving its position on the Morrison government bill until after a committee inquiry. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, took that recommendation to shadow cabinet on Monday evening before Labor caucus will gather on Tuesday, its first meeting since Scott Morrison introduced the bill late last week. On Friday, Morrison referred the bill to a joint human rights committee inquiry reporting on 4 February, despite previously calling for a Senate-only inquiry with no input from MPs. Labor argues that having backed down from that position it would be highly unusual for the government to attempt to force a vote in the House of Representatives before the committee reports, and is seeking to enlist support from Liberal moderates to prevent it happening. Murph has the latest on the the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute annual report – seems more Australians have actually had a look around: Australians are increasingly aware that racism is a problem in their country, while positive sentiment about immigration and multiculturalism has also increased over the past 12 months, according to an authoritative survey on social cohesion. The annual Mapping Social Cohesion Report from the Scanlon Foundation Research Institute, released on Tuesday, has charted a 20 percentage point increase in 12 months in response to the question “How big a problem is racism in Australia?” Back in 2020, 40% of respondents thought racism in Australia was either a very big or fairly big problem. But in the 2021 survey of 3,572 respondents, 60% held that view. The survey authors note “an increase of 20 percentage points in response to a general question of this nature is almost unprecedented in the Scanlon Foundation surveys”, which have been conducted annually since 2007. But they say there is no clear trigger or cultural catalyst explaining such a large shift. Deputy chief medical officer Dr Sonya Bennett has had a chat to the ABC, reminding people to just get vaccinated (viruses, as we know, don’t really give a fig about borders, because they are viruses): What we’re done in Australia is very proportionate and measured and the intent is to slow any spread of this new variant into Australia whilst we learn more about the virus. We’re in a very good position here. Our vaccination coverage is good. The virus does appear to be showing indications it causes mild illness in vaccinated people. So it’s really a reminder, whilst we have high vaccine coverage, we still have a large number of people who don’t have a single dose. So it’s really a reminder for people to consider that. We won’t be able to stop this virus at the border. It does look like it’s highly transmissible and we know even with the strictest mitigation measures with Delta, it’s a virus. It will get through the borders at some stage and spread. So just a reminder to people really to consider both getting double-dose vaccination and, if you’re due for a booster, get that as soon as you can. The World Health Organisation has entered the conversation (via AAP): Developed nations such as Australia have been warned slamming borders shut to countries reporting new Covid-19 variants could backfire. The World Health Organisation says it could make countries less willing to share information about emerging strains. “We don’t like to see that level of restriction because that really punishes [those countries],” WHO spokeswoman Margaret Harris told Sky News on Tuesday. “It makes other countries less comfortable about being so helpful to the rest of the world.” Australia has delayed it reopening to international students and visa holders from Wednesday until December 15 to buy time to find out more about the Omicron variant that appears to be more transmissible. For those asking, there are five cases of the new Omicron confirmed in Australia – all are in quarantine. There are four in Sydney (after two more were confirmed late yesterday) and one in the Northern Territory. All five people had been vaccinated. AAP has this update: The corporate regulator has taken the unprecedented step of launching multiple legal actions at once against one of Australia’s big four banks. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission has hit Westpac with six civil penalty proceedings in the federal court, which could draw a combined penalty of more than $100m. The actions follow separate Asic investigations conducted in 2021, resulting in allegations of widespread compliance failures across multiple Westpac businesses. These include its banking, superannuation and wealth management brands and the former general insurance business. The alleged conduct – mostly involving “poor systems, poor processes and poor governance” – occurred over many years and affected many thousands of consumers, Asic said. “It is unprecedented for Asic to file multiple proceedings against the same respondent at the same time,” Asic deputy chair Sarah Court said on Tuesday. “However, these were exceptional circumstances ... and we decided to expedite those matters for consideration by the court at the earliest opportunity.” Westpac admitted the allegations in each of the proceedings and would remediate about $80m to customers, Asic said. Asic and Westpac will also submit to the court that combined penalties of more than $100m “are appropriate”. The Andrews government has been negotiating with crossbench MPs in an attempt to get the one final vote needed to pass its proposed pandemic laws in the final parliamentary sitting week of the year. Debate on the Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill was postponed earlier this month after former Labor MP Adem Somyurek belatedly declared his vaccination status in order to be able to return to parliament and vote against the bill. The proposed legislation would replace the state of emergency, which is due to expire on 15 December. If it expires before the legislation is past, the Victorian government will not be able to enforce public health orders. Labor had already gained the support of three upper house crossbench MPs – Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party’s Andy Meddick – who negotiated a raft of reforms including a significant reduction in fines for breaching public health orders and a fully funded independent oversight committee. It is now having to negotiate with two more crossbenchers, Transport Matters MP Rod Barton and Sustainable Australia’s Clifford Hayes, to secure the final vote. The pair have called for even greater parliamentary oversight than was negotiated by the other three crossbenchers, and further checks on the new powers. Hayes told AAP late yesterday that negotiations were still ongoing: “I understand the need for some kind of pandemic framework but if we do not achieve a result that withstands expert and community scrutiny, I will not hesitate to vote against the bill.” Solomon Islands province premier Daniel Suidani spoke to the ABC yesterday and said the Australian intervention was “not helpful”. Karen Andrews was asked about that on the ABC and said Australia had made it clear it was not involving itself in the political situation in any way: It was exactly the right move for Australia to make. Let’s be clear, we made that in response to a request from the Solomon Islands’ prime minister. We’re there supporting the Solomon Islands police force. This is a policing matter. We made it very clear that we are not there to participate at all in domestic political matters. We are there to work with the Solomon Islands’ police force to restore law and public order as soon as possible. It was vile and unacceptable that ABC journalists were abused by anti-vaxxers on the weekend, ABC managing director David Anderson told Senate estimates on Monday night. Anderson said ABC journalists were increasingly under attack while out in the field and were also receiving abuse and even threats online which have been reported to police. It is something that is happening at protests and alike. It is quite confronting, it’s completely unacceptable. And it is vile what is happening to some of our people more regularly and more often. We’re having to change the way we might cover a protest or change the way we’re putting people in some of these situations. The minister representing communications minister Paul Fletcher at estimates, Jane Hume, said the government was not responsible for derogatory comments made by senators about the ABC managing director and chair. Hume was asked if the government agreed with comments made by Liberal senator Ben Small to the Australian newspaper on Monday, which included him accusing Anderson of failing in his job. A fish rots from the head, so the managing director needs to account for his leadership when the organisation is falling so short of any reasonable expectation. Hume said Small was in the government but was “not in the executive” and his views “did not represent the views of the government”. Hume also distanced herself from a speech by Queensland senator James McGrath’s last week in which he called for the ABC to be broken up and Triple J to be sold off. The new variant talk has turned attention back to quarantine facilities – Victoria and Queensland are building purpose-built quarantine centres, but the federal government hasn’t pushed ahead with any on its own (Howard Springs in the NT has been expanded). Karen Andrews says there is no need for new quarantine facilities: Look, not at all. Not at all. We have very high vaccination rates. Now, over 86%, in this country. We have very much focused as a government on vaccinations and making sure that Australians are prepared. Purpose-built quarantine facilities are very limited in their capacity. Now, Howard Springs has been very effective at managing international arrivals, particularly those from high risk countries. We’ve had around the country hotel quarantine working very effectively and the good thing about hotel quarantine is that you can manage it up and down as is required. So purpose built facilities, particularly from the federal government’s point of view, have always had a limited life. We have made it clear that any facilities that we will be involved in will need to be multiple purpose so they can be repurposed in the future, for example, if we needed to accommodate, house people, in a future pandemic, or if we particularly needed to look at where we were going to house people during a domestic crisis, which would include floods or bushfires. (Both Queensland and Victoria say their facilities will be able to be multi-use.) What about domestic borders? Karen Andrews: Well, that’s a matter for the state and territory governments to determine. We have been very keen federally to focus on the international borders, because that’s our key responsibility. Look, so far the state and territory first ministers have been very, very conscious of the impacts of the omicron variant but they’ve been taking advice and they’ve been excellent to deal with. They have made it very clear that they are focused on finding out more about this particular variant and what the impacts are. So it has been a very measured response from everyone here in Australia. And that’s very positive. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, is doing the media rounds this morning after the government announced it was pausing the border reopening for skilled worker visa holders and international students. That decision was announced late yesterday after a national security committee meeting. We took the health advice from our chief medical officer last night. So that advice was given to the national security committee of cabinet. We listened very carefully to what Paul Kelly had to say. And the decision that was taken was that we would need to pause. The decision we had already taken in relation to international students and skilled workers. The reason that we did that is because based on the health advice, more time was needed to make sure that we had all the relevant information in relation to that variant. But the good thing is here in Australia we have such a high vaccination rate, over 86% of eligible Australians are double vaccinated, so that does put us in very good stead to face Omicron and any other variant. For those who missed it yesterday, why is everyone talking about an election being held in May? Because the government tabled its proposed sitting calendar for 2022 late yesterday, and it includes minimal sittings in the first four months of the year, and a March budget. As Shane Wright from Nine newspapers pointed out (he tends to know these things) if the budget is held in March, it will be a first – previously the earliest a budget had been handed down was in early April. So the thinking goes, a short February sitting (seven days) then three days of sitting in March for the budget, and then an election in May. (Which potentially means parliament may not sit again until August, given the traditional July break, and the month after an election is usually a rest/down tools time). Scott Morrison has said he would like to hand down a budget. But in reality (except for public servants who have to work to the timetable set down, no matter whether it happens or not) Morrison can call an election whenever he likes (as long as it is before the statutory time period, which in this case for both houses, is 22 May). Which means there can be an election called at any time, no matter what the sitting calendar says. There is nothing stopping Morrison, if he thinks the timing is right, calling an election after the summer holidays (politicians try not to annoy people by calling elections during holiday periods, plus they want you to be able to be in your electorate so you can vote). There could be an election in March, April or May. So while the sitting calendar points to one outcome, it is not the only one. Welcome to the third last sitting day of the year (and possibly before the election), where the government is trying for its latest reset. Scott Morrison is back on the “won’t be distracted” train, where he waxes lyrical about knowing what Australians actually care about. So the government is pushing its social media “reforms”, which are dressed up as protecting young people and women from anonymous trolling and online bullying, but really, is aimed at those looking at defamation action. That legislation should be released today, where we will learn more, including whether the government plans on allowing public funds to be used for defamation action – something Peter Dutton, who sued over a (then deleted) tweet, floated just a short time ago. The government’s voter ID laws, which have been roundly criticised as a solution looking for a problem, are also due for an airing today – despite not having Labor’s support (not having Labor’s support is one of the reasons the government says it is not introducing its integrity commission legislation). But of course, it is all about the new Covid variant, with national cabinet to meet this afternoon to get an update. There is still a lot health experts don’t know about the new Omicron variant – on first impressions, it seems more mild than Delta, but just as contagious. A more mild version of the virus is potentially the first step to it becoming endemic, rather than a pandemic, and there is nothing to suggest that vaccine effectiveness is affected Still, the government that was selling itself as “getting out of people’s lives” has paused the border reopening for skilled visa holders and international holders for two weeks while it works out what Omicron means. So far, that is the only major change. It’s a blow for those on visas hoping to return to Australia. As yet, there is no change for vaccinated Australian passport holders being able to return. There is also no changes for people wanting to leave Australia. We will keep you updated on what happens as it does – including any changes national cabinet decides on. The health expert panel, Atagi, are also meeting to consider whether or not there is any need to bring forward the booster shots from six months to four months (for example), so if there is any decision there, you’ll be among the first to know. Mike Bowers is out and about, and in the Canberra bureau you have Sarah Martin, Paul Karp, Daniel Hurst and Katharine Murphy. It being a parliament sitting, you have Amy Remeikis on the blog for most of the day and the entire Guardian team will keep you in the know on what is happening around the country. I hope you have had your coffee (or three). Ready?And so it was Lionel Messi again, for the seventh time and, barring the most extraordinary of all career finales at the World Cup in Qatar, surely the last. Whatever the idiosyncrasies of the Ballon d’Or, Messi’s excellence has been both absurdly consistent and absurdly resilient, and those seven titles since 2009 are some reflection of that. To achieve that level of sustained success at any time would be spectacular; to do so in the age of Cristiano Ronaldo, who has won five Ballons d’Or since 2008, is extraordinary. No one else in history has won more than three – although there is a pleasing symmetry in the fact that when France Football reevaluated those years before the award was opened up to non-Europeans, Pelé also won seven in 13 years. And yet Messi’s success this year is probably the first that requires some unpacking. For a long time there’s been a sense that he was brilliant and Ronaldo was brilliant and, while the more excitable sections of social media might get very worked up about it, so long as one of them got the award it felt about right. But watching Messi wander about at the Etihad last week, a memory of the player he had been, peripheral other than the moment when he helped create the Paris Saint-Germain goal, it was hard to conceive of him as the best player in the world. PSG have a Ballon d’Or winner at last – but he has not won it for anything he has done in Paris, and there are multiple ironies in that. Neymar fled Barcelona to escape Messi’s shadow, to his own court where he could be king and yet, within five months of following him, the Argentinian has become the first player to win the Ballon d’Or at a French club since Jean-Pierre Papin in 1991. The club will probably see vindication, but Messi’s arrival, well past his best, was part of the same celebrity-driven model of football that has been so deleterious to their chances of European success. Messi did not earn his Ballon d’Or in the Champions League, and he certainly didn’t earn it in Ligue 1 or even La Liga (where Barcelona finished third), but in Brazil at the Copa América. And there is both an appropriateness and a romance to that – even if this was a pointless Copa added to the schedule to compensate federations facing a revenue shortfall because of the restructuring of the global calendar, a grotesque tournament played out in empty stadiums as Covid raged through Jair Bolsonaro’s Brazil, having been moved because of the impact of the pandemic on Argentina and civil unrest in Colombia. In the end, for Argentina, it didn’t matter. They had not won a tournament since 1993. Generations of great players had gone without success at senior level. It looked as if Messi would as well, the doubts about how much he actually cared about playing for his country long since erased by a series of tearful exits from tournaments. This Argentina squad are nowhere near as gifted as many of their forebears. Their manager, Lionel Scaloni, was appointed essentially because someone had to be after the mess of the Jorge Sampaoli reign, and he was cheap. But somehow the alchemy worked and Messi, dominating the tournament in a way no individual player has for at least a couple of decades, inspired a run that culminated in a 1-0 victory over Brazil in the final. It’s true there were only 7,800 at the final, the only game not played behind closed doors, but still, there are few things more appealing to Argentinians than a heist at the Maracanã. “Everything I won was important and beautiful,” Messi said, “but this was the most difficult because I went through many things … it was knock after knock.” The victory, he added, gave him “peace of mind”. Emotional as that moment was, though, the truth is that it’s been some time since Messi, for all his goals and obvious technical ability – those dashing feet, that thrillingly minimalist incisiveness – looked a player of the very highest level in Europe. Even before their financial meltdown, Barcelona had ceased to be a persistent danger in the Champions League, had developed a habit of going out with spectacular collapses. And one of the reasons for that was Messi and the demands that having someone who does not or cannot press places on his own midfield. Robert Lewandowski, for whom the new category of Striker of the Year seemed to be created as a consolation, probably would have won the title last year had it not been over-hastily cancelled because of the pandemic, but racking up goals as Bayern Munich win yet another Bundesliga seems a meagre argument. Jorginho may point to his centrality both in Chelsea’s Champions League success and Italy’s victory in the Euros, and countless Manchester City players may wonder whether their contributions to the Premier League title might not have been recognised, but that’s the irony of modern football and the paradox of the Ballon d’Or: they were cogs within supreme teams, less immediately noticeable than the stars who dominate in less effective sides. That’s why the Ballon d’Or often feels an anachronistic institution, servicing a celebrity culture that is incongruent with the best of modern football. And that’s why Messi was probably the right winner this year, because Argentina’s success in Brazil was a very old-fashioned victory.Doctors and trade unions have joined forces with families bereaved by Covid to highlight issues ranging from border controls to the supply of face masks that they want addressed by next year’s public inquiry into the UK’s handling of the pandemic. The British Medical Association, Trades Union Congress, the Independent Sage group of scientists and human rights campaigners are presenting a united front with Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice to increase pressure on Downing Street to step up preparations for the inquiry. In spite of rising concern about the new Omicron variant found in parts of the UK, they believe the inquiry, which is due to start next spring, remains essential to “save as many lives as possible going forward”. “The fear of a vaccine-resistant variant is explicitly one of the reasons we’ve been calling for an immediate inquiry,” said Jo Goodman, co-founder of the bereavement group. “Can anyone disagree that we’d be in a better position to overcome the Omicron variant if we’d had an independent process for learning lessons from the first three waves?” However, Boris Johnson has yet to announce a chair for the inquiry, after promising the bereaved he would do so by Christmas, or set out the terms of reference. “The prime minister promised us that we’d be consulted on the scope of the inquiry that we campaigned for,” said Lobby Akinnola, a spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice. “We’ve heard no details since, so we’ve written this report to make crystal clear the areas that the Covid-19 inquiry has to cover. We hope he’ll keep his promise to ensure bereaved families are at the heart of this inquiry.” They are also calling on Johnson to officially establish the inquiry before he appoints the chair, making it an offence to lose, destroy or tamper with key evidence. A government spokesperson said: “It is critical we understand what happened in detail, but at the moment it is right that public servants continue to focus their efforts on tackling the pandemic before moving on to the inquiry in spring.” The statutory inquiry is expected to be one of the most extensive, and therefore longest, public inquisitions in recent history. The inquiry into the Grenfell Tower disaster, which cost 72 lives, is on course to have taken four years by the time it wraps up next year. The scope of the Covid inquiry, which claimed nearly 145,000 lives so far, is likely to be far greater. The alliance is calling for the inquiry to look at: Pandemic preparations Public health measures Support for NHS staff, hospitals and care homes Border controls PPE and procurement Vulnerable households 111 services Support for frontline workers Inequalities related to race, disability and regions Differences between devolved nations Prisons and immigration centres Migrants and refugees and the homeless. It includes the human rights charity Amnesty International, the National Care Association, which represents independent care homes, Unison, a trade union for healthcare workers, the Runnymede Trust, a race equality thinktank, and the housing charity Shelter. Gus O’Donnell, the former cabinet secretary who has analysed how a Covid inquiry could work, predicted that it would not be completed until after the next likely general election in 2024. “People want this full version to be run by a judge, so it will be very, very long,” he told the Guardian. “I hope civil servants will get on and do their own ‘lessons learned’ exercises and start acting on the results as soon as they are clear. “I think the main benefit of inquiries is to help you do better next time. That’s why I favoured something quick and dirty to learn the lessons of the first response so we could deal with future waves, like the one we might be entering now.”Mel Brooks is the last comic in the world you can imagine wanting to be Hamlet – although, of course, that role is just another way of getting all the attention. He did play a Shakespearean actor in a 1983 remake of Ernst Lubitsch’s comedy To Be Or Not to Be, but otherwise the Danish you’re most likely to associate with Brooks is the kind you buy in a deli. Now 95, the comedian, screenwriter and director of such beloved spoofs as Blazing Saddles, Young Frankenstein and Silent Movie has written his autobiography. As the title might suggest, All About Me! is very much the work of the man who, as a young Jewish comic in the Borscht Belt resorts, got his break as a “pool tummler” (Yiddish for “entertainer”), his job to keep the guests happy and alert, and stop them falling asleep round the swimming pool. Born Melvin Kaminsky, Brooks grew up in working-class Brooklyn, the youngest of four brothers, whose father died when he was two. There’s a priceless opening shtick about seeing Frankenstein as a boy, and worrying that the monster would get him; his mother reassured him that it would have to shlep all the way from Transylvania, find its way to get to South Third Street, then probably eat the Rothsteins downstairs first. The other childhood stuff is fairly mundane: memories of uncle Lee and religious fanatic Louie from Minsk, “clotheslines full of wet wash” and tributes to his mother, “a true heroine”. Once Brooks enters showbiz, the period he devotes most attention to (45 pages, 15 more than his best-loved film, The Producers) is his long spell writing for TV comic Sid Caesar, an experience that comes across as both the dream and the nightmare of his existence, as traumatic as his wartime service clearing landmines. It was a joyful, frenzied, hugely stressful period that brought on anxiety attacks – not surprisingly, given Caesar’s volatility: he once held Brooks out of a window by his belt. Despite the ensuing therapy, Brooks seems to have little self-awareness when it comes to his own behaviour: like the two occasions when he menaced a colleague into handing over everything in his pockets, the second time making him wade waist-deep in Central Park Lake. Brooks was simply one of life’s “wild beasts”, he says, but doesn’t look further into why certain clowns might have a touch of the sociopath, or just be a pain in the tuchus. He’s good at remembering where jokes came from – like the 48th St impresario drying his underwear, a model for the flamboyantly squalid Max Bialystock in The Producers – but heavy weather when recalling gags and routines: “Nobody knew what was happening but it was absolutely hilarious”… “I don’t know how I held it together”… This is a book that is constantly corpsing. He’s not so hot at theorising, either: he became a clown for the time-honoured reason that “you don’t hit the kid that makes you laugh”; New York humour has “a certain intensity and a certain pulse”; and, bottom line, “Inept idiots will always be fun”. If you were Bialystock, you’d say: “OK kid, what else ya got?” Not enough, alas, to make this an essential read. Among the minute recollections of each of his movies, there’s the odd morsel you may not have known (the deranged Nazi in The Producers was nearly played by Dustin Hoffman); but strangely, he leaves out the most outlandish story about Blazing Saddles, that screen siren Hedy Lamarr sued over her name being taken in vain, with its villain Hedley Lamarr. Nor is this the most revealing treasury of brushes with greatness: he recalls a joke shared with Bob Hope (“We both laughed. Life is funny”), advice and compliments from Alfred Hitchcock, walks with Caesar show colleague Woody Allen (“entertaining chatter”). As for personal life, Brooks refers in passing to the end of his first marriage, with no mention of his first wife, Florence Baum. There are tender recollections of his long marriage to actor Anne Bancroft, but also an uncomfortable moment, more telling than intended: when Bancroft was having trouble rehearsing a scene, he told her: “You know what’s even harder? Writing!” When Bancroft died, Brooks says, “For a long time, I was inconsolable”, but then collaborators “pulled me out of my abyss of despair and we went to work on our next musical together” – a bizarre evasion of an emotional landmine, and perhaps the book’s most poignant moment. Unless you’re a Brooks obsessive, or aching for a couple of transcripts of his very droll The 2000 Year Old Man ad libs with Carl Reiner, this is not the most gratifying read. Go back to his best movies instead: they’re sometimes uncomfortably dated, in places as creaky as Brooks’s knees must be. But you’d have to be Hedy Lamarr not to find them funny. • All About Me!: My Remarkable Life in Show Business by Mel Brooks is published by Century (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe new shadow levelling up secretary, Lisa Nandy, has dismissed a rift between Keir Starmer and Angela Rayner, saying the Labour leader had a right to make the calls on how he chose his frontbench. Nandy said she saw her new role as being “to deliver on the broken promises of the last 11 years” and said there was a “hell of a lot to do” in the department of levelling up, housing, communities, and local government. Nandy, who was moved to shadow Michael Gove and was replaced by David Lammy as shadow foreign secretary, said she had not spoken to Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, since the party’s reshuffle was announced. Rayner’s allies have said they were furious that the changes began during a key speech she was giving to the Institute for Government on cleaning up politics in the wake of the scandals over Conservative lobbying. “I have not spoken to Angela since the reshuffle was announced,” Nandy said. “I have been too busy getting a team together and putting a plan together.” “I have been through a lot of reshuffles over the past 11 years,” she added. “I think that the leader makes the decisions, the gaffer picks the team, that’s how it goes and that’s how it has always gone. Frankly, I couldn’t care less about the circus of who’s in, and who’s out, who’s up, who’s down, who knew, who didn’t.” Nandy said her new role was “a very long title that Michael Gove has concocted for himself”, but said it was a big agenda she wanted to embrace. “It felt a little like coming home, to be honest,” she said. “For the entire time I’ve been in parliament, for the last 11 years, I’ve been fighting for politicians of all political parties to take seriously the fact that there are people across this country who have watched good jobs and investment leave our communities. “That we have got a level of ambition that just isn’t matched by politicians of any political party, certainly not this one, for our futures for our young people, for our towns, and for our villages. “Finally I can say that that is going to change and I am going to make it my mission to bring Labour home to people and to deliver on promises that the government simply isn’t capable of doing.” Starmer lavished praise on Nandy, whose shift from shadow foreign secretary to the levelling-up brief would traditionally be regarded as a demotion – but whose agenda both Boris Johnson and Starmer see as central to the next election. “After 11 years of Conservative mismanagement of our economy, delivering prosperity to all regions and nations in the UK will be a defining mission of the next Labour government, and there will be nobody better than Lisa to lead this work,” Starmer said. The Labour leader carried out a ruthless overhaul of his team on Tuesday, including bringing back Yvette Cooper to the frontbench as shadow home secretary. After an uneasy tussle over energy nationalisation, the former Labour leader Ed Miliband lost his responsibility for the business portfolio, which goes to Jonathan Reynolds. Instead, Miliband has a new role as shadow secretary of state for climate change and net zero. There were also promotions of key figures from the right of the party – including Bridget Phillipson and Wes Streeting, to education and health respectively.Tributes have been paid to the former Coventry City manager John Sillett, who has died at the age of 85. Sillett guided the club to one of the FA Cup’s most memorable wins in 1987, when they beat the favourites Tottenham 3-2 at Wembley. “It’s very sad news,” Steve Ogrizovic, the goalkeeper from the Cup-winning team, told BBC CWR. “My thoughts and condolences go to all of the family. First and foremost, he was a great manager and great coach, and above all that a brilliant raconteur. Whenever he entered a room he lit it up with his charisma and personality. “He had a very shrewd footballing brain and knew how to get the best out of players – he was a real man-manager. He made players feel far far better than they were. The one thing he always did was loved the players who played for him and we certainly loved him.” ‘Snoz’, as Sillett was affectionately known, began his playing career as a full-back at Chelsea. In 1962 he became Jimmy Hill’s first signing at Coventry, costing £3,000, and helped them to the Third Division title two years later, during their ascent to the top flight. After more than 100 games for Coventry, he finished his playing days at Plymouth Argyle. Sillett had two spells in management at Hereford, with whom he won Division Three in 1975–76, either side of four successful years in charge at Coventry. He was chief coach, working alongside George Curtis, when the duo led the Sky Blues to their first major trophy. The 1987 FA Cup final featured a classic diving header by Keith Houchen and ended with Sillett snogging the central defender Trevor Peake while galavanting around Wembley, trophy in hand. “I cried when we won it,” Sillett said in a post-match interview. “It was a great advert for English football at its best – and at its best there was a little team, Coventry City, involved.” In his later years, Sillett was made life president at the club and was often handed the microphone before games in an effort to gee up City’s supporters as the club fell down the league pyramid. He attended his final game this season, watching the revived Sky Blues beat Nottingham Forest in the Championship on the opening day. The chairman of the League Managers Association, Howard Wilkinson, said of Sillett: “He was a genuine, well-meaning gentleman, greatly admired throughout football for his honesty and professionalism. Football has lost a great servant.” A statement from the Sillett family read: “Obviously the family are really saddened by Dad’s passing but we are all so proud of him and what he achieved. His ability to spot things tactically, change them during a game and enhance the abilities of players was top class, the respect he had from top people in the game and the kind words we have already received already underline the high regard in which he was held by the football world. Though he will be desperately missed, his spirit will stay with us forever.”Ari Lennox, the Grammy-nominated US R&amp;B singer, has been arrested at Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport for disturbing public order. Lennox tweeted about the incident, saying “I’m being arrested in Amsterdam for reacting to a woman racially profiling me … Fuck Amsterdam security. They hate black people … I just want to go home. I’ll never leave my house again.” In statements to press, police said: “Our unit found a woman full of emotions, that wouldn’t calm down. That’s why she had to be taken into custody … she was probably under the influence of the alcohol, and this was later confirmed.” Police acknowledged her allegation of racial profiling. “Our concern is to get everything on paper and ask her why she made those threats,” a spokesperson said. A KLM spokesperson said: “There was an altercation … about seeing her identification. The lady did not show the correct document. When the employee confronted her, she drew the wrong conclusions. Meanwhile, her management has apologised to us and she will make a statement later today.” The Guardian has contacted Lennox’s UK representatives for comment and clarification. Lennox, real name Courtney Shanade Salter, has won a sizeable following for her R&amp;B tracks, charting in the US with her debut album Shea Butter Baby. She is signed to Dreamville, the label owned by rapper J Cole, and has supported him on tour. She earned a Grammy nomination for best rap album along with others who appeared on the label’s Revenge of the Dreamers III, which topped the US album chart in July 2019.There are statistics, and there are vignettes in Kate Jenkins’ review that trigger deep revulsion. “The MP sitting beside me leaned over. Also thinking he wanted to tell me something, I leaned in. He grabbed me and stuck his tongue down my throat. The others all laughed. It was revolting and humiliating.” Another person said there were aspiring male politicians “who thought nothing of, in one case, picking you up, kissing you on the lips, lifting you up, touching you, pats on the bottom, comments about appearance, you know, the usual. The point I make with that … was the culture allowed it, encouraged it.” Another: “Frequently, like at least every week, the advice was go and cry in the toilet so that nobody can see you, because that’s what it’s like up here.” Parliament is not the only Australian workplace where women, and some men, feel unsafe. There are plenty of toxic places, plenty of terrible stories. But there are distinctive characteristics of political life that supercharge some of the risks. The Jenkins review lists them. The role of power, gender inequality, a lack of accountability, a culture of entitlement and exclusion. I sit on the edge of this world. I have for more than two decades. Political reporters are in it, and out of it. The hours are long. We all work under high pressure. The occupational requirements are unforgiving. Perfection is a high bar, and I certainly don’t claim to clear it. But if any external agency assessed my own news bureau in the terms in which the sex discrimination commission has just reviewed the parliament, I would dig a large hole, clamber inside, and never get out again. I would be paralysed by shame and remorse. I would feel the clinical rebuke in my marrow. There would not be enough ways of saying sorry. A review like the one tabled on Tuesday should trigger deep institutional atonement (which was actually recommendation one of the Jenkins report: stop, take a beat, acknowledge the wrong). Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The women who spoke to the human rights commission about their private humiliations, people who have spent years being angry, should not be the only ones weeping. The Australian parliament, the political class, the whole arse-covering, ego-driven apparatus, should care enough to grieve. It should care enough to want to be better. But almost immediately after the Jenkins review was made public, someone in the Senate made a noise that sounded for all the world like a dog growling when the Tasmanian independent Jacqui Lambie was on her feet asking a question. The growl (or growl-adjacent sound – the Liberal senator who made it later contested it was a growl while apologising “unreservedly” to Lambie for the interjection) wasn’t audible on the internal broadcast. But the Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young and Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, heard it clearly, and said it came from the government side of the chamber. Both objected in the strongest possible terms. While the Senate did pause momentarily to consider this development, nobody confessed immediately to inappropriate growling, so the Senate moved on – because why would the Senate become paralysed by introspection? As the Jenkins review notes, politicians don’t have conventional employers to account to. They can growl while a woman is talking without being reported to the nonexistent human resources department, and later contest the precise nature of the sound while promising to be better. Tomorrow obviously. Being better always happens tomorrow, or possibly the next day. The house was also in a mood. The testosterone was so thick and so noxious the new Speaker, Andrew Wallace, must have felt at risk of choking. After an extended rhetorical maul – hackles raised, chests out, voices raised, like unruly teenagers on the verge of a schoolyard brawl, man toddlers separated by Perspex screens – Anthony Albanese branded Peter Dutton a “boofhead” and shouted at him to sit down while Dutton accused the Labor leader of having a “glass jaw”. Shortly after this inspiring interlude, Wallace reminded MPs the just-released Jenkins review had called for “respect”. “As I said in my first speech as Speaker, I don’t expect this place to be a monastical library, but the Australian public does not want to see this place descend into a political colosseum,” Wallace counselled. “There will be a lot of discussion over the next days and weeks over respect in this place and I would ask members, all members, to show that level of respect in this chamber as well.” Before question time, we had Scott Morrison in his courtyard, being appalled, yet also not surprised, about the culture depicted by the review. Morrison didn’t say anything terrible. It wasn’t like those excruciating weeks after the former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins came forward with her allegation of sexual assault – an allegation that blew the lid right off the often dysfunctional and sometimes cruel enterprise of working in the belly of the political beast. Back then, every word the prime minister uttered was wrong. Tuesday’s words were better, but just like with the Higgins matter, Morrison was also flat out managing, massaging, shaping. The prime minister’s very obvious objective immediately on receipt of the report was to make sure that nobody concludes this grossness is a Coalition problem, or a government problem. This muck was everybody’s problem. Liberals, Nationals, Labor, Greens, journalists. The prime minister thought this crook culture had been around for a long time – certainly longer than he’d been in the parliament. Everyone had a role in the clean-up. Morrison is correct to say everyone has a role in the clean-up. We are all culpable in our own spheres for knowing about these things, or a version of these things, but moving too quickly past them. But the problem with everybody being responsible is it is too easy for no one to be responsible, particularly when the reform options get hard, and some of the proposed changes will be contentious. Jenkins has given the parliament a structure to work with when it comes to attacking the root causes of some of the problems. But the measure of success will be action – and prompt action. This review is a landmark, but plenty of landmarks gather dust. Going forward, Morrison needs to understand two things. The first is he is responsible for making this change. He is the prime minister who has to build the necessary consensus to get this done. This moment of reckoning has presented on his watch. The other thing Morrison needs to understand is we are watching. We owe it to the victims of this crook culture to go on watching. The prime minister will be judged by what he delivers.At midnight on Monday, Barbados became the world’s newest republic ending 396 years of the British monarchy’s reign over the Caribbean island. Hundreds of people took part in the celebrations in Bridgetown and Barbadian signer Rihanna was declared a national hero. Whether you live or work in Barbados or are part of the diaspora, we would like to know what this moment means to you. We are also interested in hearing about any celebrations you took part in to mark the occasion. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The New South Wales government has introduced new testing measures and increased fines for returned international travellers who breach new Omicron isolation rules, hours after Scott Morrison urged premiers to “not get spooked” by the new variant. On Tuesday evening, as NSW Health confirmed the Omicron strain had been detected in a fifth returned traveller in the state, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, announced fines for breaching the 72-hour home isolation requirement, introduced in response to the variant, would rise to $5,000, up from $1,000. Additionally, all returned travellers – who are already required to get a negative PCR test in order to finish their three-day home quarantine – will now also be required to get an additional PCR test six days after arriving in the state and three days after finishing their isolation. The bolstered precautions, which come into effect from Wednesday, are on top of the harsher measures already in place for travellers from eight African countries of concern. Anyone who has visited those countries in the 14 days prior to entering NSW must enter two weeks of hotel quarantine, with the requirement also in place in Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory. Earlier on Tuesday, the prime minister met with premiers and territory chief ministers at a national cabinet meeting. In addition to NSW’s five cases of the Omicron variant, the Northern Territory also confirmed a case on Monday. Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, briefed national cabinet that the country was “in the early stages of understanding the Omicron variant” which could be more transmissible. Kelly advised the meeting there was “insufficient evidence” that vaccines and treatments were less effective against Omicron than other variants, and no evidence at this stage that Omicron was a more severe disease”, according to a statement issued by Morrison’s office. The statement said the NSW, the ACT and Victoria would continue to require 72 hours of home isolation for all international arrivals, with 14 days quarantine in place for travellers returning from southern African countries. “National cabinet noted that on the basis of advice provided by the chief medical officer, there was no immediate need to change current settings,” the statement said. “National cabinet agreed that the commonwealth and state and territory governments will continue to pursue a suppression strategy, noting the objective is to limit the rate of Omicron incursions into Australia, rather than eliminate it at the border.” Earlier, Morrison said the Australian government’s decision to postpone reopening Australia to international students and skilled workers was just a “prudent and temporary” measure so health authorities could gather information about Omicron. He said he hoped Omicron would “prove to be a more moderate form of the virus”. “We’re not going back to lockdowns, none of us want that. None of us want to go back to those long quarantines and all of those sorts of issues, and the way you protect against that, what we did last night, was protecting against that by having a sensible pause.” The prime minister said the pause would allow the country to “move forward into Christmas with confidence”. Morrison, who is facing an election by May next year and has campaigned for months on the national reopening plan, added: “I look forward to everybody coming together for Christmas and New Year’s and the summer holidays.” Asked whether he would be telling the premiers at national cabinet to hold their nerves and stick to their reopening plans so that the internal borders would open by Christmas, Morrison replied: “Yes.” He said: “We need to make calm decisions, not get spooked by this.” Over the weekend, the federal government announced it was banning international entry to anyone who had been in South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Malawi and Mozambique in the past 14 days, unless they were a citizen or permanent resident of Australia or their immediate family. The government followed that up with a decision on Monday night to shift the date for reopening Australia to international skilled workers and students, as well as humanitarian, working holidaymaker and provisional family visa holders, from 1 December to 15 December. The national security committee also delayed the reopening to travellers from Japan and South Korea to 15 December. Morrison said the decision would not prevent 250 students arriving in Sydney next week in “a pilot program”. He left open the possibility the 15 December date might be brought forward again, if health experts formed a view Omicron was less severe. “Indeed if the information allows us to bring that forward again, great, tremendous, because in Australia, we’re moving forward,” Morrison said. “We’re not going back when it comes to this virus. We’re going to keep moving forward into Christmas and into 2022 and we’re going to open safely and we’re going to stay safely open.” Morrison later told parliament he wanted to maintain momentum for opening up. In question time, Labor confronted Morrison over comments by the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, that purpose-built quarantine facilities were “very limited in their capacity” and that hotel quarantine had worked “very effectively”. Asked whether there had been almost 30 breaches of hotel quarantine that had led to lockdowns and border closures, Morrison sought to attack Labor as “having a bet each way on the pandemic response”. Labor’s health spokesperson, Mark Butler, told parliament Morrison had failed to establish a single new purpose-built quarantine facility, despite expert advice to do so. Also on Tuesday, a worker at a Melbourne Covid-19 testing site was hit by a car while helping people queue at the site. The man in his 50s was taken to hospital, and the driver, who initially fled the scene, was being questioned by police. Meanwhile, the Tasmanian government announced that anyone who had been overseas since 28 November – except for visiting New Zealand’s south island – would not be allowed to enter the state. Anyone who has been overseas in the 14 days before 28 November will need to gain approval to enter as an essential traveller. NSW Health on Tuesday confirmed that another overseas traveller had been infected with the Omicron variant of concern, bringing the number of confirmed cases in that state to five. The traveller had been in southern Africa and arrived in Sydney on flight QR908 from Doha to Sydney on 25 November and travelled by car to the Central Coast, according to a NSW Health statement. The person is now isolating at home on the Central Coast, but “a number of venues were visited by the traveller in Sydney and on the Central Coast before NSW Health directed travellers from southern Africa to go into isolation”. More than 92% of people aged 16 and over have had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, while 87% of that age group are fully vaccinated, according to latest nation-wide figures on Monday.The Wizard of Oz is a movie masterpiece that still glitters like a ruby slipper. Its stage prequel, Wicked, has been running non-stop since 2003. But there is another, lesser-known spin-off from L Frank Baum’s original novel. The Wiz, which filters the same story through the prism of African American culture, won seven Tonys during its initial Broadway run in 1975. It’s surprising, then, that this musical by Charlie Smalls (music and lyrics) and William F Brown (book) has been revived so infrequently over the years, or that reviews have sometimes been the critical equivalent of the bucket of water with which Dorothy vanquishes the Wicked Witch of the West. The show’s reputation was hardly fortified by Sidney Lumet’s 1978 film version, a notorious flop despite its once-in-a-lifetime cast: Diana Ross, Michael Jackson, Lena Horne, Richard Pryor. The London-born director Matthew Xia, who is now overseeing a retooled version at the Hope Mill theatre in Manchester, adored it as a teenage Michael Jackson fan. “I even played the Scarecrow at school when I was 15,” says the bearded, wiry 39-year-old during a break from rehearsals. “Watching the film recently, I think it’s kind of wacky. Some of the choices are, like: ‘Why have you decided to do that? Why is Dorothy 34 years old?’” Its significance, though, remains undiminished. “It is ultimately an experiment in Black culture taking up space.” The affection and esteem in which The Wiz is held, especially by audiences of colour, proves that it is bigger than any one flawed production. The songs, including Ease on Down the Road and the yearning Home, wear their anthemic nature lightly and there is a searching, even holistic quality to the show. It has been a reliable magnet for top-drawer talent: the singer Ashanti played Dorothy in the 2009 Broadway revival, while a 2015 live television version featured Mary J Blige, Queen Latifah and a battalion of Cirque du Soleil acrobats. Rarer is the staging that has matched the concept’s potency and potential. Xia’s reputation for bold choices – he segregated audiences along racial lines for the apartheid drama Sizwe Banzi Is Dead, and presented Rodgers and Hart’s The Boys from Syracuse as a hip-hop concert called Da Boyz – indicates that he could be the one to crack it. As his version begins, Dorothy (Cherelle Williams) is in a Manchester tower block watching footage of the Black Lives Matter protests on television when an electro-magnetic storm catapults her into a fantastical land. Familiar characters are decked out in spiffy threads: the Lion (Jonathan Andre) is a Little Richard-esque dandy in frills and yellow velvet; the gender-neutral denizens of Emerald City wear lime-coloured coats and tinted-lens wrap shades; the Winged Monkeys look like they could duff up The Warriors. The Wiz has always brought out the wildest ideas. In the first UK production, at the Sheffield Crucible in 1980, the Wiz departed in a helicopter at the end. Derek Griffiths, who played the Scarecrow, remembers the experience as a physically taxing one. “It was like an army assault course,” he says. “It’s very much a team show, energetic and vital. What attracted me was that it wasn’t the usual format for a theatre musical. The casting was multicultural, which was very wild and daring then. It broke tradition. It wasn’t accepted by all but it entertained the majority.” For the new Wiz, Leah Hill’s choreography and Sean Green’s arrangements update the palette of a show originally subtitled The Super Soul Musical so that it now incorporates post-70s trends and styles, among them house music, vogueing and hip-hop. Cultural specificity is already woven into its DNA. When 70s audiences heard Evillene, the Wiz’s Wicked Witch, ask Dorothy: “You do do windows, don’t you?”, they would have recognised what the critic Bryant Rollins described in 1975 as “the question asked of every stereotyped Black maid by every stereotyped white employer”. Times change. “That isn’t going to slide as easily now because there is a Black middle class,” says Xia, who has added some contemporary references of his own. “When that can of olive oil spray comes out for the Tin Man, every Black audience member will go: ‘Oh yeah – that’s the finish in the barber’s shop!’ And Evillene’s workers are all in hotel porter outfits with rubber gloves to show that Black people are still doing the menial jobs, the heavy lifting.” The allegorical core of the show has shifted slightly. Xia outlines the original context: “The central analogy relates to the big migration of Black communities moving north in America, post-slavery and post-Jim Crow, from the segregated south.” Knowing that the Black Lives Matter era demanded a rethink, he found inspiration in WandaVision, the Marvel television series about a traumatised superhero taking refuge in a fantasy world modelled on American sitcoms. “I wanted to ask how Dorothy can cushion the trauma of her lived experience. She tries to escape these reminders of how hard it is to be Black today, and suddenly she finds herself in this world of positive Black reinforcement.” That phrase neatly describes the creative team, which is comprised predominantly of people of colour. “If you’re in a ‘diverse’ show, that usually only means the company and the cleaners are diverse,” says Leah Hill. The Wiz, she argues, “shows that there are Black creatives out there. Rather than the old ‘Oh, we just couldn’t find any’ line, which I’ve heard a lot.” Xia nods in recognition: “My friend has a phrase for those sorts of shows – ‘plantation productions’. We aren’t doing no plantation production here.” This has resulted in an uncommon ease in the rehearsal room. “Some of the company have spoken about feeling in the past that they were constantly avoiding little racial fires,” says Hill. “You don’t have that in this space.” Xia explains: “No one’s asking them, ‘Can you be a bit more Black? Can you do something with your hands that’s a bit … Blacker?’” Tarik Frimpong, the Mary Poppins Returns star who plays the Scarecrow, has had his share of those sorts of experiences. “When the people behind the table are not people of colour, it can sometimes make for a dynamic that’s … interesting,” he tells me. “It can take the form of micro-aggressions or people pulling from cultures they don’t fully understand, or else you have to pick up your director because it doesn’t feel right to just be guessing which accent we should use for a character.” The stakes feel high for Xia. “The show means so much to the Black community,” he says. “It’s a cultural artefact, and it’s always been about Black joy. We just need it in a different way now. Maybe that’s why it’s done so rarely. It’s in those really acute moments that we go: ‘OK, we need rescuing again. Break glass in case of emergency – it’s time to bring out The Wiz!’” Racism has been so ubiquitous that the show could probably have been staged at any point and still captured a moment or provided balm for a wound. It debuted in the UK the year before the 1981 uprisings in Brixton, Handsworth and Toxteth. The year after a 1984 revival at the Lyric Hammersmith, London, starring Clarke Peters of The Wire as Scarecrow, several UK cities were once again in flames. One recent production, directed by Josette Bushell-Mingo in Birmingham, opened less than two months before the 2011 London riots, which were sparked by the police shooting of Mark Duggan. It arrives in Manchester now in the wake of global outrage over the murder of George Floyd. As Cherelle Williams insists, though: “The Wiz shows our love and passion. The struggle is always there but it doesn’t have to be just about the struggle.” Back in the rehearsal room, joy is the prevailing emotion as the company romps through the second act, their various somersaults, splits and soft-shoe shuffles astonishing to witness at such close quarters. Once they are all wiping their brows, Xia, who used to dream of being a magician, makes an announcement: “Remember, the illusionist is coming tomorrow at 2.30 …” As I leave, he pulls me aside and produces a photograph taken during his school production of The Wiz. Sure enough, there he is on stage in straw hat and yellow scarf, his mouth agape, gazing expectantly at the audience – and the future. The Wiz is at Hope Mill theatre, Manchester, until 16 JanuaryAs new cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant are uncovered across the globe and threaten to spread in America, US officials are reacting by urging vaccinations and boosters instead of imposing restrictions which have increasingly provoked political fights. But the US should quickly invest in other tools as well, experts said, including testing, genomic sequencing and surveillance, better communication, and a strong focus on global vaccine equity to prevent the emergence of new variants. All of that would prepare America better to deal with a variant that many experts suspect is probably already inside the country, even if undetected so far. Joe Biden sought to reassure Americans that his administration is taking steps to slow the spread of the new, potentially serious coronavirus variant in a press conference on Monday. “This variant is a cause for concern, not a cause for panic,” the US president said. Biden focused on the importance of vaccinations, including booster doses for adults. But national shutdowns or restrictions, like business closures or masks and vaccine requirements in public places, are off the table because “people are vaccinated and they’re masked,” Biden said. A large number of mutations in Omicron may make this variant more transmissible than others and better at evading immune responses. Early evidence suggests the variant more easily reinfects those who have survived Covid previously. If the new variant is more transmissible or able to evade the vaccines, vaccinations and booster doses will be important to strengthen immune responses. Boosters not only elicit more antibodies, but they also seem to produce a wider array of antibodies, which may be important in responding to a variant that can evade some immune responses. And vaccinating those who aren’t yet vaccinated takes on a new urgency amid early reports that those who have recovered from Covid previously may be reinfected with Omicron. Another tool Biden has sought to use is travel bans for certain countries. The US banned flights from eight southern African countries, only two of which – Botswana and South Africa – have detected cases of the new variant. But vaccines and travel bans aren’t the only tools the US should employ, experts said. “Testing is the number one thing that we really need to be on top of right now,” Katelyn Jetelina, assistant professor of epidemiology with the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, told the Guardian. PCR tests are very effective at identifying a key feature of this variant, known as an S-gene dropout, before full genomic sequencing takes place. And making all types of testing, including rapid tests at home, easy and accessible would help curtail the spread of Omicron and other variants, including the current Delta wave. “We’re ignoring what we were seeing in the UK and northern Europe and Germany, and ignoring what we saw in Michigan and Minnesota,” Larry Brilliant, CEO of Pandefense Advisory and senior counselor to the Skoll Foundation, told the Guardian. “That was a mistake. It was obvious that surge would come to the whole country.” Sequencing positive tests is also important to understand which variants are circulating. The US lags behind many countries in genomic sequencing, and there are vast differences between states. “We’re not doing nearly enough genomic sequencing in this country still,” Céline Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University and Bellevue Hospital, told the Guardian. “I’m sure we have Omicron here in the US; we just haven’t detected it yet.” Another underused tool for monitoring the spread and prevalence of the virus is wastewater surveillance, which can often be a “canary in the coalmine” to warn of local surges even before they are detected by testing for the virus, Gounder said. New antiviral treatments from Merck and Pfizer could make a difference, but they need to be free and widely available, Gounder said. “You definitely want to make it broadly available, and it needs to be where you literally have one-stop shopping” – where antivirals are offered immediately after a positive test, she said. And one of the most important ways to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant – and the emergence of others like it – is to vaccinate the world, Brilliant said. “We should be flooding the zone,” he said, with both vaccines and PCR tests that can detect the variant. Quickly deploying vaccines to countries where Omicron is detected but vaccination rates remain low would be a major step toward halting transmission of the variant, and access to the vaccines and vaccine hesitancy must also be addressed, he said. “It’s our best hope right now.” Although there are more questions than answers about Omicron, other precautions that have helped with previous variants will still help here: masking, ventilating indoor spaces, distancing, avoiding large gatherings. ”I know everyone’s sick of us saying that, but stick to what we know right now,” Jetelina said. “If we get everyone wearing a mask, that will certainly help calm the fire in the United States right now.” The US was already enduring a new wave in cases driven by the Delta variant, and officials were opposed to national public restrictions, even though most Americans support mask and vaccine mandates for public places, according to two polls from August. Local health measures have become markedly more difficult to implement in many places. More than half of US states have seen their public health powers sharply curtailed during the pandemic, making it harder to respond to new variants than when Covid first emerged. Many of the questions about Omicron will only be answered in coming weeks, as countries monitor cases of the new variant and as scientists conduct experiments to test the mutated virus’s ability to break through immunity responses. If updated vaccines and boosters are needed to combat this variant, their development will be speeded up, Biden said. Leading vaccine makers, including Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech, are already working to reformulate vaccines to be more effective against this variant, with new vaccines potentially available early next year – to countries that can access them.Fans of famed rivals Ohio State University and the University of Michigan often boast of how little they have in common. But two of America’s biggest college sports programs are bonded by one issue: a history of sexual abuse perpetuated by team doctors. On Saturday OSU and Michigan battled in front of 110,000 fans on the football field – an occasion so momentous it’s known simply as The Game. But elsewhere on the Michigan campus former athletes from both universities gathered in front of Michigan president Mark Schlissel’s house to shine a light on the sexual abuse they endured during their time at the colleges. The protest was spearheaded by Jon Vaughn, a former running back for Michigan, who went on to play four years in the NFL. Now, despite the longstanding rivalry between the universities, the men have formed a survivor solidarity group. “Toxic masculinity is an overused term, but I’m putting my name on this, because some other man is out there struggling with their own trauma and the stigma attached,” said Tom Lisy, a wrestler at OSU in the late 1980s. He was abused by an OSU team doctor, Richard Strauss, and had driven from Cleveland to attend the protest. “If sexual assault can happen to the men on the field – these athletes – then it can happen to anyone. I’m out here raising awareness of that,” said Lisy. For seven weeks and despite increasingly frigid temperatures, Vaughn and a rotation of fellow survivors from in and out of state, have slept outside Schlissel’s home, speaking to students and passersby about former Michigan team doctor Robert Anderson. Hundreds of former Michigan athletes have accused Anderson of abusing them between 1966 to 2003. The survivors of his abuse, who include prominent football and basketball players, allege Anderson fondled them and repeatedly performed unnecessary rectal and genital exams. The case sent shockwaves across the state and struck a chord with Michigan’s neighbor and rival in Ohio. Anderson died in 2008 and never faced charges over the accusations. At the same time Anderson was at Michigan, Strauss was conducting similar abuse at OSU. Strauss sexually assaulted hundreds of male athletes over the course of decades. Like Anderson, he did so under the guise of medical treatment. Strauss died by suicide in 2005. The Strauss case has been called the most sweeping sex abuse scandal in the history of American higher education. Despite that, this September a federal judge dismissed some of the biggest remaining lawsuits over the university’s failure to stop the sexual abuse. The judge acknowledged it is indisputable that Strauss abused hundreds of young men but ultimately agreed with Ohio State’s argument that the statute of limitations expired. Both universities have issued apologies for the abuse and have taken steps to prevent such cases happening in the future, although they have been accused by some survivors of doing little to prevent it in the first place. On the day of The Game, fraternity houses proudly displayed bedsheets spraypainted with unsubtle sentiments like “Fuck Ohio”. Just blocks away Vaughn – with the support of current students and fellow survivors of Anderson, Strauss and Larry Nassar – has constructed what can only be described as an encampment. In addition to his camper van, there’s a cluster of tents, two poster boards that read “Support the Survivors” filled with hundreds of signatures, a number of smaller signs with data from campus safety reports, and haunting messages like “They All Knew.” Throughout the day, men wore and distributed t-shirts that read, “#MeToo: They All Knew,” in the fonts and colors of both teams, buttons emblazoned with “Hail to the Victims” a nod to Michigan’s fight song and facemasks with “Survivors” embroidered front and center with the ‘O’ as OSU’s famous block O. Despite weeks of protest on campus, Vaughn has yet to receive any personal acknowledgement from Schlissel, who has called the Anderson case “an enormous liability” for the university with regard to the financial impact ongoing litigation will most certainly have. However, Michigan students are certainly paying attention. In recent weeks, many have approached Vaughn to share their own stories of assault. “The first day I was out here with Jon, this woman approached us and the longer we talked, I realized she was describing her rape here on campus,” said Tad DeLuca, one of the first whistleblowers about Anderson’s abuse. “This happens all the time. We’ve probably talked to 300 or 400 people and students.” Students are also joining in the protest. In the run-up to The Game, a statue of Michigan’s former head football coach Bo Schembechler was splattered with red paint. “Bo knew #hailtothevictims” was painted on the ground alongside. Schembechler’s time at the university overlapped with Anderson’s and it has long been reported – even by Schembechler’s own son – that he was aware of the abuse. “It would’ve been a lot more than red paint if I’d have done it,” said Vaughn. Despite support from students, Vaughn and his fellow protesters aren’t universally welcomed. Indeed, Michigan’s current head coach, Jim Harbaugh, has defended Schembechler. “There was nothing that ever was swept under the rug or ignored. He addressed everything in a timely fashion,” Harbaugh, who played under Schembechler during his time at Michigan, said. “Fuck him. That’s the most insensitive, irresponsible comment ever, when you know your teammates suffered rape,” Vaughn responded in a recent edition of Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel. “Fuck you, Jim Harbaugh, and fuck everybody that follows you.” In the midst of this very public fight, many of the men are only just beginning to reckon with the years of trauma, realizing it manifested in ways that include avoiding routine doctor visits and issues with internalized rage and alcohol abuse. Lisy said he only recently found a way to inform his now adult children. How recent? “Yesterday,” he said with tears in his eyes. Two hours before gametime, Stephen Snyder-Hill prepared signs to carry to the stadium. Snyder-Hill, a survivor of Strauss’s abuse at OSU, wrote in permanent marker: “Mid-game score: Strauss: 2,800+, Anderson: 2,000+”. It was a reminder of how many assaults the doctors are accused of making. “This is dark,” he laughed. Snyder-Hill, a military veteran and LGBTQ+ advocate, recalled the university asking him in 2015 to give a Ted Talk on how people can use their voice to drive change. The invitation came just three years before he began speaking publicly about his experience with Strauss – and what he says was the university’s subsequent refusal to believe him (an allegation that OSU denies). “The irony,” he deadpanned. Crowd reactions varied as the men marched to the stadium with signs in tow. There were eyerolls, scoffs and off-handed comments like, “Let people have fun today.” Revelers in the street, outside bars and on the lawns of fraternity houses either fell silent, jeered, or tossed out a half-hearted “Fuck OSU”. “This is the best tailgate I’ve ever been to,” joked Snyder-Hill. But perhaps the most poignant response came from a man and his adolescent daughter who warily approached the group after they’d reached the stadium. “That’s really terrible, I’m sorry” he told them, solemnly gesturing towards a sign that read, “I was molested at OSU.” He added: “I don’t have anything to offer other than I’m just sorry.” The day’s protest culminated with the group outside the stadium, close to a pre-game TV broadcast analyzing the two team’s chances. The signs appeared smaller as the stadium loomed and thousands of fans decked out in OSU and Michigan colors milled through its arches. It was a stark reminder that, for most fans, the battle these men are waging is secondary to the one on the field. Just as they were about to leave, another bystander teetered over. “I know I’ve had some to drink, but isn’t there a better day to have this conversation?” he asked.Bow Down The premise was staring the world in the face: “Women have been expressing themselves since the beginning of time. Yet, ask around and you’ll find that most people struggle to name even one non-male artist from before the 20th century.” Over two seasons, Frieze magazine’s editor-at-large, Jennifer Higgie, has sought to fix that. Each episode features a guest talking about a significant female artist from the past, sometimes only recently deceased (such as feminist film-maker Chantal Akerman, who died in 2015), or long overlooked (such as the 19th-century Argentinian neo-classicist Lola Mora). Higgie’s project has since expanded into books and radio. Awaye This Indigenous culture show from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is hosted by Rudi Bremer, a radio broadcaster of Kamilaroi descent. Through deep dives into poetry, music, painting and ritual, each episode is a prelude of sorts: you come away wanting to take a trip to the library. In one recent episode, the artist Pedro Wonaeamirri details how he collects white ochre near the beach and yellow ochre from further inland, and how he makes red ochre from burning yellow. “I want people to hear and understand where I am coming from, not just painting,” he says. “You share your culture – that’s how people will understand where you’re from.” Thought Pieces This is a newbie from Mack Books, a fantastically good indie art publisher. Each episode features a single text read by its author. Episode one is the poet Eileen Myles reading an essay they wrote about looking at photographs by Peter Hujar and Moyra Davey – New Yorkers, all three. If you don’t know those names, or any of the others Myles evocatively tacks to the wall of a downtown Manhattan apartment, it won’t be any less listenable. Other great episodes include the film-maker RaMell Ross’s manifesto for a personal, decolonised poetics (“Welcome the dream”) and Paul Graham on his 1986 documentary masterwork Beyond Caring, surreptitiously shot in unemployment offices in Thatcher’s Britain. Shade Of the 40-odd discussions Lou Mensah has hosted to date, the 30 May 2020 episode stands out. George Floyd had been murdered days earlier and Mensah’s guest was the Dominican-American art historian Angelina Coronado. She described an early 20th-century fresco by the Brazilian painter Candido Portinari – Portrait Bust of a Mulatto Woman, from 1937 – and went on to dig into how the African diaspora was spoken about and depicted across the Americas in the early modern period. Personally, she told Mensah, research into this field had been an exercise in finding belonging. This podcast is a quiet space in which to ask good questions and be heard. Conversations range across the cultural spectrum, unpicking how creativity, race and identity intersect. Listening in always feels expansive. A Brush With … Launched in 2017, the Art Newspaper’s Week in Art podcast has been the engaging news digest you’d expect. Since July 2020, though, A Brush With … has seen host Ben Luke hand over the mic to the artists. He introduces the guest (Glenn Ligon, Alberta Whittle and Tacita Dean, among others) then lands on one salient characteristic of their work (Ligon’s economy of language, Whittle’s empathy, the poetry in everything Dean does). It serves to open up the multifaceted, often intractable approach they each have to making art: the James Baldwin essay Ligon stencilled out in 13-plus metres of coal dust on canvas; the 150 effigies Oscar Murillo burned in the Colombian hinterland. “A first encounter,” Luke says, “is never forgotten.”Maybe you don’t go to Iranian cinema for nail-biting action and suspense. But that’s what you are given in this arresting portmanteau film, the Golden Bear winner at last year’s Berlin film festival. It is written and directed by film-maker and democracy campaigner Mohammad Rasoulof, who has repeatedly been victimised by the Iranian government for his dissident “propaganda” – most recently, in 2020, with a one-year prison sentence and two-year ban on film-making. As with Rasoulof’s fellow Iranian director Jafar Panahi, a ban of this sort can be finessed, by playing on the government’s strange pedantry and hypocrisy. If the film is technically registered to someone else and shown outside Iran at international film festivals where its appearance boosts Iran’s cultural prestige, the authorities appear to let it slide, though persist with harassment. There Is No Evil consists of four short stories – with twists and ingeniously concealed interconnections – on the topic of the death penalty and how it is poisoning the country’s soul. Hundreds of people are executed a year in Iran, including children. Execution of the condemned criminal is the job of civilian functionaries but also widely carried out by soldiers doing compulsory national service. In the first section, entitled There Is No Evil, the secret horror of the death penalty is the unacknowledged elephant in the room. Heshmat (Ehsan Mirhosseini), is a dull salaryman, who is shown living his ordinary life after the working day is done: picking his daughter up from school, dealing with his mother-in-law, taking the family out for pizza. It all seems blameless and bland until the working life resumes the next day. The second part, entitled She Said: “You Can Do It”, is where we get the thriller-style tension. Pouya (Kaveh Ahangar) is a young national service conscript horrified at the realisation that he must kill a condemned man. It is his job to accompany the prisoner from the cell to the gallows where he must kick the stool away. Does he have the nerve to turn his own weapon on his fellow soldiers? In the third, Birthday, Javad (Ahangar) is a national-service conscript taking advantage of the extra-long leave given to those who have done their execution duty, to travel to the country and propose to his girlfriend on her birthday, only to discover a hidden horror for which he is responsible. In the fourth section, Kiss Me, a musical cue discreetly hints at a relation with a story that has gone before: a middle-aged couple living in a remote, mountainous part of Iran play host to their sophisticated niece who has been living in Germany. There is great technique in the storytelling, and Rasoulof’s outrage and nausea at the state-sanctioned murder gives the film passion. • There Is No Evil is in cinemas from 3 December.The Guardian won the three big awards at the Football Supporters’ Association Awards last night (Monday 29 November), including the coveted newspaper of the year prize. The FSA, formerly known as the Football Supporters’ Federation, represents match-going fans across the UK, with the awards voted for by more than 40,000 fans. The Guardian won newspaper of the year for the eighth time in a row. Football Weekly, the Guardian’s popular podcast hosted by Max Rushden, Barry Glendenning and guests, was awarded podcast of the year, while Jonathan Wilson won writer of the year for his weekly column in the Observer. The Guardian dominated the writer of the year shortlist with journalists Suzanne Wrack and Jonathan Liew also shortlisted in the category, plus football cartoonist David Squires was featured in the online media of the year shortlist. You can view a full list of winners from the Football Supporters’ Association Awards here.José Manuel Barroso European Commission president, 2004-14 In the 10 years I led the European Commission, Angela Merkel was clearly the most influential national leader in Europe. But at her first G8 summit, in 2006, she was still relatively shy, maybe even a bit suspicious, as the photo shows. My impression is that this didn’t have anything to do with her being a woman. Instead, I linked it to her background: politicians from countries with a recent totalitarian past tend to be a little reserved when they first enter the European or international stage. I remember a conversation with her and the president of Chile, Sebastián Piñera. Piñera had entered politics at the end of the Pinochet era, after a career in business. She asked why did he engage in politics because she was trying to compare her political experience, coming also from a non-democratic country, with that of the Chilean president. Merkel was very candid: she told us that when she was very young she wanted to join the Young Pioneers, the East German socialist party’s youth organisation, not because of its ideology but because there were some interesting activities and some travel there, but she understood that she would never be welcomed there as a daughter of a Christian pastor. Her attitude towards politics was one of a pragmatic distrust of power. This also involved, at least at the beginning of her relationship with Nicolas Sarkozy, the leader of France, her biggest ally in Europe, a very clear attitude of mistrust. I was in many meetings with the two of them because of the sovereign debt crisis, and you could hardly have found a more different pair of people in terms of temperament: one of them a true intuitive political animal, the other rational, prudent, detail-oriented. I saw her emotionally hurt by comments Sarkozy made. Over a glass of wine after a dinner – Merkel likes a good glass of red, just not during Lent – she confessed to me that she heard the French president saying that France, unlike Germany, did not constantly have to apologise for the past. She was almost crying when she relayed that episode. People have an image of Merkel as being rational to the point of coldness. But I saw her several times with sincere emotion. She’s very German, at the end of the day, a patriot, and a passionate supporter of the German football team, who once complained to the Italian prime minister Mario Monti about his country’s players being too aggressive in a match against her side. And yet she is very rationally pro-European: in spite of her suspicions, she tied the fate of the German people to the European Union and the eurozone, eventually supporting all the instruments introduced to protect the single currency. With Sarkozy, too, she knew that it was vital for Germany and France to find a common ground, and she worked on that. Germany in the Merkel era has been criticised for allowing economic interests to influence its stance on Russia. That overlooks her strong support for sanctions after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and her clear words on the poisoning of Alexei Navalny. With Vladimir Putin, the only other leader from that photo in 2006 who is still in power, Merkel always got the tone right. She has shown respect for Russia and its history, and she would have never called it a “regional power” like Obama did. At the same time, she was always extremely firm on matters of principle. I remember the 2007 EU-Russia summit in Samara and a conversation between Putin, Merkel and myself. There had recently been a rupture of the Druzhba pipeline system, which is crucial for transmitting oil to western Europe and the Baltic states. We knew Russia was behind it, but Putin denied it, claiming it was an accident. Merkel pushed him brilliantly. Why don’t you repair it, she asked. It’s expensive, Putin said. We’ll pay for it, Merkel replied. Putin lost his temper at that point. Why are you always defending the Baltics, he asked us. Merkel had learned something from Helmut Kohl: in the European Union, you have to pay attention to everyone, not just the big personalities and the big countries. You could also see that at G20 summits: most leaders enter the room and only shake hands with their counterparts. Merkel was different. She would also say hello to the aides of different delegations. She wouldn’t just say hello to Obama, she would also speak to Mike Froman, the US president’s Sherpa. Of course, Froman was delighted. Why was she doing it? I think it’s partly her temperament, but she also knew she could get more information out of the aides who had read the paperwork with more detail than the heads of state. Tony Blair UK prime minster, 1997-2007 Angela Merkel has often defined modern Germany. Not in terms of her longevity in office, but in the spirit she has symbolised: calm, assured, reasonable and rational, sound common sense personified, collaborating across national boundaries, ushering in progressive reform at home. I was close to her predecessor, Gerhard Schröder, coming from the same wing of politics as we did, but got to know Angela first when she was leader of the opposition and then as chancellor during my final years as prime minister when we developed a friendship that has endured after I left office. Her period as chancellor has seen her weather the financial crisis, the threat of populism, the refugee crisis, Brexit and now Covid. Her strategic management of the country, as well as deep contribution to European affairs, has been a bedrock of stability in a period of deep change and challenge. Many will remember her chancellorship for highly competent crisis management, pragmatism and seriousness. But my recollections of our interactions that are as much about her warmth, her wisdom and her humour. One of the recent times we met in Berlin we concluded a meeting on the future of Africa, only for her to realise the Chancellery appeared completely deserted. Unperturbed, Angela got up and said she would escort us out the building herself. After a number of wrong turns, the building being something of a labyrinth, she finally managed to escort us out, but completely without irritation or any sense of status. Each politician has a dominant part of their political psyche. For Angela, it is seeing compromise, and the navigation of political challenge with the maximum attention to practical solution, as a strength and not a weakness. Throughout the eurozone crisis, she performed an intractable task: helping the poorer countries of the European Union in the face of the existential threat to their stability, whilst keeping German public opinion onside, which not unnaturally felt Germany should not have to bail out those countries whose reforms were proceeding too slowly. In fact, her legacy on Europe is to have steered it through extraordinarily difficult times, when a Europe now of 27 countries has had to struggle with multiple crises. I know how she felt about Brexit – she was profoundly saddened by it. But she was always afterwards determined not to be churlish about the decision the British had taken. Even her greatest domestic crisis – the pledge to take a million Syrian refugees – came from a place of compassion. She was the arch anti-populist, in character and policy. Her leadership will be deeply missed. Romano Prodi Italian prime minister, 2006-08 The last time I met Angela Merkel was in Assisi in 2018 when the Franciscan Friars conferred on her the “Lamp of Peace” because of her merits in preserving peace in Europe. During the ceremony I reflected on the reasons why she deserved the award: not because of her strong declarations or unexpected actions, but rather for succeeding in balancing Germany’s national interests with the exigencies of the European project. Indeed, while acknowledging the increasingly dominant role of Germany in the economy of the continent, she was also able to mediate between nationalistic pressures and the solidarity with European partners. Although this dilemma arose on many occasions, she always managed to find a final compromise, as in the Greek and the Syrian refugee crises. She was able to reconcile short-term pressures with the long-term interests of European solidarity, which is indispensable also for the future role of Germany in the world. Thanks to the trust that the German people have granted her, Chancellor Merkel has had the opportunity to develop a new European strategy after the pandemics. The next-generation EU is not only the symbol of the common fight against the crisis but also and foremost a sign of the irreversibility of the European project. This is the great legacy that Angela Merkel will leave for the future of Germany and Europe.Good morning. Sources have told the Guardian that just hours before the deadly attack on the US Capitol this year, Donald Trump made several calls from the White House to top lieutenants at the Willard hotel in Washington to discuss ways to stop or delay the certification of Joe Biden’s election win from taking place on 6 January. The former president relayed that his vice-president, Mike Pence, was reluctant to go along with the plan to commandeer his largely ceremonial role at the joint session of Congress in a way that would allow Trump to retain the presidency for a second term. He then pressed his aides about how to stop Biden’s certification from taking place, and delay the certification process to get alternate slates of electors for Trump sent to Congress. Why is this significant? Trump’s remarks reveal a direct line from the White House and the command center at the Willard. The conversations also show Trump’s thoughts appear to be in line with the motivations of the pro-Trump mob that carried out the Capitol attack. When did Trump make the calls? He phoned his lieutenants at the Willard sometime between the late evening on 5 January and the early hours of 6 January after becoming furious at Pence for refusing to do him a final favor. Meanwhile, the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack has recommended the criminal prosecution of Jeffrey Clark. Biden advises ‘concern, not panic’ over Omicron and says no to lockdowns Joe Biden said yesterday that the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus was a “cause for concern, not a cause for panic” and ruled out a further lockdown, as the US implemented restrictions on travel from South Africa and several other countries. In remarks from the White House, Biden urged all Americans to get vaccinated, including booster shots, saying it was the best protection against the new variant. He warned that travel restrictions which took effect yesterday would not prevent the spread of the virus in the US. He also said the ban would give public health officials “time to take more actions, to move quicker, to make sure people understand you have to get your vaccine”. No cases of the variant have yet been identified in the US. Biden said it was only a matter of time. “Sooner or later, we are going to see new cases of this new variant here in the United States, and we’re going to have to face this new threat, just as we have faced the ones that came before it,” Biden said after meeting his Covid-19 advisers. What else is the government going to do? Biden promised to put forward a more detailed strategy on Thursday. “Not with shutdowns or lockdowns,” he said of the forthcoming plan, “but with more widespread vaccinations, boosters, testing and more.” Jack Dorsey steps down as Twitter chief executive and is replaced by Parag Agrawal The co-founder of Twitter, Jack Dorsey, has announced he is stepping down from his executive role at the social media company and will be replaced by the chief technology officer, Parag Agrawal. The surprise move ends Dorsey’s much-criticized tenure as chief executive officer of both Twitter and Square, his digital payments company, which led to Twitter stakeholders Elliott Management and billionaire investor Paul Singer calling on him to step down from one of those roles. “I’ve decided to leave Twitter because I believe the company is ready to move on from its founders. My trust in Parag as Twitter’s CEO is deep. His work over the past 10 years has been transformational. I’m deeply grateful for his skill, heart and soul. It’s his time to lead,” said Dorsey. Why has he been criticized? Investors and some staff have questioned Dorsey’s management style and have worried that he is stretched too thin by his roles at both companies. Who is the new chief executive? Agrawal is a 37-year-old immigrant from India and relatively unknown executive who has been at Twitter for 10 years. He is considered a “‘safe’ pick who should be looked upon as favorably by investors”. In other news … Elizabeth Holmes has testified that she was emotionally and physically abused by her former lover and business partner, Sunny Balwani, as she attempts to refute accusations that she lied about Theranos’ core blood-testing technology. Jussie Smollett “is a real victim” of a “real crime”, his attorney said in opening statements at the ex-Empire actor’s trial yesterday, rejecting prosecutors’ allegation that he staged a homophobic and racist attack in Chicago. As Barbados removes the Queen as its head of state and becomes a republic, the monarch has sent her congratulations on the nation’s “momentous” day. Sandra Mason has replaced the Queen as head of state as Barbados sheds the vestiges of a colonial system stretching back 400 years. Ilhan Omar said she had an “unproductive” call with Lauren Boebert yesterday regarding the Colorado rightwinger’s Islamophobic comments she made towards the Minnesota Democrat last week. Omar says she ended the call after Boebert “doubled down on her rhetoric”. Stat of the day: Merriam-Webster’s word of the year follows 1,048% rise in searches From questions over mandates to concerns over global distribution, “vaccine” has been the clear word of the year, according to dictionary publisher Merriam-Webster. The choice of word of 2021 was a seemingly obvious one for the US publisher, which said searches for “vaccine” on its website increased by 601% compared with last year, amid a broad rollout of vaccinations for Covid-19. The change from the pre-pandemic days of 2019 is even more stark, said the dictionary maker, with searches for the word soaring by 1,048%. Don’t miss this: How activism helps undocumented immigrants cope with trauma For at least a decade, researchers have documented mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression, PTSD and feelings of low self-worth in America’s immigrant communities. In Arizona, the center of the US’s immigration wars, those who have experienced such traumas first hand have also pioneered ways to respond to it and are training others seeking to treat it. The stories told by immigrants in Maricopa county illustrate the power of activism to reshape trauma and cope with it. … Or this: The plan to transform one of New York City’s dirtiest freeways into green space It’s an appalling freeway. It’s loud, congested, and contributes to some of the nation’s highest asthma rates. Residents and activists have long described it as a form of environmental racism that in effect splits the Bronx in two. But now, after years of organizing from community groups and state lawmakers, there’s federal funding to develop a plan: cover portions of the highway with green space and reconnect neighborhoods separated by the structure. Climate check: World’s vast networks of underground fungi to be mapped for first time Vast networks of underground fungi – the “circulatory system of the planet” – are to be mapped for the first time, in an attempt to protect them from damage and improve their ability to absorb and store carbon dioxide. Fungi use carbon to build networks in the soil, which connect to plant roots and act as nutrient “highways”, exchanging carbon from plant roots for nutrients. Hotspots of mycorrhizal fungi are thought to be under threat, from agriculture, urbanisation, pollution, water scarcity and changes to the climate. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week. Last Thing: David Attenborough intervenes after Adelaide shopping centre bee plaque misquotes him A suburban South Australian shopping centre has created a buzz after it falsely attributed a quote about bees, written on a plaque in a bathroom hallway, to the famous British naturalist Sir David Attenborough. The plaque, labelled “honeybee propaganda”, has been removed after Attenborough himself intervened. It all started in July when wildlife sciences graduate Heath Hunter alerted the shopping centre’s management that the quote has been misattributed. When nothing happened he wrote to the broadcaster. “I thought, bugger it, I’ll send a letter to the great man himself,” Hunter said.From Tuesday, people in England are required to wear a face covering in certain places such as all public transport, shops and supermarkets, post offices, banks, estate and letting agents, pharmacies and vets. We would like to hear from workers on their experiences of mask wearing since they have been reintroduced. Do you find people are mainly compliant or have you encountered issues? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The bookies’ favourite is LadBaby, even though the sausage-roll-loving dad and his family are yet to reveal whether they are competing for this year’s coveted Christmas Number 1. Superstars Adele, Elton John, Ed Sheeran, and Abba are also in the running, say the bookies. But they now face competition from an unlikely quarter. The Church of England has announced its first Christmas single, a new version of the carol In the Bleak Midwinter, sung by the professional ensemble at the London church St Martin-in-the-Fields. The single, which will be released on 1 December, has been composed by Rebecca Dale. All royalties from the digital streams and downloads of the track will be donated to charity. “Although In the Bleak Midwinter is a poem which was written nearly 150 years ago, it has a timeless mystery and is wonderfully evocative of a journey from the wintery landscape to the stable and the heart of the nativity story,” Dale said. The church said the single would “form the soundtrack to this year’s Church of England Christmas campaign”. It will also release an advert on social media with the theme of #AtTheHeartOfChristmas which will highlight “tales of hardship overcome, generosity, faith, Christmas memories and hopes for the future from around the country”. St Martin’s Voices is a group of professional singers who perform at concerts, services and broadcasts from the Trafalgar Square church. St Martin-in-the-Fields has a long record of work with homeless people, rough sleepers and asylum seekers in central London. Mark Hoyle, aka LadBaby, has reached the top of the Christmas charts for the past three years with sausage roll-themed songs. Hoyle, his wife, Roxanne, and sons Phoenix and Kobe have raised funds for charity with We Built This City on Sausage Rolls, I Love Sausage Rolls and Don’t Stop Me Eatin’. Hoyle has said a fourth tilt at the festive number one spot is possible. “Never rule out a sausage roll at Christmas is what I would say,” Hoyle told Metro this month. The C of E has released Christmas adverts before to remind people of the meaning of the festive season. In 2015 an advert featuring people saying the Lord’s Prayer was banned by three leading cinema chains who said it risked upsetting or offending people. In The Bleak Midwinter is the C of E’s first foray into the pop charts, although the Rev Richard Coles, presenter of BBC Radio 4’s Saturday Live and vicar of St Mary’s in Finedon, Northamptonshire, reached No 1 in 1986 as half of the duo the Communards. Coles and his pop partner Jimmy Somerville spent four weeks at the top of the charts with Don’t Leave Me This Way, which became that year’s top-selling single. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, said he was delighted “to be sharing this new carol as the national Church of England’s first ever Christmas single”. Festive “trimmings” were wonderful, he said, “but they are not the heart of Christmas. The only thing that makes Christmas perfect is Jesus, who sees, loves and welcomes all. The message of this carol is that the only thing we need to give him and each other is our hearts – our very own selves.” • This article was amended on 30 November 2021. An earlier version placed Finedon in Nottinghamshire, rather than Northamptonshire.This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. After another difficult year, it’s normal for energy levels to be lower and motivation to feel lacking (or absent entirely!). Though things may be looking tricky once again, we’re delighted to bring you this highly practical masterclass that will help you to dive into 2022 feeling positive and proactive. Led by experts in the fields of nutrition, neuroscience, business and sport, this one-stop shop for making 2022 your best year yet will offer simple hacks and tips that you can easily put into practice, to help you set yourself genuinely actionable goals that work, and feel right for you. With practical exercises and interactive Q&amp;As, this masterclass is a must for anyone in need of some motivation, and will leave you with a focused plan for making the most of your year ahead. Course content Michelle Moore, award-winning leadership coach, author and educator, will show you how a sports mindset and the right kind of discipline for your lifestyle can help you to harness productivity for your personal and professional lives. When it comes to gut health, in an age of misinformation and oversaturated internet advice, how can you discern fact from fiction? Registered nutritional therapist, author and podcaster, Eve Kalinik, will enlighten you to the top 10 nutrition hacks that will get you well on your way to good gut health. Let’s Grid! Dr Magdalena Bak-Maier, neuroscientist and wellbeing expert, will lead an interactive exercise using her grid productivity tool, so that you can discover how to set goals that move you towards greater safety, connection and joy. Simon Alexander Ong, life coach and business strategist, will reveal how to get more energy to help you achieve your goals, and go from feeling exhausted to highly energised. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6pm (GMT). This course is for… Anyone in need of a bit of motivation to make 2022 their best year yet Those looking for advice on how to set a realistic and achieve plan Anyone who wants to optimise their nutrition and health by making simple, doable changes Tutor profile Michelle Moore is an award-winning leadership coach, author, speaker and educator, who was voted as one of the UK’s 50 Most Influential Women in Sport. For the past 20 years she has been working in senior leadership roles across sport, government and education, and her pioneering work has transformed the lives of professionals, young people, athletes and the culture of many organisations. She is the recipient of the 2016 UK Precious Award as an Outstanding Woman in Sport, a Football Black List award, and a national Change Maker award. Michelle speaks, moderates and hosts events and keynotes for organisations including the University of Cambridge, the NBA and UNICEF UK. She has chaired events at the United Nations and presented to the House of Lords. Michelle also makes regular appearances on BBC Radio 4, TRT World, Channel 4 and BBC World Service Sportshour, and she has been featured in the Guardian, the Daily Telegraph, the Times and the Independent. Her book, Real Wins, was published in November 2021 by Hachette UK. Eve Kalinik is a nutritional therapist, author and podcaster. Her first book, Be Good to Your Gut, was published in 2017, and her second, Happy Gut, Happy Mind, in 2020. As a specialist in gut health, Eve believes that having a healthy gut is fundamental to our overall wellbeing. She is passionate about how food makes us feel both mentally and physically, and she creates recipes to reflect this sentiment. In August 2021, Eve and Rosemary Ferguson launched their podcast, The Wellness Breakdown, which sees them aim to separate health fads from fiction by putting themselves in the hot seat. Eve regularly hosts interactive workshops, talks and retreats with high-profile media, brands and wellbeing companies. She is a registered member of the Institute of Functional Medicine, the British Association for Applied Nutrition and Nutritional Therapy, and the Complementary and Natural Healthcare Council. She also holds a BA in Psychology. Dr Magdalena Bak-Maier is the founder of Make Time Count Ltd, a productivity and wellbeing expert, a neuroscientist, and internationally recognized educator. She is the creator of the Grid work-life balance method, which is based on the crucial insight that in order to thrive, we must include career management and self-care into the work-life balance equation. Grid has been called “an ingenious goal-tracking system with a strong visual element” by Psychologies Magazine UK and presented at the 2021 Columbia University Coaching Conference. Magdalena’s books include Get Productive! (2011), Body Talk (2019) and Get Productive Grid (2015). Her current work explores how Grid supports human flourishing, effective habit change, mental health and burnout especially in the higher education sector and in SMEs. Magdalena is passionate about free speech and supporting quality journalism. She has generously waived her fee for the session and donated it to help keep investigative journalism independent. Simon Alexander Ong is an award-winning coach and motivational speaker. He has been interviewed on Sky News, BBC and Forbes, and has worked with many top organisations including Barclays, Google, LSE and Virgin. Everything that Simon does is built to energise people to see their world differently, and to awaken their imagination of what is truly possible, so that they can live a better story. His debut book, Energize: Find Your Spark, Achieve More and Live Better, will be published in April 2022 by Penguin, and is now available for pre-order. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6pm (GMT). Details This course has now passed, but you can be the first to know about the next one - and other workshops like this - by signing up to our newsletter here. Date: Wednesday 12 January 2022 Times: 6pm-8.30pm (GMT) Price: £65 (plus £3.34 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6pm GMT | 7pm CST | 10am PT | 1pm ET Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible – but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.For years, fans have felt increasingly shut out from what is happening to their football clubs. From the extraordinary Super League debacle to the litany of football clubs that have gone out of business in the past two decades, pressure has been mounting for a root-and-branch overhaul of the way English football functions. In recent years we have seen countless protests by fans against owners who only care about the bottom line, against unethical takeovers by dubious foreign oligarchs and regimes, and most importantly against the detrimental impact this kind of arrangement, which is primarily focused on the interests of shareholders, has on local communities. We have long needed an injection of democracy into our national game, and some serious, systemic changes. In light of this, the government established a fan-led review, which has been running since April this year, talking to representatives from more than 130 football clubs. Fans from up and down the country have had their chance to speak up. It is a welcome attempt to redress the balance, and put the interests of ordinary football fans back at the heart of decision-making. Last week it published its long-awaited findings, which the review’s commissioner, Tracey Crouch MP, promised would establish “a long-term sustainable position for English football”. While there is clearly work to do, overall the review sets a clear path towards a better-governed game for generations to come. The review recommends increasing fan representation on matters relating to club governance, which I welcome – but the measures could have gone further. I would like to see “full board representation”, requiring a fan on the full board of every club. This would allow a fan representative to have access to all discussions about the future of each club, giving a voice to the community in all decisions. One of the most interesting and important of the report’s 47 recommendations is an overhaul of the so-called solidarity and parachute payments system. Clubs receive parachute payments if they drop out of the Premier League into the English Football League (EFL). Solidarity payments, meanwhile, are paid to all of the other EFL clubs, but they are significantly lower than parachute payments. As it stands, parachute payments effectively offer extra financial compensation to owners who are willing to gamble their club’s future to get into the top tier of English football – even if they are then quickly relegated – and do nothing for the majority of poor clubs that prop up the professional game. It’s almost like a form of insurance for “get rich quick” clubs, and works against sustainable investment and growth. Taken together, these payments are really nothing to do with solidarity, as they set up a perverse incentive whereby many clubs gamble to get promoted but are left in a ruinous state. The review has confirmed that the game will finally get an independent regulator, which will oversee a new “integrity test” for owners, one that will hopefully probe both the sustainability of any ownership project and the integrity and intentions of those wanting to own clubs. I hope the regulator will also compel the Premier League and EFL to change the rules on solidarity payments, and intervene if they don’t go far enough. The FLR’s proposal is that a 10% levy will be paid by all Premier League clubs on transfers and redistributed to the lower leagues: a neat sleight of hand that would see a vital transfer of wealth to the grassroots game. The review calculated that this would have raised about £160m a year, based on transfers in the last five years. It is worth emphasising how deep the inequality in English football runs. I was struck earlier this month by the poor timing of separate announcements from the Premier League: one about “improved solidarity payments”, and just a few hours later, news about a new deal it had signed for an additional US$2bn in revenue for US TV rights. These stories both landed as I attended Grimsby Town’s Friday night game against Southend United, which had been moved to that time slot to be on BT Sport: a move for which we received a few thousand pounds. While we appreciate these payments, you can see why they feel like tiny crumbs from the top table – over the course of a season, we probably receive something in the region of £40k in TV money. Quite a contrast with the billions floating around the top tier. In her book Political Solidarity, the philosopher Sally Scholz argues that it is critical to support and find mutual respect across our economic, political and historical differences if society is to function for all, as well as to give people the ability to take up roles of leadership in our communities at every level. Solidarity is not just concerned with the distribution of material goods and wealth – it only really makes sense when paired with the idea of wider social justice. As Scholz puts it, this means “a willingness to share the risks that comes with social relations … to help carry each other’s burdens”. It feels like we need more of this at the moment. While on the whole, global standards of living have increased massively in the past 100 years, relative inequality matters not just on a moral level but also because it can create political instability. We need to recalibrate the narrative and purpose of the economic system we are operating in order to make it fairer for all involved. Which is why we I believe we need both greater solidarity payments from the Premier League and a wealth tax specifically related to the government’s levelling up agenda. In the same way that some clubs benefit from the stratospheric TV revenues associated with the Premier League while others struggle, we know that many asset-rich people have increased their net wealth during the period of Covid while others have lost their livelihoods. I have spent the past 25 years working in the technology sector as an entrepreneur, and most people I know involved in technology businesses have seen their assets increase during the pandemic. Maybe not to the degree of Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos, whose wealth has doubled since the start of the pandemic, but still – those sitting on property assets or active in the public markets have failed to show real solidarity with those out there in the streets and in homes across the UK for many of whom real wages and income have declined over recent years. How many in the top income and asset brackets are prepared to contribute to a time-bound wealth tax to support the vital “levelling up” work that should be announced by Neil O’Brien MP and his team before the end of this year? As a society we are all in it together, whether we like it or not, and we need to stand together to ensure prosperity and progress is attainable for everyone, not just elites. True solidarity is not just about a financial gesture but about what is fair – both in football and in society at large. Jason Stockwood is a technology entrepreneur, visiting fellow at the University of Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government and chairman of Grimsby Town FCGermán Cadenas was 15 when he packed up a few clothes, his beloved magic trick cards, a treasured coin box and a portfolio of his drawings. It was 2002. Cadenas, his mother and younger brother were flying from their native Venezuela for a Christmas visit with Cadenas’s dad – who had migrated to Maricopa county, Arizona, two years before – hoping to send money to his family as Venezuela descended into chaos. Reunited in Arizona over the holiday, the family decided what mattered most was staying together. They let their visas expire and settled in. Cadenas lived in Arizona as an undocumented immigrant for nine years. Nearly 10 years later, he’s 34 and a US citizen. He’s a professor of psychology at Lehigh University, and has published a prodigious body of research focusing on the psychology of undocumented immigrants. For at least a decade, researchers have documented mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression, PTSD and feelings of low self-worth in America’s immigrant communities. Such mental health issues can stem from being marginalized, hunted and detained as well as from feeling dehumanized by xenophobic rhetoric, an exclusionary higher educational system, predatory employment practices, civil rights violations and the uncertainties of changing immigration policies, researchers and advocates say. It’s impossible to accurately say how many of the nation’s approximately 10.5 million undocumented immigrants and their family members are living with mental health issues tied to their immigration status. But the number of those afflicted is likely to increase as the climate crisis and geopolitical unrest drive more migrants to cross the nation’s borders. In Arizona, the epicenter of the US’s immigration wars, those who have experienced such traumas first-hand have also pioneered ways to respond to it and are training others seeking to treat it. The stories of Cadenas and other immigrants in Maricopa county illustrate the power of activism to reshape trauma and cope with it. Cadenas has focused his research on a psychological construct called “critical consciousness”. He’s found that when immigrants identify systems that psychologically harm them and then engage in social justice activism to resist and dismantle those same systems, their efforts serve as a “coping mechanism that helps protect their mental health” and helps others heal. Cadenas’s interest in the topic stems from experience. His family settled in the Grand Canyon state at the very time it started to became overtly hostile to undocumented immigrants and their American citizen relatives. Amid congressional paralysis on immigration reform, Arizona was just beginning to pass a series of immigration laws intended to either criminalize undocumented immigrants with deportable felonies or make their lives so miserable, they would leave the state. Meanwhile, Maricopa county’s sheriff, Joe Arpaio, partnered with federal authorities to conduct shock-and-awe immigration sweeps. Knowing how to capture the national spotlight, the sheriff also dispatched swarms of armed deputies to arrest undocumented immigrants traveling through the state or to raid workplaces in search of deportable workers. “It felt like nowhere was really safe,” Cadenas recalls. “We could be raided at work, or stopped while driving or Ice could come to our home. There was no place of refuge.” “Knowing there were laws and voters who were OK with this was horrifying,” he says. “People like me were treated as if we were less than human.” Cadenas became an activist, publicly opposing the sheriff and state immigration laws while advocating for affordable in-state tuition for undocumented college students and the passage of the Dream Act, which would provide a pathway to citizenship for law-abiding people who arrived in the US at a young age. This activism, he says, improved his psychological wellbeing. It gave him pride in his “culturally rich” and “resilient” Latinx immigrant community. The activism helped him understand he mattered. Through his activism, Cadenas met other young immigrants who were coping with similar traumas. *** Viri Hernández and her mother Rita have been immigrant rights activists for well over a decade. Now 30, Viri is the executive director of the Phoenix immigrant civil rights non-profit Poder in Action. When she first got into activism, her mother cooked and chauffeured her and other young activists to marches and demonstrations. Gradually, Rita became more involved. Once, Viri and Rita helped block a major Phoenix street near an Ice office. The act of civil disobedience landed them both in Arpaio’s jail – a stay Rita mostly remembers for its bad food, icy temperature and Ice authorities telling her she had no civil rights. Rita was born in Morelos, Mexico, and was forced to marry Marcos, the father of her unborn child, at 17. The pair struggled, Rita says, trying to make a dysfunctional marriage work while living in extreme poverty. Their baby, a girl, died three days after being born prematurely because medical personnel in the area had no available incubator, she says. Viri, short for Viridiana, was born in 1991. About a year later, mother and daughter crossed the US-Mexico border, Rita says, joining relatives already settled in Maricopa county. Marcos followed six months later. The couple set down roots in Phoenix and would eventually have five more kids, all American citizens. The Hernández clan was now officially a “mixed-immigration-status” family in which all family members, regardless of immigration status, would experience trauma. In 2012, sheriff’s deputies raided the construction company where Marcos, a carpenter, worked. He’d clocked in early that day and was already out on a job when the raid took place, but he feared the deputies had checked his employment file and now knew where he lived. The family considered fleeing the state, but instead moved to a hidden corner of the county. “Nothing has ever been easy,” Rita says. Her own upbringing and journey to the US was rough. Her kids grew up terrified authorities would snatch their parents and are still working through that trauma. But successful activism has lifted her spirit and diminished her anxiety, Rita says. After being released from her short stint in jail, Rita dedicated herself to full-time social justice organizing and educating undocumented immigrants about their civil rights. She helped organize a voter outreach effort, risking getting stopped by sheriff’s deputies during her daily 90-mile-round-trip commute. But it paid off, she says. Arpaio was voted out of office in 2016, proving that undocumented immigrants have a powerful voice. Rita, who is now 49, serves as a leader at Poder in Action, where she organizes with her daughter. The non-profit aims “to disrupt and dismantle systems of oppression and determine a liberated future as people of color in Arizona”. There are some things, though, that even activism cannot begin to heal. Every day of the dead, Rita puts on an ofrenda with Virgin of Guadalupe candles lighting up framed pictures of dead relatives, including the baby she lost. As an offering to the soul of the child she still grieves, she bakes bread in the shape of a doll, and sets it on the table along with a small container of yogurt, a glass of milk and a See’s Candy Lollypop. *** Like Viri Hernández and Germán Cadenas, Reyna Montoya was heavily involved in Arizona’s immigrant activist community as a student. But she struggled to find a community she felt aligned with. Montoya had joined Arizona’s immigrant activist community in 2010, after she came out publicly as an undocumented college student. She was already “heavily involved” when her father Mario, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico, was detained by immigration authorities at a Puerto Rico airport in 2012. Mario had fled from Mexico to Arizona with his family in 2003 after he had received death threats and was kidnapped by corrupt members of Mexican law enforcement, Montoya knew. Now he sat in a Puerto Rican prison in an Ice unit facing deportation by the Obama administration. Should he be deported to Mexico, his family in Phoenix feared, he’d be murdered. Arizona’s immigrant community rallied on her father’s behalf, Montoya says. But “no one asked me, ‘How are you doing? What does it mean for you to have your dad in deportation proceedings?’ That really hurt, although I understand. People who were hurting were hurting others. If you haven’t processed your own traumas, the cycle continues.” In 2016, Montoya founded Aliento, a Phoenix non-profit that she started with a Soros Fellowship and her desire to create a gentle, culturally sensitive healing environment for undocumented immigrants and their families. Aliento is housed in a cheerful Phoenix office building with large windows that look out on to cactus gardens. The non-profit connects immigrants struggling with trauma with Spanish speaking therapists. It also focuses on training young leaders. You probably will not find Aliento fellows blocking streets in civil actions, even though they, too, focus on changing policies that are harmful to undocumented immigrants. Aliento was key in getting on the 2022 ballot a measure that will let voters decide whether to grant in-state tuition and scholarships to all Arizona high school graduates regardless of immigration status, students often known as Dreamers. Montoya and her partner, José Patiño, the education and external affairs director for Aliento, are Dreamers themselves. They have temporary protection from deportation through Daca, an Obama-era permit for Dreamers that some conservatives hope to dismantle in the courts. Now 30, Montoya recently turned in her sixth Daca renewal application. The possibility of her application getting lost in the shuffle fills her with anxiety. Without Daca, she would become an unprotected, undocumented immigrant once again. After years in deportation proceedings, Montoya’s father was granted political asylum in 2019, Montoya says. The Daca program that protects her was started by the Obama administration, which also put her father into deportation proceedings. She’s grateful for Daca, yet traumatized by the deportation nightmare. She wonders sometimes if she’s “the only person who thinks Obama has done bad things”. Maybe it’s a mistake to assume those who have experienced immigration trauma seek closure, she says. Maybe what they want instead is a simple “acknowledgment that harm was done”.The season of the coffee table book is upon us. This is a handsome enough example, featuring often startlingly candid conversations between Barack Obama and Bruce Springsteen recorded for a podcast of the same name. Having struck up a friendship on Obama’s campaign trail in 2008, the bond between the two men deepened with the years. (Partly, we discover, this is because Michelle Obama and Patti Scialfa, Springsteen’s partner, hit it off.) The title is worth a chuckle. Springsteen might once have been some sort of miscreant, but “renegade” ill befits the 44th president, a man so upstanding you could actually unfurl a flag off him. The subtitle Born in the USA raises a silent eyebrow, too, at the attempt by “birthers” to discredit Obama’s presidency by falsely questioning his citizenship. Sub-subtitled “dreams, myths, music”, the book comes liberally sprinkled with never-before-seen photos of two of America’s most famous figureheads at work and at play. For Springsteen fans, there are handwritten lyrics. History nerds, meanwhile, might get a thrill from the annotations to some of Obama’s most moving speeches, a sweetener more rewarding than it sounds. In eulogy after eulogy to innocent people shot by hate-filled men or at the services for figures such as the late US senator John Lewis, Obama celebrates the dignity of decent people caught up in an historical moment of internecine violence, pleading for gun control, for unity, for grace in a tiny, tidy hand. A better subtitle for this book might be “when masculinity goes right”. The two compare childhoods, contrast their needs for “redemption” and share their admiration for the strong women who raised and married them. It’s all very personal; it’s also very political. Both delve deep into what it means to be wedded to the American experiment in democracy, analysing the yawning gap between the promise of upward mobility and the reality of industrial decline. It all goes very wrong for the average family under Reagan, who destroyed the power of the unions to ensure good wages and working conditions, pulling the rug out from under people just as the culture lurches hard towards the worship of obscene wealth. Previously, Nixon had sowed the seeds of division by coining the term “silent majority”, a dog whistle that pitted so-called “ordinary” Americans against all those agitating for change: anti-Vietnam protesters, civil rights activists et al. Both men struggled long and hard with a father who was either absent physically (in Obama’s case) or spiritually (Springsteen’s, who suffered from schizophrenia). The writer of Born to Run is especially good on the myth of the open road, on how outlaw loner tropes perniciously devalue hearth and home, even though, when built right, the domestic sphere can be a generous source of identity and contentment. Both writers have laid themselves bare in print before – Springsteen’s excellent memoir-cum-Broadway show, which had its roots in a small White House performance, Obama’s many books, a memoir from Michelle Obama – but there are still discoveries. Obama, for one, over-achieves because he is perennially trying to heal the wound of his (now late) father leaving, to show Obama Sr that Obama Jr was worth sticking around for. The discussion does not shy away from discomfort. Obama pointedly quizzes Springsteen on the power balance of his relationship with the late saxophonist Clarence Clemons, a heroic staple of the E Street Band. The two were very close, but Clemons – older, more experienced, often the only black man on the tour – was still the side guy to Springsteen’s rock star. It’s salutary to be reminded, though, that one incarnation of the E Street Band circa 1974 happened to feature three white band members and three black. For his part, Obama contemplates criticism from figures such as writer Ta-Nehisi Coates that, as president, he should have tried harder to force the US to reckon with racism through reparations. The elephant between the covers is that these conversations are already available as a podcast of the same name, free to Spotify subscribers, complete with laughter and strummed guitars. That said, if that person in your life who has everything deserves a reminder of how rock’n’roll can be more moral than its enemies, of how, sometimes, the arc of history bends towards justice a little more noticeably, Renegades will stuff that stocking amply. • Renegades: Born in the USA by by Barack Obama and Bruce Springsteen is published by Viking (£35). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyTomb Raider recently celebrated its 25th anniversary, which means 25 years of articles about how Lara Croft transcended video games to become a global icon even your gran has heard of. As a female games critic, I am personally asked to explain her enduring popularity 25 times an hour, to the point where I have boiled my answer down to this: for many of us, she symbolises a moment in the history of gaming where we saw ourselves represented for the first time. Not as a princess trapped in a castle, but as an enigmatic, acrobatic embodiment of fierceness. Naturally, the adolescent boys of the 90s also regarded her with the same distanced respect, right? Anyway, here’s what nobody says they remember fondly about Tomb Raider: the food. Lara doesn’t have a signature snack, like Mario with his mushrooms or Pac-Man with his Mini Babybels. She’s never seen taking a break from shooting dinosaurs to chow down on a Kendal mint cake and some lemon-barley water. The early games allow you to explore her ancestral home, which has a walk-in freezer, but all it contains are giant legs of ham. All of which makes the release of a Tomb Raider cookbook seem a bit odd, though admittedly, the Lara-related merchandise that’s been launched in the last two and a half decades includes everything from shower curtains and toothbrushes to fizzy pop, postage stamps and pants. The book is a glossy, well-produced tome, as well it might be with a cover price of £22.99. The food is the star – Lara doesn’t even feature on the cover – and the many full-page photographs of the dishes inside are beautifully styled. This is food you want to eat, which is a relief. Based on the later games’ Bear Grylls-style survivalist tone, you might have expected recipes for squirrel lasagne and urine soup. Instead, much like Lara herself, the book flits around the world helping itself to cultural treasures from different countries. There’s focaccia from Italy, Japanese okonomiyaki, jollof from Ghana, and Nepalese momos. Representing England we have fish and chips, sausage and mash and chicken tikka masala. There are also recipes for beans on toast and Jaffa Cakes, presumably for when you can’t get to the shops but have some cannellini and gelatin lying around. There’s little attempt to tie the recipes to the games beyond a cursory sentence explaining their inclusion (“Dr Willard can be seen enjoying a hot bowl of tomato soup in Tomb Raider III”). Apart from the “T. rex rib eye”, there aren’t even any good puns, which is a shame for anyone seeking the perfect recipe for spaghetti carbo-Lara. The recipes are straightforward and easy to follow, with equipment lists, prepping and cooking times. The localisation for the UK market from the US feels a bit lazy, though; cream is heavy, cheese is shredded, and weights are in pounds rather than grams. Presumably the Brexiters will be happy. As well as a cookbook, this is also billed as a travel guide. There are some obvious and unnecessary tips in the back: “Most countries require a passport for foreign entry.” (How different history might have been if Lara had not known this, and spent the first game exploring Heathrow.) Recipes are interspersed with lengthy sections about the history of key locations from the game. These are well-researched and dense with facts, but like a T. rex rib eye you’ve left on the hob for too long, it’s also a bit dry. There are brief, functional references to Lara’s relationship with the locations, but no attempt to evoke how it feels to explore them within the games. To be fair, the pages are peppered with lush screenshots and artwork, but these feel like garnish rather than a key ingredient. It’s as if the book is afraid to acknowledge that it’s actually based on a video game. So … who is this cookbook for? The recipes are solid, but unlikely to blow the minds of foodies, who probably already have a recipe for tomato soup, or a tin opener. The tie-ins to the games feel tenuous, meanwhile, so there’s not enough meat to satisfy hardcore fans. The whole thing takes itself awfully seriously, which is a shame, as the old games never did. (Famously, you could lock Lara’s doddery old butler in that walk-in freezer. This seemed like great entertainment in 1997, when we had five television channels.) Still, at least it’s better than any of the Tomb Raider films.Up to one in 11 staff in some prisons across England and Wales have faced at least one misconduct investigation for allegations including sexual harassment and assault, Guardian analysis of Ministry of Justice data shows. The data, obtained via freedom of information laws, has revealed that for the year 2019-20, one in 11, or 9%, of staff at the Mount, a category C men’s prison in Hertfordshire, faced at least one misconduct investigation, the highest proportion of all prisons across England and Wales. After the Mount, the prisons with the highest rates of misconduct investigations include Cardiff prison, at 8.3% of its staff, followed by Nottingham (7.8%) and Swinfen Hall (7.8%). Staff at the Mount prison faced a disproportionate level of misconduct investigations, almost three times the average rate (3.39%), and has previously faced problems in its governance. In 2017, an incident occurred at the Mount in which prison officers were said to have lost control of two wings within the prison, leading to specialist riot-trained officers being called in to take control of the incident. At this time, inmates’ relatives also said that staff shortages meant prisoners were locked in their cells over the weekend. The prison was also subject to an action plan by HM Prison &amp; Probation Service in 2019 following a 2018 inspection, which found that the prison was undergoing “significant difficulties”, that “governance and arrangements for accountability were seriously lacking”, and that “only just over half of prisoners felt respected”. For the financial year 2019-20, MoJ figures show that 1,266 prison staff faced at least one misconduct investigation, and of them 464 staff were subject to at least one conduct and discipline that concluded that year. Seventy-eight were recommended for dismissal. Furthermore, figures from the MoJ show that for all prison staff, a total of 13,432 misconduct investigations were brought between the financial years 2014-15 and 2019-20. Over the same period, 1,121 prison staff were dismissed for misconduct. Prison staff include anyone working in HM Prison Service or the Youth Custody Service. Andrew Neilson, the director of campaigns at the Howard League for Penal Reform, said: “It should come as no surprise that misconduct is an issue in an overcrowded prison system where people are warehoused in cells and staff are poorly paid and supported, without a clear purpose. “The solution to this problem begins with sensible steps to reduce the prison population.” In 2019, the Ministry of Justice launched a counter-corruption unit (CCU), as the department aims to tackle prisons becoming overcome with drugs, violence, and poor mental health among inmates. A prison service spokesperson from the Ministry of Justice said: “While the vast majority of prison staff are hardworking, dedicated and honest, these figures show that we take strong action against the small minority who break the rules.”So, a goal at either end of the 90 minutes, with plenty of US chances in between to kill off the game, but none taken. The visitors paid the price for that profligacy in the end, as a hefty deflection off Becky Sauerbrunn with just two minutes remaining proved costly. And that wraps up this year’s competitive international football for both teams. Perhaps not the way the USA wanted, or indeed deserved to end their year, but their inexperienced squad can go home with their heads held high. For the Matildas, the Asian Cup is next, starting in mid-January. They’re not going to meet a team of the quality of this US outfit there, and if Gustavssonian theory is correct, these two games will stand his side in good stead at the tournament in India - and beyond. Stand by for Emma Kemp’s match report, which will be landing shortly. But from me, it’s goodbye for now. Tony Gustavsson: “I had all the emotions a human can have tonight. I was happy as well. That never say die attitude... and what an atmosphere.” Sam Kerr: “It was disappointing to concede in the first few minutess again. It probably wasn’t our best performance but we’re building and we’ll take a tie against the world No 1. “I could have been better. I was still a bit rusty after bring sick. But it’s not about me tonight.” It’s a 1-1 draw with the world champions that goes into the record books, but the performance was in truth not great. The defensive problems are still glaringly apparent, a cutting edge up front is still missing and there is much work to be done if the better opposition they face are to be beaten. Tony Gustavsson said after Saturday’s defeat that he’s not too interested by results, and more the performance. Wonder what his view of this result (and performance) will be? 90+4 mins: There goes the whistle! All over and it ends one apiece in Newcastle. 90+3 mins: That was the correct offside decision by the way, just in case there was any doubt. 90+2 mins: Horan scores! The USA are back in front! No! Offside! The flag is up and her close range volley won’t count! Late drama in Newcastle! 90 mins: Four minutes to be added... there’s still plenty of time for another twist in this tale. 89 mins: There’s an element of redemption about that goal, given Simon missed an absolute sitter in Sydney on Saturday. She might well have just salvaged an unlikely point here. 88 mins: Well, well, well! You wouldn’t have thought that was coming, and there’s a huge element of luck to it as Simon’s strike from the edge of the box takes a big deflection off the recently-introduced Sauerbrunn and bounces past the wrong-footed Murphy, but they’ll take that! 86 mins: Wheeler comes on to replace Yallop for the Matildas, while Sonnett and Sauerbrunn come on for Huerta and Sullivan for the USA. 84 mins: Weaver again gets the wrong side of the Matildas’ backline. This time she does manage to get a shot away, but it’s straight at Williams who makes the save without any fuss. 82 mins: The experienced Kennedy comes to the rescue as Horan’s cross causes some consternation in the Australian box. The veteran takes charge and nips the danger in the bud. 81 mins: The USA make another change now - Sanchez on for Lynn Williams, who has also been excellent. 80 mins: That’s not too nice from Horan on Yallop, and the first yellow card of the night is brandished. 79 mins: It looks like Morgan Weaver is in here but Catley flies back and makes the sliding challenge to end all sliding challenges and end the danger. 78 mins: Horan plays the ball into the feet of Lavelle, with her back to goal. Lavelle controls and turns in one swift movement to fashion a shooting opportunity but her effort isn’t struck as sweetly as she might have hoped and the ball dribbles through to Lydia Williams. 77 mins: Defender Dorsey is sent on on for the excellent Fox to make her international debut as the USA make a third change. 76 mins: Fowler looks to set Kerr free with another cute ball forward, but her captain is flagged offside before she attempts a chipped shot that lands wide of the mark anyway. 75 mins: Oh dear, Van Egmond tries her luck from 25 yards out and it’s not pretty. Her effort lacks power and direction and Murphy remains untroubled. 72 mins: Mewis straight into the action and there’s a big shout for a penalty as Carpenter trips her in the box! But the ref doesn’t want to give it. VAR, if there was VAR here tonight, might have had a different view. 71 mins: And here is that Australian change - Kennedy on for Cooney-Cross, Gielnik on for Raso. 70 mins: Actually, it’s the US who make a double change first as goalscorer Hatch and Perce goe off to be replaced by Weaver and Mewis. 69 mins: Once again, the USA find a way through the Matildas’ defence but again they’re lacking a killer touch as Williams scoops her shot over the bar. You’ve have expected her to at least hit the target there. 68 mins: It’s Alanna Kennedy and Emily Gielnik who are likely about to enter the fray in a double change for Australia. 67 mins: Looks like the Matildas might be making a change soon. 66 mins: Carpenter looks to find Kerr with an early ball upfield, but it’s easily cut out and the US can come away with the ball. Producing a quality final ball continues to be Australia’s problem. 64 mins: Ooh, Williams clips a ball over towards an unmarked Perce but it’s just out of her reach. No matter, Horan picks the ball up and sends it back over to Williams, but her stooping header is over the bar! 63 mins: The crowd noise lifts again as Raso threatens on the right. But again there’s no final ball. Still, she wins a corner - the Matildas’ sixth of the night - which will be taken by Van Egmond. 61 mins: Yallop’s cries for a foul as Perce wrestles her to the ground are audible here. She gets her wish. 60 mins: Ooh, that’s nice by Simon whose backheel sets Yallop free down the Matildas’ left. Yallop’s cross hangs up in the air, but it lacks the kind of pace or whip that would really trouble the American defence. 59 mins: That really was a terrific save from Williams, and she’s again in the action as she claims the resulting US corner. She looks to get a counterattack on the go immediately, but there aren’t many options. 58 mins: Huerta’s throw finds Horan, who in turn finds Lynn Williams. She shoots on target, but is denied by a diving, fingertip save from Lydia Williams! 56 mins: Fox gets the better of Raso in the latest instalment of their duel, as the American concedes a corner after a lovely through pass from Kerr found Raso. 54 mins: The USA are so slick in possession. Here Huerta, Horan and then Lavelle all demonstrate their skill on the ball before the latter blasts the ball high and wide of Lydia Williams’s goal. 53 mins: The official crowd number is just above 20,000. A new record in Newcastle apparently. 52 mins: Kyah Simon delights the crowd with a run across the middle of the park that sees her stumble and nearly crawl along while still in possession. 51 mins: Catley piles into Lavelle, hard but fair. The Australian seems to have fully recovered from that head knock in the first half. 50 mins: Huerta and Fox look to link up but the former’s return pass to the latter is cut out and the US move forward breaks down. 48 mins: I realise that orange slices are the snack of choice for many at half-time but can confirm that Bulla Crunch strawberry ice creams are an acceptable substitute for non-players. 47 mins: Sam Kerr! She skips around the challenge of Cook on the edge of the box after having been found by Raso, but she drags her shot well side of Murphy’s upright. 46 mins: Hatch gets us back under way in Newcastle. No changes to tell you about at the break. Graham Arnold is on the telly now. The Socceroos coach is asked what advice he’d give in the Australian dressing room at half-time. “You’ve got be brave you’ve got to get out there and put the pressure on the US.” He points to Raso and Carpenter as keys to doing that. It really should have been more though, as they made several clearcut chances to increase their lead after the opener went in after just four minutes. The Matildas struggled to fashion any gilt-edged chances of their own and the closest they came was Kyra Cooney-Crosses volley from range which was tipped onto the bar by Casey Murphy. Ashley Hatch’s opener – her second in two games – remains the difference for now. 45+2 mins: Nothing further to report before the half-time whistle sounds. And the USA go in at the break a goal to the good, as they did four days ago. 45 mins: Two minutes of added time to be played at the end of the opening period. 44 mins: So close to a second for the USA as the first half draws to a close! Willians takes on Nevin before crossing to the back post where Perce surely must score! No! Into the side netting as she slides in to meet the ball! 43 mins: Horan looks to find Lavelle with a pinged cross into the Australian box... the ball flashes across the face of goal and all the way through to safety. 41 mins: Carpenter’s getting forward a lot more now - here she goes again, set free by Raso, but her attempt to play an early ball across is cut out easily enough. 40 mins: Carpenter now bombs forward before delivering a decent cross which Kerr meets by running in across the face of her marker. She makes a good connection but it’s over the bar! 39 mins: There’s a whiff of anticipation in the air as Kerr finds Fowler on the edge of the box. She plays it wide to Simon before it comes to Cooney-Cross . Her cross in appears to strike a US hand! Nothing doing says the ref. 37 mins: Raso’s a tough cookie though and she’s up on her feet before too long. That duel down the near touchline is fascinating. 36 mins: It’s Fox’s turn now to storm forward, with Raso in tow. Just as the American releases the ball the pair tumble to the ground in a heap and Raso is slow to get up. Replays show Fox to have fallen awkwardly on top of Raso’s shoulder. The crowd lets out a collective wince as it’s shown on the big screen. 35 mins: Carpenter looks to find Raso, but her ball down the line is overhit and it runs out for a goal kick. 34 mins: Williams again is at the centre of all things good for the USA as her clever ball through finds Horan. The ball doesn’t quite fall right for her though and Williams is able to make a block after rushing off her line! 33 mins: Raso gets the ball on the right again now, but her early ball looking for Kerr in the middle drifts into the arms of Murphy who, again, has not put a foot wrong tonight - on just her second appearance for the USA. 32 mins: Brilliant from Lynn Williams with her first touch to get away from Nevin as the USA again threaten. Nevin appears to pull the American back but if so, she gets away with it. Crucially it puts Williams off her stride and the chance vanishes. 31 mins: The ref calls up Raso for a challenge on Sullivan, a decision neither the Everton player nor the Novocastrian crowd like too much. 30 mins: Catley is good to re-enter the fray. Van Egmond plays with fire at the back as she turns inside and nearly gets dispossessed in what would be quite possibly the worst place to lose the ball. She gets away with it this time. 29 mins: Eventually play gets back under way but the Matildas are a woman down for the time being. 27 mins: Catley’s up, to cheers from the crowd, but she looks groggy and will have to head off before she can carry on. 26 mins: Catley’s down injured here, following a clash of heads with Perce. The American seems to be fine, but there’ll be a break in play while Catley is treated. That gives both sides a chance to take a drink and get some instructions from their coaches on the sidelines. 25 mins: Some neat footwork from Kerr nearly ends with Fowler breaking forward. The ball ends up with Yallop on the left, but again her cross isn’t great and Murphy claims easily. 24 mins: The corner is cleared, but only as far as Nevin who fancies her chances from range. Well over the bar this time, but probably worth a crack. 23 mins: Carpenter now sets off on a trademark burst forward... she slips as she attempts to cross but wins a corner nevertheless. 22 mins: The decibel level in the stands rise sharply as Raso wins the ball on the right and centres towards Kerr. It doesn’t really sit for the captain though and the USA are able to clear their lines. 21 mins: Cooney-Cross off the post! What a volley from the Australian midfielder! In fact it’s Murphy who gets a crucial hand to the ball, to divert it onto the upright! 20 mins: Down to the other end and the Matildas win another corner, which is taken by Catley... 18 mins: Brilliant build up play from the USA here - Horan, Fox and Lavelle are all involved before Lavelle clips a lovely ball through to the onrushing Horan. Williams (Lydia) is off her line in a flash and manages to punch clear. She also gets a piece of Horan, who is flagged offside while lying on the ground. She gets up quick enough though and we’re all good to carry on. 17 mins: Phew, it’s been a hectic opening period of this game. Barely time to draw breath. 16 mins: Fowler’s class shines through as she slips through a ball for Kerr to run on to. But Kerr, looking to find a teammate in the middle, slips at a crucial moment and the danger passes. 15 mins: Hatch again! Another chance for the USA goes begging as her header is directed straight at a grateful Williams. Still, the Australian defence is exposed. 14 mins: Here go Raso and Fox again, shoulder-to-shoulder. This time the ref doesn’t like Raso’s aggression and she’s pulled up. 13 mins: No dice from the corner, nor from a second moments later. But the Matildas keep up the pressure, as Nevin pumps the ball back in. But that’s what’s lacking at the moment for the hosts - a decent final ball. 12 mins: Raso streaks clear down the Australia right now... she hares into the box but Davidson gets back after a lung-busting run to block the attempted cross. Corner to the Matildas! 11 mins: Lynn Williams! Oh, that should have been two! The American darts across her defender to get her head to a cross but it’s wide of the mark. 9 mins: The USA defence holds firm this time and the visitors are able to bring the ball upfield. It ends up with Fox who tries to take on Raso - it’s a ding-dong battle between those two already. Raso wins out this time and it’s a goal kick to Australia. 8 mins: Simon wins a corner after some hesitation from Cook in the US defence... nothing comes of it but the Matildas keep possession and can mount another attack here. 6 mins: Here goes Kerr for the first time now, set free by Fowler. A backheel from the Australian captain finds the overlapping Yallop, whose cross isn’t great and is easy for Casey Murphy to claim in the US goal. 5 mins: Amazing really. In just the fourth minute, the signs had already been there. The USA are so dangerous when they come out like that, and the gaps in the Australian defence are still evident. 4 mins: The USA take the lead early once again! And again it’s a ball in behind Catley - beautifully executed by Lynn Wiliams - that causes problems. Purce gets the byline and pulls it back to Hatch who finishes with aplomb! 2 mins: Ooh! Hatch gets in behind Catley and pokes the ball goalwards, only to be denied by Lydia Williams! The USA have started in much the same vein as they did on Saturday. 1 mins: Hearts in mouths as the clock reaches 27 seconds and Williams’ muscualer run gets her to the byline where she centres, but straight into her namesake, Lydia’s arms. Better start for the weekend then, just. 1 min: Off we go in Newcastle as Cooney-Cross gets proceedings started. It’ll be interesting to see exactly how the Matildas line up. Gustavsson said before kick-off his selection allows him flexibility, with both a 3-4-3 and a 4-3-3 available to him with the players on the pitch. The Star Spangled Banner follows, and then Advance Australia Fair (no sign of the Wiggles tonight), and with those out of the way, we’re pretty much good to go! Here’s the traditional Welcome to Country, beautifully delivered and warmly received by the crowd. Here come the teams, to fireworks being let off into the night sky, and then green and gold flares. No pyro, no party in Newcastle! Just five minutes to kick-off. Not quite the 30,000-plus that were in Sydney on Saturday, but nevertheless it looks like a healthy crowd for a cold Tuesday night in Newcastle. The tireless Hayley Raso starts tonight, as she completes her return from injury in a Matildas shirt. “I’m only just coming back in so it’s been a little bit of a rusty start finding my feet,” she told my colleague Emma Kemp. “But I’ve done that now.” More here: The 2019 Ballon d’Or Féminin winner Megan Rapinoe may be missing tonight, but Sam Kerr will lead out the Matildas tonight, fresh from coming third in this year’s vote. The Chelsea striker’s stellar season for Chelsea and Australia was rewarded, coming in behind Alexia Putellas and Jennifer Hermoso, the Barcelona and Spain pair. “I feel proud just to be on that list so to be third it hasn’t really sunk in yet but I feel really proud and honoured that I was before a lot of great names,” Kerr has just told Channel 10. Perhaps strangely, there was was one US player on the list - Samantha Mewis, who polled 14th in the final vote. Weather report: Saturday’s game was played out in soggy conditions as rain lashed the east coast. Tonight... there are dark skies in Newcastle, but no rain at the moment. The starting lineups are in. There’s no Caitlin Foord – who has an FA Cup final with Arsenal to think about at the weekend – for the Matildas tonight, one of three changes to Tony Gustavsson’s starting XI. Nevin keeps her place at the back, but her central defensive partner on Saturday Nash drops to the bench. Teagan Micah joins her on the pine as Lydia Williams get the nod in goal, while Kyra Cooney-Cross comes into the midfield. Hayley Raso starts for the first time since returning from injury and Emily Gielnik, who didn’t feature at all on Saturday, gets a place on the bench. For the US, there’s just one change as Sofia Huerta comes into the starting XI at the back as Emily Sonnett drops to the bench. If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it, and all that. For the second time in just over a month, Australia complete a Saturday-Tuesday double-header against world class opposition. But whereas October’s mini-series against Brazil started off well for the Matildas – with a 3-1 win in game one – they will tonight be looking to recover from a 3-0 weekend thrashing first time out against the world champions. That result in Sydney was not helped by the absence of key defenders Clare Polkinghorne and Alanna Kennedy, nor by a calamitous start from their replacements – the inexperienced central defensive pairing of 19-year-old Courtney Nevin and 17-year-old debutant Jessika Nash. How coach Tony Gustavsson acts to mend his leaky defence may be key to tonight’s outcome in Newcastle, with Polkinghorne still out and Kennedy starting on the bench as she comes back from a quad injury. Gustavsson, typically, remained upbeat after the defeat at Stadium Australia, pointing to his side’s “preparation mode” for the upcoming Asian Cup and beyond that, the 2023 World Cup on home soil, that means they try to play the scoreboard “blind” – in other words he doesn’t care too much about results, but it’s all about gaining experience and being tested by the best teams in the world. “If I wanted to build that kind of false confidence, I would stick with some simple games and win some games and then people talk about ‘it looks so good’,” Gustavsson said. “But then maybe that would also be a little bit naive because when it comes to tournaments [where] you play the best teams, you’re not really ready.” Even an understrength and inexperienced USA – who didn’t travel with the likes of big names Megan Rapinoe and Alex Morgan – can certainly provide another test and tonight’s game at McDonald Jones Stadium promises intrigue, one way or another. Kick-off is 8:05pm local, 4:05am on the east coast of the States. Full team news coming up, so stick with us. In the meantime, feel free to get in touch, either via email (mike.hytner@theguardian.com) or Twitter (@mike_hytner).Fashion designer Tom Ford has said he “laughed out loud” during a screening of House of Gucci. While he praised Lady Gaga’s performance as Patrizia Reggiani, Ford, who was the creative director of Gucci between 1994 and 2004, was scathing in his critique of the film. The Ridley Scott-directed starrer, which has been repeatedly criticised by the Gucci family, tells the story of Reggiani’s doomed marriage to Maurizio Gucci. Reggiani was convicted of ordering his murder after hiring a hitman to kill him. After watching the film, Ford said that he was “deeply sad for several days” and that it was hard for him to “see the humour and camp” in something that was so bloody. “In real life, none of it was camp,” he said in the digital magazine Air Mail. “I suspect [it] will be a hit,” he wrote. “Splash the Gucci name across things and they usually sell.” Indeed, online searches for Gucci clothes have increased by 73% since the release of the film. Ford, who launched his own company in 2005 after leaving Gucci as well as later directing the films A Single Man and Nocturnal Animals, went on to praise some aspects of the film. He applauded “Gaga’s and [Adam] Driver’s strong performances, powerful over-the-top portrayals by the entire cast, impeccable costumes, stunning sets and beautiful cinematography”. Today, the Gucci family released a statement, calling the film: “an insult to the legacy on which the brand is built today.” They say that they observed the release of House of Gucci with “some bewilderment.” “Despite the claim that the work seeks to tell the ‘true story’ of the family, the fears aroused by the trailer and interviews released thus far are confirmed: the film conveys a narrative that is anything but accurate,” reads the statement. It adds that the family reserves: “the right to take any action necessary to protect the name, image and dignity of themselves and their loved ones.” Addressing the factual accuracy behind the film, director Ridley Scott told Total Film last month: “I tried to be as respectful as possible by being as factual as possible, and as factual as we can possibly imagine.” Scott added: “the story, in a funny kind of way, it’s a satire. And therefore, satire is really a posh way of saying it’s a comedy. And I think a lot of it is comedic. Certainly for the first two acts.”If we want to tackle the climate crisis, we need to address a global blindspot: the vast underground fungal networks that sequester carbon and sustain much of life on Earth. Fungi are largely invisible ecosystem engineers. Most live as branching, fusing networks of tubular cells known as mycelium. Globally, the total length of fungal mycelium in the top 10cm of soil is more than 450 quadrillion km: about half the width of our galaxy. These symbiotic networks comprise an ancient life-support system that easily qualifies as one of the wonders of the living world. Through fungal activity, carbon floods into the soil, where it supports intricate food webs – about 25% of all of the planet’s species live underground. Much of it remains in the soil, making underground ecosystems the stable store of 75% of all terrestrial carbon. But climate change strategies, conservation agendas and restoration efforts overlook fungi and focus overwhelmingly on aboveground ecosystems. This is a problem: the destruction of underground fungal networks accelerates both climate change and biodiversity loss and interrupts vital global nutrient cycles. These networks should be regarded as a global public good to be mapped, protected and restored as a matter of urgency. Fungi lie at the base of the food webs that support much of life on Earth. About 500m years ago, fungi facilitated the movement of aquatic plants on to land, fungal mycelium serving as plant root systems for tens of millions of years until plants could evolve their own. This association transformed the planet and its atmosphere – the evolution of plant-fungal partnerships coincided with a 90% reduction in the level of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Today, most plants depend on mycorrhizal fungi – from the Greek words for fungus (mykes) and root (rhiza) – which weave themselves through roots, provide plants with crucial nutrients, defend them from disease and link them in shared networks sometimes referred to as the “wood wide web”. These fungi are a more fundamental part of planthood than leaves, wood, fruit, flowers or even roots. We are destroying the planet’s fungal networks at an alarming rate. Based on current trends, more than 90% of the Earth’s soil will be degraded by 2050. Modern industries, from agriculture to forestry, have failed to take account of the life in the soil. Despite the fact that mycorrhizal fungi supply as much as 80% of a plant’s nutrients, intensive farming practices – through a combination of ploughing and application of chemical fertilisers, pesticides and fungicides – severely reduce the abundance, diversity and physical integrity of fungal networks. Logging wreaks havoc below ground, decreasing the abundance of mycorrhizal fungi by as much as 95%, and the diversity of fungal communities by as much as 75%. A large study published in 2018 suggested that the “alarming deterioration” of the health of trees across Europe was caused by a disruption of their mycorrhizal relationships, brought about by nitrogen pollution from fossil fuel combustion and agricultural fertiliser. Mycorrhizal fungal networks make up between a third and a half of the living mass of soils and are a major global carbon sink. When we destroy them, we sabotage our efforts to limit global heating. Plants supply carbon to their fungal partners in exchange for nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus – much of the phosphorus that makes up the DNA in your own body will have passed through a mycorrhizal fungus. In their exchange, plants and fungi engage in sophisticated trading strategies, striking compromises and resolving dizzyingly complex trade-offs. The influence of these quadrillions of microscopic trading decisions spills out over whole continents. Globally, at least 5bn tons of carbon dioxide are sequestered within mycorrhizal networks each year, a quantity roughly equivalent to the amount of carbon dioxide emitted annually by the US (unpublished data suggests this figure is closer to 17bn tons). Even small reductions in the prevalence of fungal networks have significant consequences: a release of just 0.1% of the carbon now stored in Europe’s soils is equal to the annual emissions from 100m cars. Mycorrhizal fungi are keystone organisms that support planetary biodiversity; when we disrupt them, we jeopardise the health and resilience of the organisms on which we depend. Fungal networks form a sticky living seam that holds soil together; remove the fungi, and the ground washes away. Mycorrhizal networks increase the volume of water that the soil can absorb, reducing the quantity of nutrients leached out of the soil by rainfall by as much as 50%. They make plants less susceptible to drought and more resistant to salinity and heavy metals. They even boost the ability of plants to fight off attacks from pests by stimulating the production of defensive chemicals. The current focus on aboveground biodiversity neglects more than half of the most biodiverse underground ecosystems, because areas with the highest biodiversity aboveground are not always those with the highest soil biodiversity. Mycorrhizal fungal networks and the nutrient flows and processes they manage should be considered a global public good, analogous to clean air and water. For millennia in many parts of the world, traditional farming and land management practices have attended to the health of the soil and thus supported plants’ fungal relationships implicitly. But over the course of the 20th century, our behaviour has led us into trouble. Organisations like the Society for the Protection of Underground Networks (Spun), the Fungi Foundation and GlobalFungi are advocating for soil ecosystems, and leading a massive global sampling effort to create open-source maps of Earth’s fungal networks. These maps will help chart the properties of underground ecosystems, such as carbon sequestration hotspots, and document new fungal species able to withstand drought and high temperatures. Researchers will be able to track the distribution of fungal networks as they shift in response to changing climates and patterns of land use, much as they already do for global vegetation, climates and ocean currents. A deeper knowledge of these dynamic living systems will support conservation projects and policies that aim to halt their destruction and encourage their recovery, besides driving much-needed innovation in underground ecosystem science and technology. Mycorrhizal fungal networks have long sustained and enriched life on our planet. It’s time they receive the attention they deserve. Toby Kiers is professor of evolutionary biology at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and co-founder of the Society for the Protection of Underground Networks (Spun) Merlin Sheldrake is a biologist and the author of Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds, and Shape Our FuturesOn Saturday it took Ashley Hatch 24 seconds to score the USA’s opener. Three days later the Matildas made it to three minutes and 16 seconds without conceding to the very same player. By the simplest of definitions, this is an improvement. Likewise, a 1-1 draw in Newcastle is better than a 3-0 loss in Sydney. Apart from that there is not much more to say after this two-match friendly series. There is little more learned than what we already knew: that Australia play freely in attack but struggle with the final ball, and that they also play freely at the back – though in a less complimentary sense. This series was, as manager Tony Gustavsson called it, was a “dress rehearsal” for the 2023 World Cup final. On the balance of play against a USA team missing a number of high-profile veterans, they could have a hard time getting even close. The Americans have been at the top of the Fifa rankings for 13 of the past 14 years for a reason, and their ruthless professionalism was always supposed to offer a test for an Australian outfit which has beaten them only once some four years ago. But still Tuesday’s match did not so much expose, but confirm, existing vulnerabilities still to be addressed before the Asian Cup in January. Results, of course, are the real currency, and that the hosts plucked a goal from nothing in the final minutes is a credit to the team’s attacking intent. Kyah Simon, too, will be pleased with her deflected strike from the edge of the box, which will offer some solace for the sitter she missed on Saturday. Overall, though, the Matildas finished this match with 16 shots to eight (7-2 on target) and did well not to concede more than Hatch’s flashy opener in the far corner. The scene had been set for a home win. The Matildas like scoring in Newcastle and the pitch, slick from the rain, was the perfect platform. The crowd clearly knew this too, all 20,459 of them moving with the sounds of beatings drums. Sam Kerr in particular is prolific here, with five from three games at McDonald Jones Stadium. The Chelsea striker was primed for a big outing, having the very same day place third in this year’s Ballon d’Or Féminin vote behind Alexia Putellas and Jennifer Hermoso. “I feel proud just to be on that list so to be third,” she said before the game. “It hasn’t really sunk in yet but I feel really proud and honoured that I was before a lot of great names.” Kerr could have given the spectators what they wanted late in the first half, when she did not quite bury Ellie Carpenter’s fine cross, but will return to England hungry ahead of the weekend’s Women’s FA Cup final against Arsenal and some of her national teammates. There were other bright sparks, too, including Hayley Raso and Mary Fowler, and the belatedly-introduced Clare Wheeler, who was instrumental in the equaliser. Kyra Cooney-Cross had a chance too, denied only by Casey Murphy’s fingertips with 20 minutes played. But in the end it was all a bit difficult against a world champion side featuring Rose Lavelle and Lindsey Horan, who scored a would-be winner in the 92nd minute only for it to be ruled offside. Raso’s return to the XI turned into a 70-minute Emily Fox hunt. The competition and raw physicality between the pair out wide rivalled the broader contest itself. It also tested Raso’s shoulder, which has kept the Manchester City winger out for both club and country in recent months and copped Fox’s full body weight during one of countless clashes. Fowler, for her part, was again on song, threading ball after ball to Kerr with a cunning and meticulousness defying her 18 years. Her on-field connection with her captain in particular is one of the more pleasing elements of this team in its current form. The obvious issue, of course, comes when one or both are unavailable. Fowler and Kerr are what Gustavsson described pre-match as two of his “core group of players” in this starting line-up, which begs the question: if this is the “core group”, where are the back-ups? The manager has introduced some debutants in recent windows but the overall look of the team remains the same, suggesting depth could be an issue in the Asian Cup and beyond, with the 2023 World Cup now not such a distance-future prospect. This was supposed to be the issue of the USA team, whose largely second-string side have shone this series with several young players and confirmed by Vlatko Andonovski’s decision to retain an identical starting line-up save for the inclusion of Sofia Huerta. And so the visitors’ efficiency remained and Lydia Williams was forced to defend her goal repeatedly, including one superb dive to deny Lynn Williams. The pressure built and a second USA goal was seemingly on the way, until Wheeler won the ball off Ashley Sanchez to start an attacking move that ended with the ball at Simon’s feet, then bouncing off substitute Becky Sauerbrunn and over Murphy into the net.A prominent academic has resigned from a Hungarian higher education body, alleging censorship and accusing the top European standards organisation of turning a blind eye to waning academic freedom in central Europe. Andrea Pető, a professor at the Central European University in Vienna, said she had resigned from the Hungarian Accreditation Committee’s humanities subcommittee last week after she was asked to change part of an article she wrote that was due to be published in an academic journal. Academic freedom in Hungary has been under pressure since Viktor Orbán returned to power in 2010. Under the prime minister’s self-proclaimed “illiberal democracy”, the ruling Fidesz party has sought to take control of courts and public institutions, while shrinking the space for independent media and NGOs. The Central European University was forced to leave Budapest for Vienna in 2018, and observers have voiced concern about a tax on institutions helping refugee students and researchers. Pető said the director of the Hungarian Accreditation Committee (MAB), Prof Valeria Csépe, asked her to withdraw a statement in the draft article that criticised the European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA) for failing to confront a slide to illiberalism in educational policy in Hungary and Poland. MAB is a member of ENQA, a Brussels-based body that promotes quality standards in higher education across Europe, the Balkans and Central Asia. “You can feel how dictatorship works,” the historian and specialist in gender studies said in her first interview with international media since her resignation. “Because this is not the state, this is not Prime Minister Orbán who is giving orders. Those who make this system work are the kind of ordinary people who are running those institutions. The whole story looks as it had happened in communist Hungary well before 1989.” Pető said the request to withdraw her criticism of ENQA was “unacceptable … against my values, against my professional conviction, against everything I have been working for in the last 30 years. “The president of the Hungarian Accreditation Committee wanted me to change what I think about the European accreditation process, namely that the ENQA is unprepared for the illiberal attack, as they are just accepting at face value what is reported to them as the truth.” She accused ENQA of staying silent while academic freedom was under pressure in Hungary, citing the examples of the Hungarian government’s decision to close gender studies programmes and policies that pushed her university to leave Budapest for Vienna – the first time in decades a university has been forced out of a European country. The professor said “the European infrastructure” was so focused on box-ticking requirements it was failing to recognise a paradigm shift in higher education in central Europe. MAB joined the pan-European ENQA in 2002 and had its membership reconfirmed in September 2018 under a regular five-year review. Her resignation came after what she described as “a very stormy discussion” on academic responsibility inside MAB’s humanities subcommittee over a government plan to cut teacher training by one year, which she opposes. The professor hopes other academics will also resign, as she believes the episode illustrates a wider problem. In the article, which was published unchanged last week, she argued an illiberal turn in higher education policy was leading to self censorship among Hungarian academics. MAB declined to comment publicly. Senior sources, however, do not dispute that the director requested a change to Pető’s article, but characterise the change as a technical correction relating to MAB’s relationship with ENQA. In a statement, ENQA said the purpose of its agency reviews was to assess “compliance with external quality assurance activities relating to learning and teaching in higher education”. It added that academic freedom “is not specifically covered” by those standards and the review process, but is covered by other aspects of the Bologna process, a reference to a wider policy of cooperation in European higher education spanning 48 countries. “The ENQA review process assesses the agency itself (its policies and practices) and not the education system of the country in which it operates,” the agency added. ENQA also said it had full confidence in the independent experts, who receive training, to carry out reviews. “Since the review in 2018, ENQA remains satisfied that [MAB] continues to meet the standards of the ESG,” a reference to its standards and guidelines on quality assurance.Entering Sheffield’s Crucible theatre – currently celebrating its 50th anniversary – always gives one a lift: there is something about its open stage that seems to presage excitement. It helps that under its four directors this century – Michael Grandage, Samuel West, Daniel Evans and Rob Hastie – the work has been of high quality and the audience steadfastly loyal. But I’ve just been reading an extraordinary book – Stirring Up Sheffield by Colin George, the theatre’s late founding director, and his son Tedd – that records in bruising detail the bloody battles the building faced half a century ago. I first came across Colin George when he was a well-graced actor and contemporary of Albert Finney at the Birmingham Rep in the mid-1950s. He moved into directing first in Nottingham and then in Sheffield where in 1965 he succeeded Geoffrey Ost in running the city’s Playhouse. George had lots of fresh ideas, including playing in repertoire and setting up a young people’s company, but was staggered when invited to a meeting at the town hall in 1966 to be asked by a former Lord Mayor, “Now then, where do you want your new theatre?” Plans were drawn up for a main auditorium, with a jutting forestage, and for a flexible studio. But the big moment, that was to have a lasting effect on Sheffield and on British theatre, came when George and his ally on the Playhouse board, David Brayshaw, went on a fact-finding mission to North America. They had already heard the great peripatetic director Tyrone Guthrie talking with missionary fervour about the supremacy of the open stage. What they saw at the Guthrie theatre in Minneapolis and at the Stratford festival in Ontario convinced them that this was where the future lay. Guthrie’s own magical production of The House of Atreus persuaded them that the sculptural possibilities of the open, or thrust, stage knocked into a cocked hat the pictorial illusion of the proscenium theatre. It was a Damascene conversion and, to their credit, the board backed George’s radical vision of an open stage for Sheffield’s new theatre. But this was where the trouble began. Bernard Miles, founder of London’s Mermaid theatre, led a hostile media campaign against the idea branding the three-sided stage as “an abortion born of street platforms set up inside bear and bull-baiting rings and inn-yards”. One of Sheffield’s main papers, the Star, took up the cause, wondering how drawing-room drama as well as visiting opera and ballet would survive on the open stage. An articulate local theatregoer campaigned, with almost sexual fervour, against “the stage that really thrusts! Deeper than deep!” Today this seems like a battle long since won. If you look around the UK, you find audiences respond warmly to different configurations. They flock eagerly to the open stages of the Olivier, Chichester, Stratford-upon-Avon’s Swan or the theatres-in-the round at the Royal Exchange in Manchester, the Stephen Joseph in Scarborough or the Orange Tree in Richmond, also celebrating its 50th birthday. That doesn’t mean proscenium theatre is dead. But there is far less fun sitting in a three-tiered space, where the quality of your view depends on your income, than in one of those wrap around auditoria where the spectators inhabit the same space as the actors. Those doom-mongers who thought the Crucible would only be suitable for certain kinds of play have also been proved ridiculously wrong. It works perfectly for an epic drama such as Schiller’s Don Carlos, which looked more at home in Sheffield than it did in London’s West End. Githa Sowerby’s Rutherford and Son, a classic Edwardian picture frame play bred of the theatre of illusion, sat comfortably in the Crucible. New work, not least Richard Bean’s The Nap, which paid homage to the Crucible’s hosting of snooker, never seems swamped by the space. George’s candid memoir ends a touch wistfully with the premature departure of himself and his designer, Tanya Moiseiwitsch. But even if the book shows that pioneers often pay a price for their vision, it also proves that they are vindicated by time and that only minds firmly closed are opposed to the open stage. Stirring Up Sheffield is published by Wordville PressHaris Aziz is not a man to let a problem pass him by. Born in Pakistan, he did a Bsc at Lahore University of management sciences, an MSc in maths at Oxford, a PhD at Warwick and is now an associate professor at the University of New South Wales. There he specialises in computational social choice and algorithmic game theory. So far, so on a higher plane. He also loves cricket. So when, during the recent men’s T20 World Cup in the UAE and Oman, the toss became increasingly problematic and the advantage of winning it and fielding first, when a very heavy dew fell at dusk, became more and more obvious – especially in Dubai where 12 out of 13 games were won by the chasing team – Aziz applied his considerable brainpower. How to, in his words, “ensure that the toss continues to be meaningful but doesn’t have an unfair effect on the outcome of the match”. “One of the overarching issues that I work on is that many decisions are being made by computers or computer algorithms and one of the overarching themes is how these decisions are made in a fair manner,” he says. “And that was the angle I took when looking at this issue: fairness.” For Aziz, the toss is not inherently unfair over a long sequence of games as both teams equally have the chance to win it, but it is if you consider it on a match-by match basis. For example, in a one-off game such as the ICC World Test Championship final, the last match of an Ashes series or a T20 World Cup final. The problem is not only advantage to the toss-winning side due to things like the state of the pitch and weather conditions, but also perceived advantage, which can make the losing side feel hard done by and also denigrate the achievement of the winning team. Aziz’s solution is to move the toss from a two-step formula – toss the coin, winning captain chooses – to a three-step formula: toss, propose, choose. Here, the coin is tossed as normal, then the Unlucky (toss-losing) captain chooses a run handicap to pin to the more favourable option in order to equalise the two choices, before handing back to the Lucky (toss-winning) captain to make the final decision of whether to bat or field. The beauty of the division is that the Unlucky captain will not overestimate or underestimate the runs needed to equal up the decision, as it is the Lucky captain who gets to make the final choice. “The reason I came up with this method is that it also has really solid mathematical foundations,” says Aziz. “It is inspired by a rule called divide and choose which has been used throughout history to make a very different kind of allocation decision about dividing a divisible resource. Steven Brams and Alan Taylor have written an excellent book on it called Fair Division. Here we don’t have a divisible resource but we do have runs, which are almost a divisible resource, and which we can use to balance things out.” To non-mathematicians, it is a variation on the age-old solution to squabbling children: let one child cut the cake, and the others choose the slices. I like the jeopardy aspect of how many additional runs might be worth giving away in order to make the opposition captain opt for what you would like them to do – but it definitely piles added complications on to a game that is already subdivided up to Law 42.7.2.2 (bad behaviour by a runner). But Aziz has thought this through too. “Cricket already has so many rules such as Duckworth-Lewis and this [the three-step toss] is fairly simple in that respect. How does a captain make the decision? This can be estimated by a very simple thought experiment. Would you bowl first or bat first, then would you bowl or bat first if five, 10, 15 extra runs were added? At some point you would say I’m indifferent between the two options. By doing that, the losing captain cannot say they were disadvantaged.” There must be a possibility, though, that this will end up being another data-driven decision in a game that sometimes seems it might be eaten up by its own analytics. Can a computer ape intuition? “By careful analysis one can get a pretty good idea of bowling first given two teams at one ground at a certain temperature, but I feel that sports rules should be elegant and simple so my method is not dependent on any calculations on a computer. I think the beautiful rules in sport are those that are timeless and not dependent on technology.” Though concerns were raised during and after the T20 World Cup by voices as prominent as Sunil Gavaskar, the problem of the toss has been vexing minds for some time. The ICC cricket committee considered removing the toss from the World Test Championship in 2018, but decided instead to urge member nations to produce better pitches. The County Championship went one further between 2016 and 2019, giving the visiting teams the opportunity to bin the toss and bowl first. This was an attempt to stop clubs preparing excessively damp seam-friendly pitches and to encourage spin bowling, but after four years the England and Wales Cricket Board decided it hadn’t worked. In limited-overs cricket, the captain has had to become something of a gambler, deciding whose over allocation to keep up their sleeve for the crucial final over, the vital penultimate over, that key last over of the power play. Batters have had to reassess their calibration of risk, and DRS means that even in Tests, captains must choose when to play their joker. Aziz’s proposed toss reform is a continuation in the same direction: more risk, but greater integrity. The TV companies would love it. Heads, it’s a goer. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.When it comes to outsized projects with geopolitical undertones, Walter Smerling has form. Between 2015 and 2017, the chairman of the Stiftung für Kunst und Kultur (Foundation for Art and Culture) in Bonn and a German art-world statesman of sorts organised the largest ever exhibitions of Chinese art in Germany and German art in China. And when tensions between western Europe and Russia started rising around the same time, he envisaged a continent-spanning exhibition: “A dialogue,” as he puts it, “about what unites people in Europe. About democracy, about solidarity, about personal and political freedom.” The result is Diversity United, a traveling group exhibition comprising over 150 artworks by around 100 living artists, from 34 countries, chosen by 10 curators. It is not, mercifully, about Brexit, but it does aim to highlight “the importance of a united Europe during times of political uncertainty”. Smerling says he is on a mission to promote basic liberal values. “How do we work together?” he wanted the show to ask. “What do respect, dignity and freedom mean?” In 2018, he convened curators from museums and galleries across the continent and together they whittled down a longlist of 300-plus living artists to about 90. And for something funded almost entirely by the private sector, it is an impressive muster. All the textbook Europe-related names feature: from octogenarian luminaries Georg Baselitz, Paula Rego and Sheila Hicks to Sonia Boyce (who will represent Britain at the Venice Biennale in 2022), and Yan Pei-Ming (one of the few contemporary artists whose work sits in the Louvre, following his own Venice appearance in the early 2000s). Moscow-based painter Ekaterina Muromtseva is the youngest, born in 1990. Gerhard Richter, who at this point in his career really could get away with always saying no, called Smerling up and instantly agreed to take part. He proposed his European Landscapes, a set of 60 uncharacteristically small, gem-like overpainted photographs, that few will know. Anselm Kieffer too went all out, with a piece that no one had seen yet: a full-scale mise-en-scène of 19th-century Romantics (from Madame de Staël to Lord Byron), inscribed, in that immediately recognisable cursive of his, into a painterly, wintery forest. And Christian Boltanski, who sadly passed away between the printing of the catalogue and the show being installed in Berlin in May, made a new video work entitled Etre à nouveau (“To be again”) Diversity United. Formatted like one of those children’s books where you can mix and match the heads, bodies and tails of creatures, this piece features monochrome headshots of unnamed children from Russia, Germany and France, their foreheads, eyes and mouths constantly shuffling into new facial configurations. The curatorial team spent hours transcribing telephone conversations with the artists about their work and their relationships to Europe as a place and an idea. Nothing about that is straightforward though, not least what is meant by “Europe”. The term refers neither to the EU, nor to the Council of Europe. The map in the catalogue excludes Turkey (which has been on said council since 1950, 46 years before Russia was granted membership) yet Turkish-born, Amsterdam-based conceptual artist Ahmet Ögüt makes his mark with an arresting installation composed of protective police shields. Several of the curators point out that most of the artists here have lived in at least two countries, many in several more, and several weren’t born where they now call home. As Paris-based British curator Simon Baker says of Yan Pei-Ming: “One of China’s greatest artists has been based in Dijon for the last 38 years and has made these incredible paintings about Napoleon. To me, that’s contemporary Europe.” I saw the first instalment in West Berlin, entering through a discombobulating portal of yellow light courtesy of Icelandic – Danish artist Olafur Eliasson (the second instalment is now open in Moscow). The show is divided into 10 chapters. In the opener – titled Dreams and Democracy – at Lucy and Jorge Orta’s Antarctica World Passport Office, you can acquire citizenship and papers for a fictional community dedicated to combatting climate change and global inequality. My passport is numbered 2188. You can get a mini man too – one of the thousands of plastic models Fernando Sanchez Castillo has made of the one resistant who refused to give the Nazi salute in a crowd of Hitler supporters in 1936. And you can sit with Moldovian film-maker Pavel Brăila’s magnificent Shoes for Europe, from 2002: a documentary about how former USSR trains have to make a stop en route to western Europe because their carriages are fitted for a wider gauge of railroad track. They have to change their shoes. Yan’s depiction of Napoleon crowning himself (in masterful, monochrome crimson) anchors the third and most powerful of the chapters. Entitled Memory and Conflict, this grouping includes a Tarkovskyesque video meditation on fear – an endless shot of what looks like an asteroid that ceaselessly flames but never crashes, by Moscow collective Bluesoup. Polish sculptor Alicja Kwade’s rocks on slender structures is a mesmerising moment of heft and disquiet both. And Latvian artist Kristaps Epners offers up a deeply evocative diptych featuring, on the one hand, a silent film about an old man in a leather jacket traversing a cold lake and, on the other, a patchwork travelogue about two young men on a journey into Siberia. You come out of that (I was moved to tears) only to be greeted by Estonian sculptor Kris Lemsalu’s altogether more rambunctious poetry: a wall-based pincushion of freewheeling, lifesized limbs cast in clay and glazed like a Jackson Pollock, ensconced in this tufted pink eiderdown with a boombox and multicoloured climbing wall grips scattered all about in every which way. It is a dance you can’t hear but you can definitely feel: satisfyingly and gleefully tactile. The project, like any textbook, is as deeply flawed as the territory it seeks to showcase. For something that literally has “diversity” in the title, the cast is almost all white. Certainly all the curators are. But there is, undeniably, beautiful art everywhere, from some of Europe’s most spellbinding artists. And in that sense this is a show that cannot fail. • Diversity United is at the New Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, until 13 March.Home Alone meets The Lost Boys in this trashy half-way entertaining Christmas vampire movie from director Sean Nichols Lynch; it’s a black comedy with some silly splattery gore. Lynch makes the most of a limited budget and his self-aware script is sometimes genuinely funny, too. Still, you wouldn’t exactly call it light of touch and the actors struggle a bit with the comic register. Some scenes leave you wondering: is this intentionally naff or just a bit wooden? The setting is Lake Tahoe a couple of nights before Christmas. Dennice Cisneros plays Olivia, an unpublished author of romantic vampire novels who lives alone; her kitchen drawer is stuffed full of rejection letters. Any jobbing writer will sympathise with Olivia’s decision-making when she rescues a bat that turns out to be an actual vampire – a hot vampire at that. He is Luke (Nico Bellamy), and Olivia makes him an offer: he can crash for a few nights in her garage while he recovers from a nasty wooden-stake injury in return for reading her latest manuscript. So, while she warms up mugs of pigs’ blood for him in the microwave (“they were practically giving it away at the butcher’s”), he gives her line-by-line feedback on her prose. The fundamental flaw in the script is that Olivia overcomes her terror of Luke in about five minutes flat, switching to Twilight-ish fantasies of romance – even after a vampire hunter knocks at her door and Luke’s leather-jacket-wearing vamp buddies begin sniffing around. Barely a drop of dramatic tension remains. • Red Snow is released on 6 December on digital platforms.Plans to adapt Alice Sebold’s memoir Lucky, about her rape as an 18-year-old, have been dropped, according to Variety. The news comes after the rape conviction at the heart of the 1999 memoir was overturned last week. Anthony Broadwater had spent 16 years in prison after being convicted of the crime in 1982, based largely on Sebold’s identification of him as her rapist on the witness stand, and on microscopic hair analysis by an expert tying him to the crime. The US Department of Justice now rejects such analysis, and Broadwater was cleared last Monday of raping Sebold. “I’m not going to sully this proceeding by saying, ‘I’m sorry.’ That doesn’t cut it,” said the Onondaga county district attorney, William Fitzpatrick. “This should never have happened.” Tim Mucciante, who has a production company called Red Badge Films, signed on as executive producer of the adaptation, to feature You star Victoria Pedretti. But Mucciante became sceptical of Broadwater’s guilt and “started poking around and trying to figure out what really happened here”. Now Variety has reported that the film adaptation has been dropped, and that Pedretti is no longer involved with the project. According to the entertainment magazine, a source close to the production said it had been abandoned after “losing its financing months ago”. Lucky details how as an 18-year-old Sebold was raped and beaten inside a tunnel near her university campus. Later, Sebold writes of how she saw a Black man in the street and was convinced he was her attacker. “He was smiling as he approached. He recognised me. It was a stroll in the park to him; he had met an acquaintance on the street. “‘Hey, girl,’ he said. ‘Don’t I know you from somewhere?’” Sebold writes. “I looked directly at him. Knew his face had been the face over me in the tunnel.” Broadwater is given the pseudonym Gregory Madison in the book. The memoir records how after he is arrested, Sebold fails to identify him in a police identity parade, but he is nonetheless tried and convicted. A spokesperson for publisher Scribner declined to comment on the conviction’s overturning. “Neither Alice Sebold nor Scribner has any comment. Scribner has no plans to update the text of Lucky at this time,” they said. Sebold went on to write the award-winning, bestselling novel The Lovely Bones, about the rape and murder of a young girl. “I never, ever, ever thought I would see the day that I would be exonerated,” said Broadwater after the court made its ruling last week. • This article was amended on 30 November 2021. An earlier version suggested Lucky was a Netflix production.This pandemic has a lot to answer for, but your article on the Resolution Foundation’s report on the economic fallout from Covid-19 (UK workforce shrinks after sharp rise in people choosing to leave work, 23 November) highlighted a particularly dismal finding. Having left a legacy of over half a million more people economically inactive in the UK, coronavirus has caused participation in the workforce by those aged between 55 and 64 to fall by 1.2 percentage points – the biggest drop in any recession for 40 years. This is very worrying, because having older workers and age diversity in the workplace makes such a positive contribution to employers, to society and to the workers themselves. We know that good work and good working conditions benefit workers’ physical and mental health, especially where employers and management can help ensure all their people are able to fulfil their potential. Yet employers must look after their people and recognise their value if they are to recruit and retain a productive workforce. They need to take a socially sustainable approach by designing better jobs, adjusting their workplaces and investing in training and skills, retraining and redeployment, as well as flexible working and phased retirement. It’s time to invest in the skills, experience, knowledge transfer and stability that older people bring to their work. With a third of workers in developed countries estimated to be aged over 60 by 2050, we’re really going to need the full value and potential that they bring. Ruth Wilkinson Head of health and safety, Institution of Occupational Safety and Health • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A senior Olympic official has defended his organisation’s efforts to confirm the safety of Peng Shuai, dismissing criticism as “silly” and saying no one else had been able to get in touch with the tennis star who went missing after publishing allegations of sexual assault. Dick Pound, who has held a variety of posts with the IOC over 45 years and is the chairman of Olympic Broadcasting Services, rejected criticism of the IOC for giving minimal information after its president, Thomas Bach, spoke with Peng via video link last week. Some had accused the IOC of seeking to not anger Beijing and prioritising the commercial relationship over the safety of athletes. China is due to host the Winter Olympics in February. Pound’s defence of his organisation’s handling of the case came as calls grow from western countries for China to release clear evidence that Peng is safe. “The EU requests the Chinese government to provide verifiable proof of Peng Shuai’s safety, wellbeing and whereabouts,” the bloc said in a statement on Tuesday. It also urged “the Chinese authorities to conduct a full, fair and transparent investigation into her allegations of sexual assault” against a retired senior Chinese official. In an interview with Bloomberg on Tuesday, Pound said criticisms of his organisation were “silly” and “not supported by the evidence”. He said the fact the IOC had been able to contact her when others hadn’t should provide reassurance, and suggested it was not unusual. “I was disappointed, I thought everyone was anxious to find out that she was fine and healthy. The IOC was able to establish that and the others were not. All of a sudden it becomes somebody else’s fault that their questions haven’t been answered,” he said. In an essay posted to social media this month, Peng, a former doubles world No 1, accused Zhang Gaoli, a former Chinese vice-premier, of coercing her into sex her three years ago. The post was quickly deleted and Peng was not seen in public for more than two weeks as the Women’s Tennis Association and colleagues said they were unable to reach her. As an international campaign for answers on her whereabouts built, fuelled by ham-fisted apparent propaganda released by Chinese state media, the IOC was urged to leverage the Beijing Winter Games to seek assurances of Peng’s safety. A subsequent 30-minute call with Peng included Bach, the IOC athletes’ commission chair, Emma Terho, and IOC member Li Lingwei, a former vice-president of the Chinese Tennis Association. Bach said Peng had told them she was safe and well and wanted privacy. However human rights groups and others advocating for Peng said they remained concerned she was not able to speak freely, and criticised the IOC for not addressing the original allegations, or why Peng had not made any further posts or why her friends could not reach her. Yaqiu Wang, senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch, accused the IOC of “actively playing a role in the Chinese government’s enforced disappearance, coercion and propaganda machinery”. Pound said on Tuesday that people “not on the call” did not have the benefit of knowing what the discussion may have been, and everyone “should be reassured she is fine and healthy and there are no signs of compulsion, rather than speculating what might be the case.” The IOC, and Pound specifically, have resisted calls to release the tape of the call. Meanwhile, a British pro-Beijing commentator for CGTN, China’s state-owned English-language news broadcaster, said on Monday that he had been banned by the outlet for publicly questioning CGTN’s ability to convince the world about Peng’s wellbeing. CGTN had released text it claimed was an email from Peng to the WTA, but this was widely dismissed as suspicious. South Korea-based Tom Fowdy said in an English-language post on China’s social media site Weibo that he wrote that piece on the Russian state-owned news website RT because “I love China and I despise what the US are doing in their propaganda war every day”. “Sometimes though we cannot run away from the truth just because we want to pretend things are great, when they may not be,” he wrote.Michael Carrick will remain in charge of Manchester United for the Premier League match at home against Arsenal on Thursday because the club have not received the requisite paperwork for Ralf Rangnick. The German has been appointed as interim manager until the end of the season but has not yet been granted a work visa. A United statement said: “While the club follows the regulatory process around a work visa, Carrick will continue at the helm.” Whether Rangnick will have some input into team selection and tactics regarding the Arsenal match may become clear when Carrick speaks to the media at lunchtime on Wednesday. Carrick, a former United midfielder and now coaching staff member, was appointed as caretaker after Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s sacking following the 4-1 loss at Watford earlier this month. The 40-year-old has taken charge of a 2-0 victory at Villarreal that sealed qualification for the Champions League knockout stages and Sunday’s league draw at Chelsea. For each game he showed a willingness to make tough calls – dropping Bruno Fernandes for the win at Villarreal and Cristiano Ronaldo for the 1-1 result at Chelsea. Rangnick is expected to bring a more structured ethos to the side than under Solskjær and he, too, faces selection dilemmas. These include the patchy form of the captain, Harry Maguire, at centre-back, and regarding Ronaldo. At 36 years old he may be unable to adopt the high-pressing style the German coach is renowned for. With United hosting Crystal Palace on Sunday at Old Trafford it would be a surprise if Rangnick were not in the dugout then. United’s final Champions League group game with Young Boys, which is also at home, may be moved to a neutral venue due to Switzerland’s Covid restrictions. While the club are hopeful Young Boys will be granted dispensation to travel to Manchester for the game next Wednesday, the decision rests with the local government of the Swiss club’s canton, Berne.The Guardian has been named newspaper of the year at the Football Supporters’ Association awards – winning the award for the eighth time. The award was one of three big prizes for the Guardian, with the Football Weekly podcast winning podcast of the year and Jonathan Wilson picking up the writer of the year prize for the third time. The FSA, formerly known as the Football Supporters’ Federation, represents match-going fans across the UK, with the awards voted for by more than 40,000 fans. The Guardian’s writers made up half of the writer of the year shortlist, with Suzanne Wrack and Jonathan Liew also nominated. Cartoonist David Squires was featured on the online media of the year shortlist. The FSA said: “The Guardian deservedly took home the newspaper of the year for an amazing eighth year in a row, as voted for by fans. The breadth and quality of content is unsurpassed – proven by the fact that Guardian writers made up half of the shortlist for writer of the year.” Liverpool’s Mo Salah won the men’s player of the year award for a second time, while Arsenal’s Vivienne Miedema took home the women’s award. Alex Scott was named pundit of the year. You can view a full list of winners from the Football Supporters’ Association Awards here.Imagine, for a moment, the England football manager, Gareth Southgate, has just published a book about leadership. And within its pages has revealed that players in England are victims of “the disease of entitlement” and that a high-profile squad member has been sent away for acting lessons because he is too “inward looking” and unlikely to become the national captain. Then imagine him really picking up the pace: how the media “love to hate” England, how he prefers to work with assistant coaches he doesn’t necessarily like, how a named young international lacks discipline and how he himself needs two steam baths on a matchday to enable him to calm down and think clearly. All this, crucially, while still being paid to do the top job and with a career-shaping World Cup around the corner. Let’s just say the feedback might be lively. Eddie Jones, though, rarely appears too bothered what other people think. His latest book Leadership, published just in time for Christmas, can be relied upon to earn a few quid and ruffle feathers in roughly equal measure. Neither of those two outcomes has ever been an instinctive turn-off for the 61-year-old and, anyway, who can gainsay honesty? No one, if Eddie’s printed version of the truth really is gospel. But has he gone too soon with this particular instructional tome? England finished fifth in last year’s Six Nations and, for all their autumnal promise, have yet to hoist a World Cup under their far-sighted guru. While many of the team building tips sprinkled through the book are shrewd and well argued and Jones’s relentless work ethic comes over loud and clear, his is still an unfinished symphony. On the flip side, the essence of Eddie and his obsessive coaching nature shine through even more strongly than in his autobiography, written two years ago with the same high-calibre ghostwriter, Donald McRae. To declare an interest I have been fortunate to work alongside the latter at The Guardian for years. To say Eddie has been lucky to have such a brilliant practitioner fusing his thoughts and words is a Twickenham-sized understatement. But therein lies the biggest of Jones’s many contradictions. On the one hand he generally loves nothing more – “The more you win in England, it seems, the more they dislike you” – than slagging off the media. On the other he is more than happy for one of (ye olde) Fleet Street’s finest to make him sound good. Then there are his hot and cold relationships with his own coaching staff. In the book he writes thoughtfully about mellowing with age and the importance of empathy and calm judgment. In real life, we read claims of him berating an assistant coach for wanting to spend a day off watching his son play cricket. Sometimes he seems trapped in a world of deliberate self-flagellation. “He understands I am uncomfortable when I start feeling comfortable,” reveals Jones at one point, referring to the unsparingly honest conversations he has with his long-time Australian confidante Neil Craig. Which perhaps explains why his book manages to be simultaneously instructive, thought-provoking and slightly wince-inducing. Is it a good look, for example, to talk at length about how crucial it is to treat modern players with more individual sensitivity these days and then to publicly castigate Worcester’s Ollie Lawrence for the crime of not training as relentlessly as the great Beauden Barrett and attracting a few headlines as a possible successor to Manu Tuilagi? “He’s still a kid, only 21, but the way that some of the media raves about him you would think he’s already assured of becoming one of the best players in the world. He might do that, one day, but his attitude was not hungry or disciplined enough.” There are echoes here of the recent Emma Raducanu comments that generated some blowback for Jones. The latter remains convinced that young players and gushing headlines are a toxic mix, as if public acclaim is a crime against humanity. “I sometimes go harder on the younger players because I want to … make them understand that they are entitled to nothing,” he writes, reflecting on the lessons of England’s uneasy 2021 Six Nations campaign. “England lost their way partly because of a creeping sense of entitlement which ate away at the core values and principles we had established. Complacency corrupts the soul of the team. When that happens, the core of the team cracks open and you have to start again.” Always a possibility, of course, but perhaps there is also an argument that Jones’s blanket suspicion of youthful prodigies is increasingly dated and counterproductive? Is it truly enlightened leadership to cast a gifted playmaker such as Marcus Smith as a potentially spoiled kid or to invest in him unblinkingly? And is there any such creature, more generally, as a lazy modern-day England rugby international? Every single one, in my experience, is acutely conscious of the stiff competition and the need to work his or her socks off. They also play a sport in which half-heartedness, whether for club or country, is not an option. When Jones suggests he has found it tricky to pinpoint “a coherent English identity” it raises another question: is he too swift to stereotype certain types of people – players, colleagues, the media – before he trusts them as individuals? Maybe none of this ultimately matters. No one has ever disputed Jones’s deep coaching knowledge. Being a stern, workaholic taskmaster is not illegal and, from England’s perspective, he is vastly experienced and tactically savvy. “We will play some lovely rugby in the next year or so,” he forecasts at one point. “But I know that by the time the World Cup begins in 2023, we will revert to more pragmatic rugby.” Whatever happens, he also knows the defining chapter of his rugby life is yet to be written. Leadership: Lessons from My Life in Rugby by Eddie Jones with Donald McRae (Macmillan, £20.00) • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.EasyJet said near-term bookings had weakened since the new Omicron variant was identified amid concerns over travel restrictions, but it still expects passenger numbers to return to close to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the summer. The airline reported a loss before tax of £1.1bn for the year to 30 September, wider than the £835m loss made in 2020 but better than analysts had expected. Johan Lundgren, easyJet’s chief executive, said “many uncertainties remain as we navigate the winter” and the airline expected a “tough winter” outside the holiday period. However he added it was too soon to say what impact Omicron, and any additional restrictions which are introduced, may have on European travel. “We see some people are transferring out from bookings that have been made for December into the early part of next year,” he said, noting that passengers were rebooking for 2022 rather than cancelling their flights. City destinations have been more affected by customer changes than beach destinations, which remain popular for those seeking winter sun. “We never thought the recovery would be straightforward. We knew there was underlying demand, but that there would be some uncertainty in winter and that is where we are today,” he said. However, easyJet is expecting a “huge turnaround” next year, according to Lundgren, and sooner than many have predicted. “We’re seeing very strong demand into next summer,” he said, “because there is very strong pent-up demand. We have more revenue for next summer than we had at this point in time for the summer of 2019.” Many of those who have already booked their 2022 summer holiday have chosen sunshine destinations such as Greece, Turkey and Egypt. The airline reported strong demand during key periods such as the October half-term school break, as well as for ski and Christmas holidays. It has been increasing the number of flights and added slots at London’s Gatwick, Porto, Lisbon and Milan’s Linate airport, with plans to get up to 70% of its pre-pandemic capacity in its second quarter compared with 65% in the current quarter, and to near-2019 levels over the summer. Lundgren said the UK’s decision to put several countries in southern Africa on the red list of the toughest travel restrictions was an important measure. Yet he questioned the costly “blanket PCR testing” for travellers entering the UK, which “once again makes the UK government an outlier” in Europe. The government had only recently changed the requirement to lateral flow tests on day 2, in time for half-term breaks in late October. The threat posed by the “highly mutated” Omicron variant shows what a “perilous and precarious” situation the world is in, the head of the World Health Organization said on Monday. Stock markets, and especially shares in travel and aviation companies, tumbled on Friday amid concerns about the impact of the Omicron variant. Shares also traded lower on Tuesday after the chief executive of the US biotech firm Moderna, Stéphane Bancel, said in an interview with the Financial Times that it would take several months before an Omicron-specific vaccine could be produced at scale. Sophie Lund-Yates, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Airlines can’t seem to catch a break. News of new Covid variants, and the potential for further travel restrictions, makes it incredibly difficult to predict trading patterns from here. There are some competitive advantages where easyJet’s concerned. The biggest is that it’s a lower-cost short-haul carrier, where demand should return at a faster rate than long haul.”The television industry has a problem with the way it treats women. According to a survey by Film + TV Charity, 39% of female employees have experienced sexual harassment at work, while 67% have experienced bullying. Bectu, the union that supports TV and film workers, found that two-thirds of those who had experienced abuse did not report it for fear of being blacklisted. Other studies have reported mothers being prevented from working due to childcare issues, and a serious female under-representation in leadership positions, despite Ofcom finding that women make up around 45% of TV roles. The Guardian has spoken to a number of female TV insiders to hear what it’s really like. The producer I was at a wrap party, which is usually the best of TV fun. By this point, I hadn’t got to know a lot of the channel or the higher bosses and one of the most senior people essentially put his hand up my skirt on my way to the loo. I turned around and said: “What the fuck are you doing?” He went: “Well, there’s not much you can do about it,” laughed and walked off. I told a colleague and he said: “Watch out for him. I’ve heard he’s touched up interns and stuff.” I was horrified. I think I was quite lucky; I have heard of other people having had similar experiences that have gone further than that. He’s been my boss since then. If I did report him, it would get back to him because he’s one of the people who would have to deal with it. I would be terrified if he found out it was me. I do think there’s movement there, though. I also find that there’s a lot more opportunities for BAME people – I see more and more job posts specifically aiming for people of colour. I do think that, whether it’s quotas or whether it’s just generally monitoring diversity, it is working. The assistant producer/director I was sexually harassed by a commissioner from the age of 23 to 26-ish. He would take me out for drinks under the guise of networking. He’d go out and buy me bottles of wine and get me drunk. He’d tell me I was attractive and ask if I had a boyfriend. He’s married with kids. He recommended me to a talent manager at a company, and I ended up getting a job off the back of that chat. I bumped into [the commissioner] and told him, and he was like: “Ah, so I got you this job. You need to come out for a drink with me, then.” There was a sense of “I don’t want to ruffle his feathers because he’s powerful”. He had picked a place near my house. After the pub shut, he was like: “Why don’t we get a cup of tea at yours?” And I was like: “OK, well, if it’s a cup of tea, that’s fine.” I have flatmates as well so I felt safe. We went back to mine, were sitting in the living room, chatting on opposite sofas and then at one point he just lunged at me across the room. Like, he fell on my body. It was very strange, and then he sort of started wrestling me. He bit me on my arm and left marks. After that, I massively distanced myself. But I kept getting texts from him, saying: “Why haven’t I seen you?” It was very stressful – even talking about it now makes me feel sickened and disgusted. He was a good contact, and you always hear that TV’s about networking, right? The writer My friend worked on this show where the presenter was famously handsy. I went along to the wrap party, which was in a bar, and she spent all night sticking to me like glue, because [the presenter] kept chasing her into the bathroom and trying to grope her. She was laughing at the time but now, when we look back, we think – that was not fucking funny. Everybody knew it was going on. There’s a male-led management culture that becomes a lads-on-tour vibe. I was once working on a show where they cast an actor because – according to the joke being made in the room in front of me – the producer was like: “She’s shit, but I want to fuck her. You know?” It just speaks to their fundamental lack of respect for women. I also met with a producer, who is now quite prominent in [a broadcaster]. I was pitching ideas and he said: “Where’s your shoes and handbags show?” I said: “What?” He replied: “You’re giving me all this stuff about assassins and aliens and you’re a 21-year-old woman … where’s your Sex and the City? Where’s your shoes and handbags show? You know, like, shows that are going to appeal to people like you?” The reality TV producer I come from a working-class background so it wasn’t an easy route into TV. I was training as a multi-camera director on a reality TV show when I got pregnant with my first child. I was able to job share when my daughter was born, so after the birth I went back to a shared contract, which was great. [The reality show] was only on for four months every year so I went back to a few different companies. A lot of the time as a mum you end up in the edit suite making programmes, because it’s more office-based. I thought I could just job share – but nobody would entertain it. Nobody would do it. There are no part-time jobs in television and I couldn’t work full time. My phone didn’t ring that year. Literally, not a single phone call or email – nothing. Because most people knew that I had a baby. Things are changing slightly with certain roles, but you can’t really progress. You can’t talk openly about kids. When I started, people wouldn’t put maternity leave on their CVs. Meetings are often arranged at times that are awful for mums to go to. It’s much better now – remote working was never offered or even considered in television before, and it has been a game-changer – but there’s still a long, long way to go. You can’t manage long hours when you’ve got children. But you’ve got half a chance if you can work from home, so that is a massive, massive shift. The assistant producer/director I was working as a researcher and in order to get promoted to an assistant producer you have to have camera experience. So I was trying to get camera experience and [this cameraman] was being really kind on set, letting me play with the camera. At the time, I was 23 and everyone else was 40 plus and male. The cameraman and I had been talking earlier about how the hotel was really cold. Later that evening, I was in my room – he was next door – and it was quite late. I think it was midnight. I didn’t even know he had my number, but he texted me, like: “I found a way to turn the heating up. Do you want me to help you?” I remember at the time knowing there was no way I could show that text to my executive producer, because it was so by the book. But because of the dynamic we’d had that day and the fact that he was next door, it felt incredibly flirtatious. I didn’t reply, then he texted again with a question mark. It made me feel very frightened. I stopped bantering with him, which meant I didn’t touch the camera at any point during the rest of our shoot. I didn’t get the experience I needed to progress my career, because I was frightened he would think I was flirting with him. That’s the problem of being a woman in TV. All these relationships are friendly. You do need to be charming to progress. But how can you be charming as a young woman with a bunch of men, and not be perceived as being flirtatious?Ten days ago, people stood on the beach in Hastings and tried to prevent a lifeboat crew from going into the sea to rescue a group of refugees in a flimsy dinghy. According to a witness, they were shouting at the RNLI: “Don’t bring any more of those, we’re full up, that’s why we stopped our donations.” Meanwhile, a group from the same town calling itself Hastings Supports Refugees has set up what is thought to be the first emergency response team run by volunteers to welcome the bedraggled, traumatised newcomers and provide them with hot food and drinks, dry clothes and a warm welcome as soon as they come ashore. The two approaches underline tensions at the heart of one East Sussex coastal town affected by the rise in small boat arrivals which culminated in 27 people drowning as they attempted to cross the Channel last Wednesday. The Guardian visited this week. Hastings, population around 100,000, is on the frontline of the small boat arrivals. Refugees have been landing on its beach since 2019 but in line with the overall tripling of numbers this year there has been a huge increase, particularly in the last month. Dinghies not picked up by Border Force vessels when they are heading for Dover often drift towards Hastings or other towns on the south coast such as Dungeness, depending on weather and tides. The angry backlash happened on Saturday 20 November, and emerged after a woman called Zoe called James O’Brien’s LBC radio show last week. It was reported in the Hastings Observer on Tuesday. Zoe said she was on the beach with her boyfriend when the “lifeboat crew pulled the boat out and were going to go into the water” before a group “stood directly in the line of the boat so the boat couldn’t be put in the water”. An RNLI spokesperson confirmed to the Guardian that the incident had been reported to police, that the lifeboat had been able to launch and the Hastings lifeboat station remained in service. It isn’t the first time RNLI has faced criticism. In July Nigel Farage accused it of facilitating illegal migration, a claim strongly rebutted by RNLI. Donations to the charity subsequently surged. Previously, far-right supporters have turned up at the beach to hear from figures such as Nigel Marcham, known as Little Veteran, whipping up hostility towards people arriving in small boats. These moments have left some residents horrified. Many have responded generously to appeals from Hastings Supports Refugees to buy £5 Primark joggers, tops and underwear for people to change into on arrival so they can get out of clothes sodden with sea water. Restaurants and cafes have cooked trays of piping hot chips along with hot drinks and rushed them down to the beach. The beach response team has a box of emergency supplies at the ready and as soon as the phone pings to say there are new arrivals coming ashore, volunteers hurry down to the beach. Jane Grimshaw, one of the coordinators of the beach response team and co-chair of Hastings Community of Sanctuary, said: “From Dover to Hastings is the frontline of this. We do feel in the eye of this particular storm. It’s easy to disconnect from what’s going on with the refugees unless you see their suffering yourself.” The group says it does witness people standing on the beach shouting: “Go home”. But this is not the norm. Grimshaw, Rachael Roser and Rachel Lowden, who are also involved with the emergency response team, provided heartrending examples of things they have witnessed in the moments after people arrive on the beach. In extreme cases, the refugees are believed to have been at sea for more than 24 hours. The women were not sure if one refugee who arrived recently was dead or alive and had to gently coax food into his mouth to try to revive him. Some are children, and one produced a crumpled piece of corrugated cardboard he had tried to keep dry inside his clothing. He explained it was the phone number for his uncle in London. The boy called him on one of the volunteers’ phones and whoops of joy that he had survived and was safely in the UK could be heard down the line. Another boy who was offered a phone to call relatives shook his head and said he had been travelling for so long he was no longer in touch with any family members. One Syrian boy was clutching a piece of plastic which he refused to let go of. Police wanted to check what he had in his hand and it transpired it was his only photo of his mother, who had died in the conflict in his home country. He had kept the photo safe throughout his long and difficult journey and was not prepared to part with it now he had finally reached the UK. BJ Griffiths, a boatman and a longtime Hastings resident, told the Guardian he had reservations about the refugees, however. “I saw about 30 of them arriving in a boat only meant for 10 people. There are people who live in this country who are homeless. Where is the money coming from to provide accommodation for these new arrivals?” he told the Guardian. One man, who declined to give his name but said he was a boatman commodore, said: “I don’t mind migrants and if I was in their situation I would want to do what they’re doing. But there’s an awful lot of bad feeling about them coming in our boatyard.” Meanwhile a local coffee shop has made its thoughts clear, posting a notice in the window which reads: “This cafe is a hostile environment for the home secretary.”Cat Jesus, as the work is known to staff, can be found on a painted mirror in the archives of the Bethlem hospital’s Museum of the Mind. It was created by the celebrated cartoonist of comical cats and Bethlem psychiatric hospital patient Louis Wain, whose art is about to go on show here. One Christmas, Wain was asked to help with the institutional decorations. He asked if he could paint on mirrors – and the results still survive. In Cat Jesus, a feline Father Christmas holds up a white kitten with a sunflower halo around its head while other cats salute the radiant offspring, in front of a Taj Mahal-like building in a fantasy jungle. It really looks like holy art for a new cat religion. You can see that too in another picture of a white cat, who stares at you and seems to say: “I am happy because everybody loves me.” Wain had already depicted, as his contemporary HG Wells put it, “a cat society”. Born in 1860, he was a star of the golden age of British illustration. Pictorial magazines such as The Illustrated London News were hugely popular and still used drawings, not photographs. Wain drew cats doing human things – playing cricket, taking tea, going to the doctor – and the pet-loving public lapped it up. Yet, as the forthcoming Benedict Cumberbatch-produced biopic The Electrical Life of Louis Wain relates, these popular pussycats didn’t give him a happy life. Tragedy and financial ruin soured the milk. He started to believe there was something sinister about electricity, and that his sisters were stealing his money. After attacking them, he was certified insane in 1924 and spent the rest of his life in asylums. We don’t have “asylums” any more. Bethlem Royal hospital is now an NHS psychiatric hospital in spacious grounds in Beckenham, on the outskirts of London. Its museum is part of the open-access site. But this hospital was founded in the middle ages and, under its old nickname Bedlam, was not just one of the first asylums but the world’s most notorious. Hogarth depicted it as a place of human tragedy and cruelty in his painting The Rake in Bedlam, inspiring Goya’s madhouse scenes and, later, the Boris Karloff film Bedlam. This feared place in the mythology of London, founded in 1247, originally stood where Liverpool Street station is today, then after the Great Fire moved to Moorfields. In 1815, it moved again to Southwark, where the central, domed part of the Victorian asylum survives as today’s Imperial War Museum. Originally it had two long wings leading to the heavily barred female and male criminal wards. It was to this place Wain was brought. He was in Bethlem five years, then in a hospital near St Albans until his death in 1939. As a patient he carried on drawing cats, but not necessarily as we know them. Wain’s early cat cartoons are skilful and quite funny. But as art, I much prefer his late work, which has been diagnosed as psychotic. Soon after Wain’s death, a psychiatrist called Walter Maclay found eight of these later pictures in an antique shop and bought them. He analysed them as a sequence in which we can see the breakdown of a mind, and they still appear in textbooks as visual symptoms of schizophrenia. Looking at four of the originals in the Bethlem museum’s permanent collection, it is easy to understand what he meant. The first is a “classic” Louis Wain cat: cute, smiling and drawn with vivid realism. In the next, a cat made of jagged pulsing red lines with huge dark empty eyes floats in a radiating ether of blue and green. It looks like a psychedelic 1960s version of the Cheshire cat. The next is even wilder. Just as Carroll’s Cheshire cat leaves only its smile behind, the mask of a cat face is isolated in darkness, glowing uncanny blue, fringed with flames of red, orange and emerald, something between an ancient Tibetan demon and a fractal pattern. The final cat in the series is hard even to recognise as a cat. Its eyes are buried in a stunningly rich, complex symmetry, like a fantasy of a Turkish carpet in which a feline face is hidden. Maclay’s interest was clinical rather than aesthetic. He used these works to map degrees of psychosis in the illness with which he diagnosed the recently deceased Wain: schizophrenia. It was an abuse of science. As museum director Colin Gale and archivist David Luck explain while we’re admiring these intense moggies, Maclay had no evidence the drawings formed a series, or in what order they were created. The “first” one may have been created last. Wain clearly portrayed some very unusual and even scary cats in his asylum years, but he also drew his lifelike funny ones. “I would resist any simplistic link between Louis Wain’s illness and his creativity,” says Gale. Yet to me, the metamorphosis of Wain’s cats looks like a liberation. This Victorian-born artist, who made his name gently mocking the human customs of the imperial age, burst out of the pedantic habits of mainstream British art in his hospital years. In the melancholy freedom of his illness, he escaped into delirious visions of divine felines. He became an outsider artist. While British psychiatrists were using art as medical evidence, a German doctor, Hans Prinzhorn, led the way to reevaluating the work of asylum inmates as art. Jean Dubuffet later put this admiration of such art into the mainstream of modernity with his concept of art brut – “raw art”. Wain was no modernist but in the asylum he freed himself from the bonds of Victorian draughtsmanship. Looking through some of the works about to be hung in Bethlem’s exhibition, the early, popular depictions of cats doing funny human things seem to me more unbalanced than his later visions: the “cat society” Wells praised is overcrowded with cats, brittle in its humour. As an artist he is much more free when he explores his surreal, hallucinatory side. We don’t even know what Wain suffered from. Maclay’s diagnosis of schizophrenia was a post facto speculation. As I looked through a stack of Wain’s art, from jolly cats sledging to cats that are eerie patterns of lurid colour, I started to wonder if the key to his mental world is so obvious it gets ignored: his fascination with cats. For there was something very odd, even repressed, about the sentimental cats he drew in Victorian magazines. When he pictured them in a more unsettling way, he was more openly embracing their place in art history and mythology as uncanny dream animals. Wain charmed the world with lovable cats when he started selling his work in the 1880s. “What he communicated was a joie de vivre,” says Gale. Yet, up to then, the cat in art was far less homely, associated with sex, the night and madness. In Goya’s print The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters, a cat is among the evil creatures that unthrone a man’s sanity as he sleeps. When Wain was a child, Edouard Manet shocked Paris with his frank unglamourised nude Olympia. At the feet of the courtesan, her black cat screams, arches its back and prickles its hairs in an image of sexuality and aggression. Similarly uncanny cats graced posters for the legendary fin-de-siecle Paris cabaret Le Chat Noir. But these macabre modern cats are all the great-grand-kittens of ancient Egyptian art. While Egyptian cats can be delicately and beautifully observed, they are not exactly the cats next door. They are gods. Ancient Egypt’s feline divinities included Bastet, a cat-headed goddess associated with both sex and motherhood, and the Great Tom Cat, a form taken by the sun god to slay a world-devouring serpent. Sun gods? Maternal goddesses? It makes you think of Wain’s Christmassy cat messiah with a sunflower halo. His multicoloured cats from space suggest a sublime cat religion. Perhaps he is not simply depicting lurid cat dreams in the asylum but working out his own mythology. Wain’s early work creates a rational feline world where, instead of haunting the Paris night, cats play cricket and take tea on an English village green. It is the art of a man keeping a lid on his miaowing demons. Later, in the most psychedelic works of his life in hospital, he lets the cat out. Animal Therapy: The Cats of Louis Wain is at the Bethlem Museum of the Mind from 4 December until 14 April.Staff at Future, the owner of magazines from Marie Claire to Metal Hammer, are to share a £10m bonus pot after the pandemic-proof publisher reported expectation-busting revenues and profits for the year. Shares in the company, which also owns digital assets including TechRadar and comparison site GoCompare, soared by more than 15% to make it the biggest riser on the FTSE 250 on Tuesday morning as investors cheered a forecast that next year will be even better, with results “materially above” existing estimates. Future reported a doubling of profit before tax to £107.8m, and a 79% increase in revenues to £606m in the year to the end of September. While these figures were flattered by fresh acquisitions made during the year, the company still reported year-on-year organic revenue growth of 23% – enough to beat its own forecast. The publisher, which generates revenue from magazine sales, digital advertising, and e-commerce by sending online customers to partner retailers, also said it had enjoyed record Black Friday trading in the UK and the US. “I am pleased to announce another set of exceptional results,” said the chief executive, Zillah Byng-Thorne, who has made more than £8m in the previous two years from the performance of the company, and can expect another bumper payday when this year’s remuneration is revealed next month. “Looking ahead, we expect our diversified strategy to continue to deliver.” Future, which has proved a pandemic success story thanks to a boom in reading and online shopping, said that after the strong results it will be “paying out the maximum in our all staff annual profit pool bonus scheme”. Under the scheme, the minimum each of Future’s 2,800 staff will receive is a bonus of £2,250, with the amount graduated by factors including salary level, from a total pot estimated to be about £10m. In 2022, staff earning under £50,000 will receive a 4% pay rise, and those on more will get 2%. A new bonus scheme for management, which has been implemented despite 40% of Future shareholders voting against it, could award Byng-Thorne £40m when it starts paying out in tranches from 2023. The scheme will also benefit staff, who will share an annual pot of shares capped at £95m for three years, as long as Future’s share price rises at least 10% a year between 2020 and 2025, which it is currently doing.It is incredible to think of where we were this time last year: nearly a month into a national lockdown, with the prime minister’s promise of Christmas bubbles planned for but never quite believed, and the atmospheric sense that every stranger represented a threat. We talked a lot about hugs, and stayed miles apart in the Tesco Metro. It was, in short, like living in a 1950s sci-fi dystopia, a subdued life of managed disturbance, just before something absolutely terrible happens. Now all our thoughts are on the Omicron strain, and the gear change, from complacency to deja vu, is pretty lurching. The new daily case rates this time last year were averaging nearly 16,000; this week’s daily average is around 43,000. It’s an imperfect, even daft comparison, since the vaccine was yet to be cleared, let alone administered, and we hadn’t mingled for nearly a month. Comparing hospitalisations shows a different picture: there are around 8,000 people in hospital today, it was more than double that a year ago. The government has been relaxed about that high case-rate plateau. The system concern was always that the NHS would be overwhelmed: in a post-vaccine Britain, that anxiety receded. Omicron could be vaccine-resistant but cause less severe symptoms; or it could be vaccine-resistant and just as deadly, which would leave us back at square one. It’s dispiriting but predictable to watch measures unfold exactly as they always have, with procrastination and optimism amounting to fatalism. At the level of the individual, attitudes are more perplexing – I was never especially worried about being hospitalised, yet a year ago, I powerfully wanted to avoid catching it, and when I finally did (this February), I felt obscurely ashamed, as though I had done something stupid or careless, rooted in some character flaw – a congenital failure to keep myself to myself. If I caught it now, by contrast, there are so many people I’d blame before I got to myself that I don’t even know if I’d bother finding a culprit. At the psychological level, the data is echoed in the anecdata: it just feels like everyone has Covid again. A third of both my kids’ classes are off school; colleagues, friends, people on social media; a fashion friend has a very new strain, she says, because obviously. The “nudge unit” set up by David Cameron, which once used its assembled behavioural expertise to make wrong projections about the future, anticipated mass resistance to lockdowns and found none. The relatively lesser burden of wearing a mask, by contrast, unleashed vehement opposition (not least within the Conservative party), which mingled with anti-vax sentiment to create a trenchant conspiracist protest movement. The human spirit is harder to predict than it might look, but just because you can’t predict behaviours doesn’t mean you can’t learn anything from observing them. Why did the nation let its guard down this autumn, get back on the tube and into football grounds, and resume partygoing? One simple answer is that we have reached the end of our attention span: the risks of returning to normal are still higher than we’re prepared to take, but we’ve got bored of thinking about, still less talking about those risks. It seems to be what Chris Whitty was talking about at the weekend when he said: “My greatest worry at the moment is that people … if we need to do something more muscular at some point, whether it’s for the current new variant or at some later stage, can we still take people with us?” But this doesn’t take into account how many of us have not simply got bored, but are making mature and informed decisions about getting on with life. Now that most of us are double-jabbed and many boostered, lots of us have decided that going to the pub or party – factoring in the risks of long Covid and new strains – is something we are willing to risk. For others, it comes down to economics. Research from the thinktank Class conducted over summer revealed that half the British public could not afford to self-isolate if they became ill. Currently, streets and trains are still crowded, pubs are still desperate for staff, the great tanker of general behaviour has yet to turn itself around and head back towards 2020. But the shadow of the Omicron strain already underlines some certainties about the pandemic: the only measures that can avert new variants are decided at an international and national level – a dynamic push for global vaccination and a better social safety net to allow people to isolate. It seems so compelling, particularly on the brink of a crisis, to accuse one another over an excess or absence of caution, yet it’s always been a dead end. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistThis month’s design news finds beauty in surprising places. Preston’s bus station is one of them: discover why this 1960s depot has received a prize from the World Monument Fund. A raffle to help refugees could put some work by Turner Prize winning artists on your wall and, finally, learn about a trainer that designers are hoping will turn into compost. Because beauty is more than skin deep. For more news on architecture, sustainable living, art, fashion and new ideas, sign up for our monthly newsletter here Art postcards in aid of refugees Postcards are a great way to remind you of a place, time or trip, a function that takes on new meaning if you’re talking about refugees. This is why Art Refuge, a charity that supports people displaced by conflict, is holding an exhibition of postcard-design artworks to raise funds for its valuable work. As well as providing art therapy, the charity gives crisis support to refugees in Paris, Calais and Folkestone; supplies training and support for volunteers and carers; and raises public awareness of the refugee crisis. A situation which gets steadily worse. The upcoming exhibition, called Wish You Were Here, includes colourful, creative works by Jeremy Deller, Grayson Perry, Julian Opie and Eileen Cooper. There are 150 works in total and you can enter a raffle to win one and raise some money. It’s hard to think of many better causes this Christmas. Wish You Were Here is at Yorkton Workshops, East London, from 1-4 December Alessi at 100 Hard to believe that Italian design company Alessi celebrates its 100th anniversary this year, perhaps because few family-owned firms, steeped in decades of tradition, have been so successful at embracing the new. Giovanni Alessi started the company back in 1921 to make coffee pots and trays – he came from a long line of metalworkers. It was his son, Carlo, whose eye for the style trends of the 30s and 40s transformed the company’s products from objects of quality to objects of design. Then Carlo’s son Alberto completed the transition to designer company. Coming on board in 1970, Alberto wanted the company to produce “art multiples” and had a vision of Alessi as the successor to Bauhaus and Arts and Crafts. Under Alberto, the crème de le crème of design talent – Achille Castiglioni, Ettore Sottass – created the kitchen accessories of 80s excessive dreams. His biggest coup, though, was employing the new, young designers coming through in the early 90s. It was Marc Newson, Jasper Morrison and Ron Arad who created the playful, plastic, brightly coloured bowls and condiment sets. Those works will forever be a part of 90s culture – stylish and affordable homeware that brought a new sense of fun and identity to the high street. Alberto is still at the company helm, and to celebrate the family business centenary he has created the Alessi 100 Values Collection. Each month celebrates a different facet of Alessi with a previously unreleased design or new version of an Alessi classic. October’s launch was the coffee maker - with Richard Sapper’s 9090 manico forato and Aldo Rossi’s La conica manico lungo espresso makers. November saw the first production of the Bulbul kettle by Achille Castiglioni and December will bring the Juicy Salif Study n3, a research sample of Philippe Starck’s iconic juicer. That’s Christmas sorted, then. Window dressing While windows have functional and aesthetic purpose in every culture, in Japan the prevalence of sliding windows and doors can change the shape of a building with a single movement. This architectural significance is celebrated in Windowology, a new exhibition at Japan House in London. The show is curated by architectural historian and critic Igarashi Taro, working with the Window Research Institute in Tokyo (yes, the foundation is dedicated to studying the importance of windows) and includes a full-scale replica of a 17t- century architectural plan of Yōsuitei teahouse in Kyoto to discover how windows are used to enhance the experience of the tea ceremony via light and breeze. The exhibition also shows how certain cultures adopt particular windows, such as the drehkippfenster in Germany and full-length French windows that open up a room. The significance of windows as plot points in film and a window-themed art installation blurring the lines between visitors and the outside world will also be on display. “Allowing us to see the world outside as well as in, windows are intimately linked to our everyday lives and physical actions,” says Igarashi. “Now more than ever, windows play a vital role in connecting us with each other and our wider communities.” Windowology: New Architectural Views from Japan, 1 December – 10 April 2022 at Japan House London Puma’s smart, compostable trainer Puma is currently working on a biodegradable version of its iconic suede trainer. The Re:Suede is made from suede tanned without heavy metals, biodegradable TPE (thermo plastic elastomer) and hemp. This isn’t the end of the story – from January 2022, 500 volunteers in Germany will wear the Re:Suedes for six months to test out their durability. Puma will then take back the trainers to see if they can be turned into compost for agricultural use. Puma’s first experiment with biodegradable sneakers, InCycle in 2012, was discontinued due to the need for further research and development. This year has seen the company make a push on eco projects, with the Designed to Fade sportswear using bacteria dye and a manufactured-on-demand model to reduce waste also launched. The Re:Suede experiment is the first circular programme to launch under Puma’s ‘Circular Lab’ – led by Puma’s sustainability and design experts. “As they say, with every challenge there’s an opportunity,” said Heiko Desens, Puma’s creative director. “We hope that progress made during the Re:Suede experiment will help us raise the bar in circularity testing – enabling our consumers to make better fashion choices in the future, so their sneakers can go ‘from suede to soil’, without compromising on style or durability.” Preston’s award-winning bus station Britain’s bus stations are not synonymous with award-winning design, so well done to Preston’s local depot, which has just won an international prize. The World Monuments Fund has presented the 2021 WMF/Knoll Modernism Prize to John Puttick Associates for a thoughtful and detailed conservation of Preston Bus Station. When it opened in October 1969, Preston was Europe’s largest bus station, an exemplar of brutalist architecture and of post-war transport planning. With its exposed concrete structure and integrated bus and taxi facilities, it was seen as a meeting place for local people and a hub for the Central Lancashire new town. By 2012, it was under threat of demolition, the appeal of brutalism and coach travel having declined along with the building. But a local campaign saw the station placed on the World Monuments Watch List and, by 2015, restoration was underway. John Puttick Associates updated infrastructure and restored the civic role of the original bus station with improved pedestrian access and relocating waiting areas to face a new communal square. “Preston Bus Station is the largest project honoured by the World Monuments Fund/Knoll Prize and the first at the scale of regional infrastructure,” said Barry Bergdoll, art curator and jury chair of the prize. “The complex’s respectful restoration represents not only appreciation of the modernist commitment to creating dignified monuments for basic civic functions, but the 21st century’s need to adopt sustainable rehabilitation of inherited structures. It’s an achievement for Lancashire and an exemplar for other cities.” Tiles made from electrical waste The annual Dezeen Awards were announced last week. Among the winners was Snøhetta for a sustainable design project that the Norwegian studio has worked on with Belgian designer Studio Plastique and Italian manufacturer Fornace Brioni. Forite is a collection of glass tiles made from recycled glass components recovered from kitchen appliances. Electronic waste (e-waste) is a vast and growing category of rubbish, difficult to recycle and extract components. These beautiful terrazzo-style tiles give value to discarded materials and also recycle silicate, a finite mineral resource. Around 55 million tonnes of e-waste is created worldwide each year and nine million tons of non-recycled glass. The Dezeen judging panel – which includes Olafur Eliasson and Chrissa Amuah – commented: “Studio Plastique has taken an underexplored waste stream and found a clever solution with wide-ranging applications in these glass tiles. The product takes a ubiquitous source of waste to which we can all relate. We pay for end-of-life disposal but these tiles fulfil a design-to-design loop that is rarely found in repurposed materials.”TSB Bank is closing a further 70 branches – a quarter of its network – in a move described by campaigners as “yet another hammer blow” to the UK high street. Fourteen months ago TSB had 475 branches, but these latest cuts – following a wave of previous closures in 2020 and this year – mean that by the end of June 2022 this number will have more than halved to 220. TSB is the latest in a line of banks to announce it is slashing its network in response to what it said was a continuing decline in branch use and increasing numbers of customers switching to digital banking – a trend accelerated by the pandemic. Its branches closing next year are spread across the country, from Thurso on the north coast of the Scottish Highlands to Exeter in Devon. TSB said it remained committed to a UK-wide branch network and that, after the cuts, it would still have the 7th largest network in the UK. It added that the branches that were closing conducted about one-third fewer transactions than the TSB national average, and there was a post office or free-to-use ATM within a mile of each affected outlet. A series of branch closures have been announced during the pandemic, with financial institutions insisting customers are spurning traditional counter service in favour of online banking. In October this year, Lloyds Banking Group said it would be closing a further 48 branches, while in September, Virgin Money announced it was shutting 31 outlets for good. In March, Santander revealed it was closing 111. TSB said that in recent years it had seen a significant decrease in branch usage, with the average number of transactions per outlet falling since January 2019 and “no prospect of branch transactions returning to pre-Covid levels”. More than nine in 10 transactions are now carried out digitally. Robin Bulloch, TSB’s chief customer officer, said: “Closing branches is an incredibly difficult decision to take, but we have to respond to the changes in the way people bank and provide the right mix of services for all our customers now and into the future.” He added that the bank had already opened “pop-up” services in 41 locations and a further 10 were now planned. According to the consumer body Which?, banks and building societies have closed or announced the closure of about 4,300 branches since January 2015, not including the latest announcement. Dr Jackie Mulligan, the founder of ShopLocalOnline.org and one of the government-commissioned High Streets Task Force experts, said: “This news is yet another hammer blow to the UK high street, which is already reeling after nearly two years of pain.” Mulligan added: “The shift online is irreversible, but so, too, is the damage that a bank leaving a high street can cause for the shops that surround it. Local high-street shops need their local communities more than ever, and the gradual retreat of banks, which bring all-important footfall, poses another existential threat.” The TSB branches closing next year Aylesbury, 1-3 Market Street – closing on 19 April Bath, 10 Quiet Street – 15 June Bermondsey, 253/255 Southwark Park Road – 27 April Bishop’s Stortford, 3 The Corn Exchange – 26 May Bromley, 58 High Street – 18 May Bury St Edmunds, 8 Guildhall Street – 26 May Camberley, 54 High Street – 5 May Cambridge, 6 St Andrews Street – 20 April Carolgate, 1 Carolgate – 24 May Cleveleys, 77 Victoria Road West – 8 June Colchester, 2 Culver Street West – 31 May Coldside, 101 Strathmartine Road – 13 April Cirencester, 37 Market Place – 14 June Denton, 38 Ashton Road – 17 May Ealing, 31 New Broadway – 5 May Eastbourne, 76 Terminus Road – 17 May Ellon, 36 Bridge Street – 19 April Exeter, 6 High Street – 21 June Forfar, 20 East High Street – 14 April Forres, 156 High Street – 27 April Fort William, 6 Tweedale High Street – 20 April Frodsham, 96 Main Street – 22 June Garston, 6 Speke Road – 9 June Gateshead, 264 High Street – 10 May Gillingham, Sydenham House – 15 June Greenwich, 6 Crescent Arcade – 28 April Harlesden, 58 High Street – 28 April Horsham, Unit 1 – 12 May Kirkintilloch, 4 Alexandra Street – 28 April Lanark, 25 Bannatyne Street – 27 April Longbridge, 1401 Bristol Road South – 28 June Louth, 11-13 Eastgate – 24 May Magdalen Street, 65 Magdalen Street – 28 June Maidstone, 16 High Street – 10 May Market Hill, 17 Market Hill – 16 June Maryport, 109/111 Senhouse Street – 10 May Melton Mowbray, 23-25 High Street – 1 June Morden, 66 London Road – 11 May Morecombe, Lunedale House – 7 June Nelson, 23 Manchester Road – 18 May Newbury, 26 Northbrook Street – 7 June Newton Aycliffe, Unit 3B, Greenwell Road – 3 May Northallerton, 164 High Street – 3 May Ossett, 3 Wesley Street – 17 May Oxford, 17 George Street – 7 June Redcar, 87-89 High Street – 4 May Redditch, 4 Unicorn Hill – 2 June Romford, 3 Stewards Walk – 31 May Ross-On-Wye, 9a Gloucester Road – 22 June Rushden, 133 High Street – 21 April Sherwood, 583 Mansfield Road – 29 June Shrewsbury, 45 High Street – 28 June Solihull, 58 Poplar Road – 1 June Southend-On-Sea, 32 London Road – 2 June Stranraer, 21 Castle Street – 28 April Sutton, 79 Ellamsbridge Road – 26 May Swaffham, 61 Market Place – 24 May Taunton, 34 North Street – 12 April Thornbury, 9 St Mary’s Way – 9 June Thurso, 12/14 Traill Street – 21 April Tunbridge Wells, 62 Mount Pleasant Road – 19 May Uxbridge, 24 Chequers Square – 4 May West End, 68 Baker Street – 4 May Weston-super-Mare, 12 Walliscote Road – 23 June Wilmslow, Emerson Court, Alderley Road – 14 June Wimborne, 5 The Square – 13 April Winsford, 160 High Street – 21 June Woodseats, 1 Abbey Lane – 15 June Worcester, 24 Mealcheapen Street – 21 June Yeovil, King George Street – 12 AprilSome Tory MPs fear that tougher Covid rules that come in to force in England on Tuesday are a “gateway to lockdown over Christmas”, as they prepare to mount a small rebellion in the vote on new measures to tackle the Omicron variant. A handful of Boris Johnson’s backbenchers plan to oppose the reintroduction of mandatory mask wearing to settings such as shops and public transport for the next three weeks, and as many as a few dozen are likely to vote against tightening up isolation rules until March. Ministers are pressing ahead with the plan in the face of a new variant, which may be more transmissible and may be able to evade the protection afforded by vaccines. The prime minister has resisted initiating his “winter plan B” of telling people to work from home where possible and rolling out vaccine passports, but he said other “temporary and precautionary” rules would be brought in from 4am to ensure Christmas would “considerably better” than last year. MPs who form part of the Covid Recovery Group gathered hours before the vote to share their discontent at the changes. They also criticised the head of the UK Health Security Agency, Jenny Harries, for saying it was important that people were “not socialising when we don’t particularly need to” to contain the spread of the new variant. One accused her of peddling nonsense and another called it “mumbo jumbo”. A third said the advice was absurd because no socialising was essential. They also said millions of healthy people would be caught up in the change of isolation rules, which was tantamount to a return to the “pingdemic” of early summer. “It’s a gateway to lockdown over Christmas,” they said. Another senior Tory complained there was a “woeful lack of clarity” over the definition of a suspected Omicron case. They said they might have backed a more temporary rule change, but given that it would remain in place until March, they would probably vote against it. Johnson has faced sizeable rebellions over Covid restrictions before, but this latest one is likely to be relatively small because most accept there are a lot of unknowns about Omicron. One backbencher who has voted against reimposing rules before said: “We mustn’t panic, but reintroducing some precautionary measures is sensible until we know what we are dealing with.” Labour is expected to back the measures so there is practically no chance the government will be defeated, but ministers will still face pressure over the coming weeks to reassure MPs and a public anxious that they will not have their Christmas plans ruined with just a few days’ notice – as happened last year despite Johnson’s insistence that people would be able to see family and friends. Scientists continue to investigate Omicron’s transmissibility and the extent to which it may be resistant to vaccines, but they are hopeful that the rollout of vaccinations and booster shots means the UK is in a much better position than it was at this time last year.Rihanna has been declared a national hero of Barbados, as the country celebrates its transition to an independent republic. “May you continue to shine like a diamond,” the country’s prime minister, Mia Mottley, said at an investiture ceremony for the pop singer, fashion icon and entrepreneur, in reference to her 2012 hit Diamonds. Rihanna is Barbados’s most famous citizen and in 2018 was appointed an official ambassador for culture and youth. She has never softened her Bajan accent, and her music, while tapping into pop, R&amp;B and dance music, has remained connected to her Caribbean heritage. Mottley said the superstar commanded “the imagination of the world through the pursuit of excellence with her creativity, her discipline, and above all else, her extraordinary commitment to the land of her birth”. She added: “On behalf of a grateful nation, but an even prouder people, we therefore present to you the designee for national hero of Barbados, Ambassador Robyn Rihanna Fenty.” Rihanna, 33, was born in Saint Michael and raised in the capital, Bridgetown. She was propelled to fame after the American producer Evan Rogers recognised her talents. Her 2007 single Umbrella confirmed her as one of the world’s biggest pop stars, and in 2008 the then prime minister, David Thompson, announced an annual Rihanna Day. As well as continuing to make music, Rihanna has enjoyed a highly successful business career with her Fenty group of companies. In August Forbes estimated she was worth $1.7bn (£1.3bn), about $1.4 bn of which comes from the value of her cosmetics company, Fenty Beauty, a partnership with the French fashion giant LVMH. Rihanna joins a select group of 10 other Barbadians including Garfield Sobers, regarded as one of the greatest cricketers of all time and the only other living national hero. Sobers was also at the ceremony and hugged Rihanna. Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportHours before the deadly attack on the US Capitol this year, Donald Trump made several calls from the White House to top lieutenants at the Willard hotel in Washington and talked about ways to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win from taking place on 6 January. The former president first told the lieutenants his vice-president, Mike Pence, was reluctant to go along with the plan to commandeer his largely ceremonial role at the joint session of Congress in a way that would allow Trump to retain the presidency for a second term. But as Trump relayed to them the situation with Pence, he pressed his lieutenants about how to stop Biden’s certification from taking place on 6 January, and delay the certification process to get alternate slates of electors for Trump sent to Congress. The former president’s remarks came as part of strategy discussions he had from the White House with the lieutenants at the Willard – a team led by Trump lawyers Rudy Giuliani, John Eastman, Boris Epshteyn and Trump strategist Steve Bannon – about delaying the certification. Multiple sources, speaking to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity, described Trump’s involvement in the effort to subvert the results of the 2020 election. Trump’s remarks reveal a direct line from the White House and the command center at the Willard. The conversations also show Trump’s thoughts appear to be in line with the motivations of the pro-Trump mob that carried out the Capitol attack and halted Biden’s certification, until it was later ratified by Congress. The former president’s call to the Willard hotel about stopping Biden’s certification is increasingly a central focus of the House select committee’s investigation into the Capitol attack, as it raises the specter of a possible connection between Trump and the insurrection. Several Trump lawyers at the Willard that night deny Trump sought to stop the certification of Biden’s election win. They say they only considered delaying Biden’s certification at the request of state legislators because of voter fraud. The former president made several calls to the lieutenants at the Willard the night before 6 January. He phoned the lawyers and the non-lawyers separately, as Giuliani did not want non-lawyers to participate on legal calls and jeopardise attorney-client privilege. Trump’s call to the lieutenants came a day after Eastman, a late addition to the Trump legal team, outlined at a 4 January meeting at the White House how he thought Pence could usurp his role in order to stop Biden’s certification from happening at the joint session. At the meeting, which was held in the Oval Office and attended by Trump, Pence, Pence’s chief of staff, Marc Short, and his legal counsel, Greg Jacob, Eastman presented a memo that detailed how Pence could insert himself into the certification and delay the process. The memo outlined several ways for Pence to commandeer his role at the joint session, including throwing the election to the House, or adjourning the session to give states time to send slates of electors for Trump on the basis of election fraud – Eastman’s preference. The then acting attorney general, Jeff Rosen, and his predecessor, Bill Barr, who had both been appointed by Trump, had already determined there was no evidence of fraud sufficient to change the outcome of the 2020 election. Eastman told the Guardian last month that the memo only presented scenarios and was not intended as advice. “The advice I gave the vice-president very explicitly was that I did not think he had the authority simply to declare which electors to count,” Eastman said. Trump seized on the memo – first reported by Washington Post journalists Bob Woodward and Robert Costa in their book Peril – and pushed Pence to adopt the schemes, which some of the other lieutenants at the Willard later told Trump were legitimate ways to flip the election. But Pence resisted Trump’s entreaties, and told him in the Oval Office the next day that Trump should count him out of whatever plans he had to subvert the results of the 2020 election at the joint session, because he did not intend to take part. Trump was furious at Pence for refusing to do him a final favor when, in the critical moment underpinning the effort to reinstall Trump as president, he phoned lieutenants at the Willard sometime between the late evening on 5 January and the early hours of 6 January. From the White House, Trump made several calls to lieutenants, including Giuliani, Eastman, Epshteyn and Bannon, who were huddled in suites complete with espresso machines and Cokes in a mini-fridge in the north-west corner of the hotel. On the calls, the former president first recounted what had transpired in the Oval Office meeting with Pence, informing Bannon and the lawyers at the Willard that his vice-president appeared ready to abandon him at the joint session in several hours’ time. “He’s arrogant,” Trump, for instance, told Bannon of Pence – his own way of communicating that Pence was unlikely to play ball – in an exchange reported in Peril and confirmed by the Guardian. But on at least one of those calls, Trump also sought from the lawyers at the Willard ways to stop the joint session to ensure Biden would not be certified as president on 6 January, as part of a wider discussion about buying time to get states to send Trump electors. The fallback that Trump and his lieutenants appeared to settle on was to cajole Republican members of Congress to raise enough objections so that even without Pence adjourning the joint session, the certification process would be delayed for states to send Trump slates. It was not clear whether Trump discussed on the call about the prospect of stopping Biden’s certification by any means if Pence refused to insert himself into the process, but the former president is said to have enjoyed watching the insurrection unfold from the dining room. But the fact that Trump considered ways to stop the joint session may help to explain why he was so reluctant to call off the rioters and why the Republican senator Ben Sasse told the conservative talkshow host Hugh Hewitt that he heard Trump seemed “delighted” about the attack. The lead Trump lawyer at the Willard, Giuliani, appearing to follow that fallback plan, called at least one Republican senator later that same evening, asking him to help keep Congress adjourned and stall the joint session beyond 6 January. In a voicemail recorded at about 7pm on 6 January, and reported by the Dispatch, Giuliani implored the Republican senator Tommy Tuberville to object to 10 states Biden won once Congress reconvened at 8pm, a process that would have concluded 15 hours later, close to 7 January. “The only strategy we can follow is to object to numerous states and raise issues so that we get ourselves into tomorrow – ideally until the end of tomorrow,” Giuliani said. Liz Harrington, a spokesperson for Trump, disputed the account of Trump’s call after publication. “This is totally false,” Harrington said, without giving specifics. Giuliani did not respond to a request for comment. Eastman, Epshteyn and Bannon declined to comment. Trump made several calls the day before the Capitol attack from both the White House residence, his preferred place to work, as well as the West Wing, but it was not certain from which location he phoned his top lieutenants at the Willard. The White House residence and its Yellow Oval Room – a Trump favorite – is significant since communications there, including from a desk phone, are not automatically memorialized in records sent to the National Archives after the end of an administration. But even if Trump called his lieutenants from the West Wing, the select committee may not be able to fully uncover the extent of his involvement in the events of 6 January, unless House investigators secure testimony from individuals with knowledge of the calls. That difficulty arises since calls from the White House are not necessarily recorded, and call detail records that the select committee is suing to pry free from the National Archives over Trump’s objections about executive privilege, only show the destination of the calls. House select committee investigators this month opened a new line of inquiry into activities at the Willard hotel, just across the street from the White House, issuing subpoenas to Eastman and the former New York police commissioner Bernard Kerik, an assistant to Giuliani. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said in a statement that the panel was pursuing the Trump officials at the Willard to uncover “every detail about their efforts to overturn the election, including who they were talking to in the White House and in Congress”.While the scientists work out how bad the Omicron variant is or isn’t, the government has reimposed mask-wearing in shops and on public transport for at least the next three weeks. Consequently, a number of prams have been swiftly emptied of all toys. Across the airwaves – and up and down the train carriages and the supermarket aisles – you can find multiple refuseniks who suffer from the pandemic version of that old sexual problem: being “too big for condoms”. To those who have reacted to the precautionary mask-wearing mandate with histrionics and aggression, I think we have to say, very clearly: DO BUCK UP. This really isn’t the attitude that won us the war. As for mentioning the war, forgive me. Around 70,000 Britons died in second world war bombing raids, most of them in the blitz, while 145,000 have thus far perished from Covid. Yet somehow there does seem to be a large intersection between the Venn diagram sets “People who bang on endlessly about WW2” and “People who cannot cope with having to take a relatively minor public health measure for the greater good”. Of course, in London, both positions have links with the tube. In December 1940, you’d have been snatching a couple of hours’ troubled sleep on the underground platform while Hitler blew up your house. In December 2021, you’d be on your way to Oxford Street on the Central line to sample the pre-Christmas enticements of JD Sports. Yet still, somehow, managing to see a few minutes of mask-wearing in a non-ventilated space as an outrageous imposition on your personage, with which you – a stone-cold hero – simply shouldn’t be involved. But why? It’s really not that bad, is it, to have to wear a mask in limited settings, if it might help other people, even a bit? For all their big talk, you can’t help thinking those unable to bring themselves to do it wouldn’t make the first sacrifice for their fellow humans, let alone the ultimate one. As they shout – or type in capitals – the words “THE BRITISH PEOPLE HAVE HAD ENOUGH”, it’s intriguing to remember that chaps like this really fancy their chances at having been able to cope with the blitz. Picture this person, this person who wets their pants and goes full online Braveheart over being asked to wear a mask between Liverpool Street and Holborn. Assuming they didn’t think air raid sirens were part of some “great reset” and ignored them (fatally), try to imagine this person trudging out of the tube station after the air raid. Try to imagine them discovering they didn’t have a street any more, having to remake their lives and those of their family in an anguished instant, by migrating somewhere else in the country in the clothes they stood in. Or try to imagine them having been taken in by friends or relatives, and turning straight back up to the bomb site with a broom to assist in clearing the rubble. I don’t want to be a bitch, but if you lose your mind over being asked to pop on a face covering in Boots, I honestly don’t think you’d be up to a whole lot of the above. Admittedly, I appreciate that many people would prefer to hear public safety advice from Winston Churchill rather than Boris Johnson. But let’s not kid ourselves the advice would have been massively different, once adjusted for circumstance. For all their constant bleating about the government trying to control them, it’s a shame the poppy-shaggers and online warriors have absolutely zero understanding of how deeply embedded in people’s lives government was in the last world war, in the interests of the wider public good. How would these people have coped with rationing, for years and years on end? Being told by the state how many ounces of basic ingredients you were allowed per week feels a bit more of a pisser than being told to wear a mask while you load up your trolley with pounds and pounds of the stuff in Asda. (I know it’s kilos these days, but I didn’t want to send them really off the dial.) Then again, maybe I’m wrong. Maybe there was a whole section of British society in 1941 that was convinced the war was not actually real or happening, but was merely part of some great reset cooked up by various international powers. There were certainly enough profiteers at work to make elements of conspiracy theorising understandable, if not remotely excusable. And maybe that’s also the case in our own day and age. You can see where at least some of the suspicion has crept in. In the first days of the pandemic, when retailers were selling £3 hand sanitiser for £40, and bumping up the price of essentials just because they could, Johnson declared in parliament that there should be laws against this kind of thing. There weren’t any in the end. But we now know that another deeply distasteful type of profit-seeking was in fact directly licensed by the government – and that it resists scrutiny of it to this day. As well it might. Contracts for PPE were handed out to friends, donors, cronies, firms Owen Paterson worked for, Tory councillors, Matt Hancock’s publican … the list goes on. Much of this happened via VIP lanes and WhatsApps that have now mysteriously disappeared. Billions in taxpayers’ money were spent – but many of those billions were wasted. Individuals made staggering profits, often on items that ended up being unusable. Yet instead of being regarded as social pariahs, these people sail on regardless. Some of them are even in the House of Lords. It’s not a huge stretch to see how this kind of naked opportunism – some of which was straight profiteering – is a big part of why many ordinary people now feel they too can opt out of the idea of even minimal national effort. Pulling together should come from the top. If our overlords are so obviously out for themselves, how can we really all be in it together? Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist“Reshuffle” seemed an understatement, given the radical scope of the shake-up Keir Starmer carried out among Labour’s top ranks on Monday, with few posts left untouched. Starmer’s aides saw it as completing the work begun in May’s botched overhaul, which saw Anneliese Dodds replaced by Rachel Reeves as shadow chancellor; but was derailed by Angela Rayner, who resisted a move for herself. Changes for both Jon Ashworth and Lisa Nandy were mooted at the time, and have now been acted on. And this time around, Starmer publicly asserted his authority over Rayner – with whom relations have continued to be scratchy – by kicking off the reshuffle as she was delivering a major speech in Westminster on cleaning up public life. She was briefly informed that a shake-up was under way; but not consulted (though Jeremy Corbyn certainly didn’t consult his deputy, Tom Watson, on the makeup of his shadow team either). The end result marked a shift to the political right, and created a powerful platform for rising stars Wes Streeting and Bridget Phillipson, both viewed as effective media performers. Shadow cabinet ministers had recently complained about how much airtime Streeting was getting, despite holding the relatively junior post of shadow schools minister. As shadow health secretary in the midst of a pandemic, he will now be a key spokesperson and public face of a potential future Labour government. One Labour insider suggested there had been little effort to match people to their expertise – citing Steve Reed’s move to shadow justice, for example – and an overwhelming focus on who can deliver a punchy media performance. More low-key shadow ministers, including Kate Green at education and Luke Pollard at environment, both of whom were viewed by colleagues as diligent and thoughtful, were unceremoniously ditched. Tellingly, one Starmer aide told the Politico newsletter – a daily note for Westminster insiders – that the reshuffle had put, “fresh hungry effective message-carriers in key briefs”. His team are ruthlessly pursuing the aim of winning over swing voters in a handful of key seats, many of them in the “red wall”, and want people in place who are reassuring to Conservative-Labour switchers, not redolent of Corbyn. They believe they are succeeding for the first time in a long time in having a leader voters can imagine as prime minister; and are delighted by the performance of Reeves, including, recently, a highly positive profile in the Telegraph; but they now want to build on that by creating a wider team the public can imagine as a government. To that end, the overhaul also saw the return of Labour “big beast” Yvette Cooper, one of a relatively small number of sitting MPs – with Ed Miliband and Hilary Benn – who have been cabinet ministers. Starmer appeared to avoid such tall poppies in his first frontbench team, instead promoting Nick Thomas-Symonds and Dodds, both intellectuals with deep expertise, but without their own powerbases in the party. One longtime Labour insider remarked that both Cooper and Miliband are “more experienced politicians than Keir,” suggesting that by moving Miliband sideways and bringing Cooper into the tent, he must now feel his own position is more secure. So for Starmer’s team, the reshuffle was an assertion of his authority, which had been battered by the ham-fisted reshuffle back in May; and a signal of intent to voters, with a general election potentially just a couple of years away. For MPs on Labour’s soft left, who had previously regarded Starmer as one of their own, the end result was a sense of gnawing disquiet about a continued drift to the right, however. And some warned that the relentless focus on target voters in the red wall, while understandable given the shape of 2019’s crushing defeat, risked alienating other groups Labour may need if it is ultimately to succeed in forming the next government.In 1933 Cliff Roberts, co-founder of the Augusta National club in Georgia, home of the US Masters golf tournament, declared that “all the golfers will be white and all the caddies will be black” for as long as he could influence the situation. He was as good as his word for the next four decades, but in the end Lee Elder forced open the doors at the 1975 Masters, where he became the first black person to play in the competition. Elder, who has died aged 87, had been a significant force in US golf in the late 1960s and early 70s, yet had waited in vain for an invite to the Masters, one of the four “majors” of golf. However, his profile reached such heights that Roberts felt he had no choice but to ring up Elder and offer him a place. Perhaps because of the hullabaloo that surrounded his appearance, Elder’s performance in 1975 was hardly a distinguished one – he missed the cut after two rounds and retreated back to Texas. But it was his presence that was important, for it meant that another racial barrier in US sport had been broken down. Two decades later, when a young Tiger Woods arrived at the Augusta practice ground on the final day of the 1997 Masters, Elder emerged from the crowd to wish him luck. Woods won the tournament to claim his first major, and afterwards revealed that the brief encounter had proved to be a key moment of inspiration. “That did it all for me,” he said. “Right there, I knew what I had to do today.” Elder was the youngest of 10 children born in Dallas to Charles, a truck driver, and his wife, Almeta, both of whom had died before he reached the age of 10 – his father in action during the second world war and his mother, it was said, shortly afterwards from shock. Looked after initially by an older brother, Lee was then taken into the care of an aunt, first in Wichita Falls, Texas, and then in Los Angeles. After a period caddying at golf clubs in California, at 16 he wound up at the Tenison club in Dallas, a municipal course also frequented by another young, poor golfing aspirant, Lee Trevino, who later remembered that the professional there, Erwin Hardwicke, was a welcoming presence to whom “your background didn’t matter”. Hardwicke allowed Elder to practise on the course at quiet times and by his early 20s he had become good enough to make a living. Backed financially during the early 50s by a local gambler and hustler, “Titanic” Thompson (Alvin Thomas), Elder began entering local tournaments for prize money while also helping Thompson to take cash from gullible participants in more informal matches. In a favourite trick, Thompson would declare that his opponent was not even good enough to beat his caddy – – who just happened to be Elder, at which point the indignant golfer would accept a large bet to the contrary, only to be soundly beaten. Eventually, in 1961, after two years of national service, Elder joined the all-black United Golfers Association, which ran parallel to the main US PGA Tour. He dominated for the next five years, winning four Negro National Open championships and coming first in almost all of the tournaments he entered during 1966. With the prize money he earned from those victories he was able to save the $6,500 needed to enter the 1967 qualifying school for the US PGA tour – and got through easily, gaining his tour card for 1968 at the age of 34. Elder was an immediate success, placing 40th on the money list in his first year, winning more than $38,000 and finishing as runner-up to Jack Nicklaus in the American Golf Classic at Firestone in Arizona, which he lost on the fifth hole of a memorable sudden death play-off that thrilled millions of US television viewers. In 1971, having won the Nigerian Open, he became the first black golfer invited to play in the South African PGA championship – at the behest of Gary Player – after agreeing to participate only on condition that the apartheid authorities relaxed their racial segregation of spectators. After winning the 1974 Monsanto Open in Pensicola, Florida, Elder had to move into the clubhouse to accept the trophy, as the police had received notice of several death threats against him. His victory in that event did not automatically entitle him to play in the 1975 Masters, but it did ratchet up the pressure on Roberts, who immediately phoned Elder to offer an invitation. Elder was otherwise engaged when the call arrived, and when they spoke the next day he told Roberts that he would have to think about it, later revealing that: “I just wanted to give Cliff a taste of his own medicine.” He did eventually accept and when it became known that he would be playing at Augusta the news spread well beyond the golfing world. The largely white crowd proved to be supportive, cheering him as he went round, and even Roberts claimed to have been “very delighted” at the turn of events. However, taking part in the tournament was stressful for Elder, who had received more death threats before he arrived, had two bodyguards with him at all times, and had to flit between two different rented houses so that any potential assassin could not be sure where he was staying during the tournament. It was hardly surprising that he failed to do himself justice on the course, but afterwards he played with more success in five further Masters, with a best place of 17th. “I always spoke well of the Masters, and meant it,” he said in 2019. “I believe people are good at heart. If you treat people how you’d like to be treated, they’ll come around eventually. I love going there.” Elder won three more PGA competitions between 1976 and 1978, and was picked for the USA Ryder Cup team in 1979, another first for a black golfer. In 1984, after winning the Jamaica Open, he moved on to the US seniors tour, on which he won eight tournaments before retirement. Widely admired for the grace with which he tackled the obstacles put before him, in 2019 he was presented with the United States Golf Association’s highest honour, the Bob Jones award, in recognition of “distinguished sportsmanship in golf”. At this year’s Masters, Elder was one of the tournament’s ceremonial openers, alongside Nicklaus and Player. Elder married Rose Harper, a public relations executive, in 1966. She acted as his manager until the marriage ended in divorce in the 1990s. He is survived by his second wife, Sharon. • Robert Lee Elder, golfer, born 14 July 1934; died 28 November 2021Dancers sweep across studio seven at London’s Pineapple Studios, skipping through Prokofiev’s rhythms. Choreographer Johan Kobborg shouts for more gusto. “Throw her!” he says to one man handling his partner too tentatively. To the side stands the tall figure of Sergei Polunin. Dressed in black with a rock star vibe, a faded tattoo visible on his hand, he eyes himself in the mirror before flying into the centre and launching into five or six pirouettes, like a bird of prey swooping into a flock of starlings. This is Kobborg’s new production of Romeo and Juliet, which Polunin danced with star ballerina Alina Cojocaru in Verona pre-Covid, now being remounted for London’s Royal Albert Hall. It marks the end of an eventful couple of years for Polunin, and perhaps a turning point. Known as a technically brilliant but erratic dancer, Polunin was the youngest principal at the Royal Ballet, aged 19, but walked out of the company two years later. He made headlines for the 30m YouTube views of his Take Me to Church video, but also for missing shows, for his critical flops, his misguided tweets (from drug chat to homophobia) and his chest tattoo of Vladimir Putin’s face. But in 2019 he met Olympic figure skater Elena Ilinykh, and their son, Mir, was born in January 2020. It’s made him grow up, he concedes. “Kids change us in a positive way, for sure,” he says. “Because you connect to them with energy, you have to be right with yourself. If I get angry, a child feels that energy.” He’s even getting rid of his tattoos as he wants to be “clean”, and is halfway through an agonising two-year process of getting them lasered off. Since leaving the Royal Ballet, Polunin’s focus has been on making new dance and new stories, but this Romeo and Juliet is a return, of sorts, to classical ballet. “I had said, ‘Never in my life will I do a Romeo &amp; Juliet,” he says, laughing. “And a week later I was like, yeah, I’ll do it.” The reason was to work with Kobborg, the lauded Danish dancer and choreographer who spent 14 years at the Royal Ballet but who, like Polunin, is now independent. “You have really good choreographers but they are locked into the system,” says Polunin. “Johan thinks differently, he is very classical in that he respects the style but he has a different way of thinking about it that’s very modern.” “It is a challenge to keep classical ballet alive,” says Kobborg. “Contemporary dance has an easier way of communicating with us now, and if we don’t bring a certain amount of contemporary energy into classical dance, it’s just not going to [connect].” In the studio, Kobborg implores his dancers to act like real people, injecting life on to the stage while mastering tricky triplets in detailed footwork. Despite nearly 20 years between them, Polunin and Kobborg have a joshing, brotherly rapport. “I always really liked Johan,” says Polunin. “I felt support from him, even though I let him down sometimes with his galas,” sheepishly referring to times he didn’t turn up to dance at Kobborg’s shows. “I asked him, why do you still want to work with me?” Now they’re both laughing. “You learn to live with it,” says Kobborg, who clearly values Polunin’s talent. “Sergei can do anything,” he says. And Kobborg has had more creative freedom on this project than any he’s worked on. “Hats off to Sergei,” he says. “It’s very rare.” Polunin is on a more even keel now than he was in his 20s. At the Royal Ballet he felt confined by the institution and craved freedom, but when it came he was overwhelmed by it. “I didn’t know how to answer my emails,” he says. “I had so much opportunity when I left the Royal, American theatres writing to me, movies, agents: I just didn’t know what to do with it. So I kind of locked myself away for six months, waited till everything was gone and went to Russia.” He felt lost for a while, overindulged in drinking and drugs to escape responsibility. “Dancers are kids,” he says. “You’re well looked after, but you never take responsibility for your own decisions.” He wrote some offensive things on social media. “That’s one regret for sure,” he says. “Part of it was arrogance, it was stupid. I tell myself: ‘You’re a penis.’ In a way it was to destroy what I had,” he says. An act of self-sabotage. But these days Polunin shoulders a lot of responsibility, producing up to three shows a year. He’s learning as he goes. “In the past we made so many mistakes,” he says. “The first show at Sadler’s Wells we spent so much money. It failed with critics, so you lost the trust of the team, of the sponsors.” But he came back with a second premiere the next year. “You have to come back fast,” he says – or you’ll be soon forgotten. His survival system is based on always going forward. “I have a one-week memory,” he says. He tries not to think about the financial risk. He never borrows money, and, if they find themselves £10,000 short to pay for a dance floor, he’ll go and do a guest performance to get the funds – his name has global pulling power. Polunin is not short on self-belief but he has a sense of destiny too. His failures could have destroyed him, he says. “But maybe we’re doing the right thing, because we’re still here. If it’s right, the universe will help us get there.” • Johan Kobborg’s Romeo &amp; Juliet is at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 1 December. • Free: A Life in Images &amp; Words by Sergei Polunin is published by teNeues (£45). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The Northern Ireland Brexit protocol has not “shattered” the constitutional status of Northern Ireland within the UK, as some unionists have argued, a government lawyer has told a court in Belfast. Tony McGleenan QC was opening his defence of the protocol against a legal challenge brought by a group of unionist politicians including the Traditional Unionist Voice leader, Jim Allister, the former Labour party MP Kate Hoey and the former Brexit party MEP Ben Habib. In a landmark case, they have contested that the withdrawal agreement and act of parliament changed the constitutional status of Northern Ireland and conflicted with the Acts of Union from 1800. McGleenan rejected those arguments. He told senior judges: “There has been no change to the constitutional status of Northern Ireland.” He added: “The suggestion that there’s been some shattering of the union is, we say, not sustainable.” The Northern Ireland protocol came into force on 1 January and mandates checks and controls on goods crossing from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. This is because under the Brexit compromise to avoid a border on the island of Ireland, Northern Ireland remains in the UK but is also, for trade purposes, in the EU single market, which means EU customs and standards checks still apply on goods entering the region. Reviewing the course of the UK’s departure from the EU, McGleenan argued that the political cost of the withdrawal agreement including the section on Northern Ireland was known to the parties involved in the case, with two of them expressing strong support for it. It had been “subjected to debate for three years” and its political force was expressed by at least two of the parties involved in the case, Habib and Hoey. Those taking the case have argued that the protocol is unlawful because it conflicts with the Acts of Union and the Good Friday agreement of 1998. The high court rejected their first challenge this summer and they are appealing against that verdict in an expedited case. John Larkin QC, for the appellants, said references to the debate in parliament and expressions of support or otherwise for Brexit were a “distraction” because legally all that counted were “the words of the statutes” of parliament. On Monday judges were told the Acts of Union had legal supremacy over the protocol. Larkin told them: “The protocol could not be validly made because it is in conflict with a provision of the constitution of the United Kingdom – that is article 6 of the Acts of Union.” On Tuesday, McGleenan challenged the claim, saying: “The argument that the Act of Union has interpretative supremacy; [that] it dominates later provisions, we say that is wrong,” he said. He said that even if there were conflicts between the 1800 law and the protocol, they were “legally irrelevant” as section 7 (a) of the Withdrawal Act allowed for the protocol “to continue to have effect in domestic law”. The case continues.The UK has announced it is to accelerate its booster programme in order to increase protection against Covid amid concern over the Omicron variant. The government accepted advice from the vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), to cut the gap between the second dose of the vaccine and the booster from six to three months and for it to be made available to younger age groups more quickly. But some vulnerable housebound British residents say they are struggling to get a booster jab at home. More than 40 people who responded to a Guardian callout say they or a relative have encountered difficulties with either being invited for their booster or getting someone to administer the jab in their home. Five of those people talk about their experiences of waiting to be vaccinated. ‘I’m feeling very vulnerable’ Anne*, a 69-year-old in Carmarthenshire, Wales, has been waiting to receive a booster jab since she became eligible in early November. As she is housebound, her GP administered her first two AstraZeneca vaccine doses at home. “I got a letter through the post last week to go to the vaccine centre in Carmarthen [two days later],” she says. “The problem is I’m a double amputee. I have a wheelchair-accessible vehicle but I need someone to put me in and drive me. I would also need to give my carers more notice so two of them can come in before the appointment,” she says, explaining she needs two people to lift her and help her wash and dress. As she wasn’t able to attend the appointment, she tried calling the number on the letter. “I tried 10 times that day and six the next to tell them I couldn’t go,” she says. Anne worries that she might have to wait a while to get vaccinated. “Cases are going up and I’m feeling very vulnerable – I don’t feel there’s anything I can do.” ‘The rollout is obviously affecting quite a few people’ In West Sussex, Patricia, who is 97, registered blind and housebound, is still waiting for both her flu jab and booster. Her 62-year-old daughter Anne who works as a nurse says: “I phoned her GP about a week ago to make sure she was still on the list to be seen, but the surgery doesn’t have any other information on when she might get the jab. “It was when I heard on the news that nearly all over-80s had received their booster that I got a bit worried,” says Anne. “The rollout is obviously affecting quite a few people.” Anne says her mum is quite safe as she doesn’t go out much and everyone in the family has had their boosters. “It would just be nice to be told when they might come in so I can check on her that day.” Later the same day she received an automatic text message inviting her mum to book a booster. Anne is so concerned that she has given up waiting and is prepared to try to take her mum to be jabbed at her GP surgery. “I thought I should just get her booked in instead of waiting for someone to come to her,” she says. “I followed the link to book online at her surgery, as this is the nearest place and easy to get a wheelchair in, but I was unable to book because there was no availability! I’ll just have to try again.” ‘I’m worried about missing Christmas with family’ Hannah*, 23, hasn’t been visited to be given a booster jab, despite being clinically vulnerable. The 23-year-old, who lives in Greater Manchester and has myalgic encephalomyelitis (also known as chronic fatigue syndrome) alongside other conditions, is registered housebound with her GP surgery. “I was just about well enough to get to my GP surgery down the road for my initial vaccinations,” she says. But she adds that the 10-minute journey caused a “major flare” of her conditions. “Now my condition has declined further and I wouldn’t be able to do that.” Hannah says her GP surgery has been unable to clarify when housebound patients will be vaccinated. She is worried about becoming ill because her domiciliary carers are not jabbed. “There seems to be an assumption that housebound people don’t have access to the outside world when in reality, we rely on others for care and basic necessities,” she says, adding that her partner works in education and is teaching in person. Unless she is vaccinated in time for Christmas, Hannah says she will not feel safe spending it with her family. “When you are limited to your house so much, these things are like a light at the end of the tunnel,” she says. “Just because I am disabled and vulnerable doesn’t mean my life is expendable.” ‘We are going to be victims of the huge winter surge’ Roy, 76, had two vaccine doses and his flu jab administered by a nurse who visited him at his home in the east Midlands, as he is registered housebound. While he has received texts encouraging him to book his vaccination at a local centre, Roy, who cannot get in or out of a car, has not been told whether he will be given his booster at home. “The nurse who came with the flu jab had over 60 people to get round so I am not the only one in limbo in this area,” he says. When he last spoke to his GP surgery, he was advised that they did not have the recommended Pfizer vaccine in stock. Although his wife, who cares for him, is triple-vaccinated, Roy worries about the high local infection rates. “I’m anxious that we are simply going to be ignored and, having done everything right so far, are going to be be victims of the inevitable huge surge in infections this winter.” ‘We’ve been failed by the government’ For Lynda in west Dorset, who lives with and cares for her 98-year-old mum, Emily, getting a booster has been very difficult. She says her local GP surgery is not arranging visits for the jab and that district nurses will be going out in November to offer them to housebound patients. “I can’t leave the house because someone might call to give mum her jab,” said Lynda. “She has severe dementia so I need to be with her.” Lynda hopes her mum will get the booster by the end of the month but thinks there is little access to the vaccine in Dorset generally. “In a rural area like this self-help is how we get by, and what we’re going through at the moment just emphasises how much self-help we’ve had to gather during Covid and we’re still not out of it. “We don’t feel it is the fault of our GP surgery or the district nurses, who have been under terrible pressure, but the total shambles of the government rollout – it’s non-existent. The government doesn’t seem to have its finger on the pulse about how to get jabs to rural areas. We’ve been failed.” One of her main concerns is that a family Christmas won’t take place if her mum doesn’t receive her booster in time. “My daughter worked on Christmas day last year and hasn’t been inside the house since March 2020 because mum’s very vulnerable, but we’re hoping she’ll be here this year. “If mum hasn’t been ‘boostered’ it’s going to be very difficult. She can’t go outside as it’s too cold, and can just about get to the window in her bedroom to wave at my daughter in the garden when she does visit. There seems to be a big gap as to what the reality is and what the government perceives is going on across the country.” * Names have been changed.It is rare that the women’s football community is united when awards season rocks around but no one could argue there was a worthier winner of the Ballon d’Or than Barcelona’s Alexia Putellas. Social media was awash with debate over the order of the players placed second to 10th: should the Arsenal forward Vivienne Miedema be as low as fourth? Why was Chelsea’s Fran Kirby down in 10th? But no one remembers who didn’t get their hands on the mounted, golden football. Only 22 points separated third and 10th, with the top 10 amassing 544 points. Putellas collected a staggering, but unsurprising, 186 and her clubmate Jenni Hermoso finished second on 84. Arguably, given Barcelona’s dominance and unmatched fluid play, the top 10 should consist solely of players from the club. Picking out Putellas from the pack seems somewhat unfair when the whole is so good. There isn’t only one heartbeat to Barcelona, there are many, each pumping blood into the body of a team who feel as if they have too many limbs for opponents to deal with. Putellas recognised the incredible whole in which she operates when she said on Monday: “I want to thank my teammates. This is an individual award but it is unquestionably a team prize.” However, it is right to pick out Putellas for individual awards and praise because, to labour the analogy, if the team are made up of numerous beating hearts then she is a larger one at the centre fuelling and linking them all. The 27-year-old midfielder has been sublime for the European champions. In guiding them to a first Champions League title and historic treble she scored 27 goals and provided 19 assists. With the Spanish league newly full-time and professional it would be easy to dismiss the dominance of Barça there, yet the manner in which they have swept aside teams with similar ease in European competition has been, quite frankly, scary. The 4-0 hammering of Chelsea in the Champions League final, in which Putellas scored a penalty and provided an assist, sent reverberations through the women’s game. This season, across all competitions, they have scored 83 goals in 15 games, conceding four times. Their 4–1 defeat of Arsenal in their opening Champions League group game was not unsurprising but the complete brushing aside of a team showing similar signs of domestic dominance in England was. At the centre of everything Barcelona do is Putellas. Tight control, tricks and flicks are only one part of her game. The ability of the player born in Mollet del Vallès, Catalonia, in picking out the most improbable passes, finding space where there is none, knowing where players are going to be before they do and almost slowing the play of those around her is second to none. This season a four-minute hat-trick against Valencia and a stunning and powerful free-kick against Hoffenheim are a couple of highlights. Putellas is Barcelona’s second highest goalscorer of all time behind Hermoso and Spain’s most capped player. In August she was named the Uefa women’s player of the year and in her Ballon d’Or acceptance speech she thanked “all the coaches that have believed in me”. Her 157 goals in 364 games for Barcelona since she signed from Espanyol in 2012 speak to her longevity at the club, after the lifelong Barça fan began her career at Sabadell and spent one year in the Barcelona academy, aged 11, before joining Espanyol. She made her Espanyol debut at 16 and spent one breakout year at Levante, scoring 15 times in 34 games, before Barcelona came back for the youngster they had rejected. Five league titles, six Copa de la Reina triumphs and one Champions League title later the club are beginning to replicate the style and dominance in possession associated with their male counterparts, with Putellas critical to the long-term steady development of the team. In an extremely moving moment during her Ballon d’Or speech the majestic player dedicated her win to her father, Jaume, with whom she used to travel to the Camp Nou as a child but who died in 2012 when she was 18, and on the eve of competing in the Under-19 Euros (where she captained the side to the final) and joining Barcelona. “I hope you are proud of your daughter. This is for you daddy, wherever you are,” she said. How could he not be?Here is a bit of a diversion from the Exhibition on Screen series’ usual practice of hanging their films around blockbuster artist names: this latest is a profile of Wilhelm Hansen, the “Danish collector” of the title, who assembled a mighty private collection of 19th-century French painting – centred on the impressionists – which was eventually donated to the Danish state in the early 1950s. The film actually takes its cue from the Royal Academy’s 2020 exhibition Gauguin and the Impressionists, whose curators are on hand to provide context. Hansen himself seems a solid if unspectacular figure: a wealthy insurance tycoon whose main biographical drama appears to be getting caught up in a banking collapse, of which he was cleared of criminal involvement but whose financial repercussions forced him to sell a large chunk of his collection. Much of this had been scooped up in Paris during the first world war, when prices for the kind of work he was interested in had slumped. Hansen did, however, have an excellent eye, acquiring works that spanned the full spectrum of early modern French painting, and its classical roots. His chief love, apparently, was the classic impressionism of Monet, Sisley and Degas, but he also worked backwards to the foundational works of Delacroix, Ingres and Corot and forwards to Cézanne and Gauguin. All these are normally housed in the Hansens’ former country home Ordrupgaard, now preserved and transformed into an art museum. Compared to an artist biography, there’s a little less ground to cover, so this film can afford a somewhat more languid pace than other Exhibition on Screen offerings; the most interesting material, perhaps, is the passages covering the development of art-dealing in concert with the rise of impressionism, and the history of collecting itself. A quiet, reflective film. • The Danish Collector is released on 30 November in cinemas.Boris Johnson has rejected the idea that people should cancel Christmas parties and other festive events, after one of the UK’s most senior health officials said people should cut down on socialising. The prime minister said there was no need to strengthen the guidance on social contact, despite the cautionary message from the head of the UK Health Security Agency, Jenny Harries. After visiting a vaccination centre, Johnson said there needed to be a “surge” in people getting booster shots and that the army would be brought in to provide logistical support, but there would be no further change in advice “about how people should be living their lives”. Harries had earlier urged people to reduce their social contact, even if only by a little, as fears grow that existing vaccines will prove less effective against the Omicron variant. “Of course our behaviours in winter – and particularly around Christmas – we tend to socialise more, so I think all of those will need to be taken into account,” the former deputy chief medical officer for England told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “So I think being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to and particularly going and getting those booster jabs.” Tory MPs were outraged by Harries’s suggestion, and the lockdown-sceptic backbenchers Desmond Swayne, Mark Harper and Steve Baker challenged it in the House of Commons. Baker said it “appears now that employed civil servants are no longer bound to policy” and that it was a “recipe for chaos”. Pressed about whether people should cancel their Christmas parties, No 10 said Harries “gives advice to the government, she is not the government”. Senior politicians are pressing ahead with Christmas drinks parties, and Johnson will continue to attend and hold receptions. His official spokesman also made it clear that the government had no intention of moving to its “plan B” of working from home and introducing vaccine passports unless hospitals show signs of becoming overwhelmed. Harries, however, appeared to suggest a lower bar for plan B measures based on a rising number of cases rather than hospital admissions. She said advice from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) had “shown that, if we have significant surges in Covid cases, then actually working from home is one of the key ones to implement”. She said the number of Omicron cases identified in England remained low. “So it’s a very early stage for this, I think, but certainly, if we see surges, then working from home will be a good thing to do.” Three more cases of the Omicron variant were identified in Scotland on Tuesday, taking the UK’s total to 14. Harries spoke after the chief executive of the drugmaker Moderna said existing vaccines were unlikely to be as effective against Omicron as they had been against the Delta variant. Stéphane Bancel told the Financial Times: “I think it’s going to be a material drop. I just don’t know how much because we need to wait for the data. But all the scientists I’ve talked to … are like ‘this is not going to be good’.” Bancel had earlier said on CNBC that there should be greater clarity on the efficacy of vaccines against Omicron in about two weeks’ time, and that it could take months to begin shipping a vaccine that would work against it. Asked about the prospect of Christmas being cancelled, the Sage member Prof Paul Moss told Sky News: “I don’t think we need to worry too much about that at this stage … the measures that we got in place have a good chance of gaining some control here.” The Labour MP Lisa Nandy said it was up to the government to save Christmas. She told Sky News: “The vast majority of people are doing what is asked of them – wearing masks, getting the booster jab, social distancing … People are trying their best, but there are some big holes in the government’s plans, particularly around travel.”The energy regulator has promised to enact tougher stress tests for energy suppliers to prove they have the financial strength to weather a surge in energy market prices – with consequences for suppliers which fail. Ofgem’s chief executive, Jonathan Brearley, said regulation would need to “go much further” to assess whether suppliers are able to survive unpredictable energy market shocks, after the collapse of more than 20 suppliers in the last 12 weeks. The energy regulator boss was forced to defend its record in a House of Lords hearing after historic energy market highs sank a string of providers, including Bulb Energy, which will require a taxpayer bailout of up to £1.7bn to keep supplying its 1.7 million customers through the winter. “We do need a retail sector that is able to handle shocks like this in the future,” he said. “In my mind that means making sure we have a very sharp focus on capital adequacy, but also the rules in place as to what you do when someone breaches those rules.” Brearley warned that suppliers must plan for record market prices “to be around in the coming months”, and brace for “a very, very different way of regulating the retail sector” in the future. The “new reality” after the energy crisis will require “fit and proper” tests, he added, to determine whether suppliers have taken on too much risk, and whether they have enough capital to manage this risk if energy markets rocket. “What is evident from the last few months is that those stress tests need to be very wide. We’ve seen a fivefold increase in the price of gas. This is certainly not something we’ve seen before in the market,” Brearley said. Many challenger companies buy energy from the wholesale markets just three to six months in advance, which left them exposed to record energy markets prices after a rapid surge earlier this year. By contrast, established energy suppliers and those with strong financial backing have been more resilient to the energy shock because they sourced more of the power needed for the coming winter last year, when market prices were weak. Brearley told the committee that each company can decide how much it wants to hedge, and how much risk it wants to take, but “the rule has to be that if you take risk you have to have the capital available” to manage a wide range of market scenarios. About 90 of the highest energy price events of the last 10 years have taken place in the last few months, so energy suppliers “need to be ready for that in the future”, he added. “I don’t see that this is going to be a bubble that goes away and then we will carry on as we were before. I think we are going to be in a different kind of reality. That will mean having rules in place which say ‘you choose what you do, but you have to underpin that choice’,” he said. The regulator is planning to put in place new regulation to strengthen the resilience of the market in February next year, including changes to the energy price cap, which could mean that it is allowed to rise and fall more quickly to reflect sudden changes in the energy market. The regulation review is likely to reignite criticism of the regulator for allowing a deluge of small, unstable energy suppliers to enter the market in an attempt to boost customer switching to improve market competition. Dozens more energy suppliers are expected to go bust in the coming months, according to market analysts, which could reduce the number of suppliers in the market from a peak of 70 to fewer than 10 by next spring. “Competition is important; it drives customer value, it drives innovation,” Brearley said. “But we need a broader way to look at the retail sector in the future and to make sure that we go get to a sustainable place.”Facebook parent company Meta has been ordered by the UK competition watchdog to sell the gif creation website Giphy, the first time the regulator has moved to block a deal struck by one of the Silicon Valley giants. The Competition and Markets Authority, which provisionally ruled in August that a sell-off was the only way to resolve competition concerns, said the move would “protect millions of social media users” and stop Facebook “increasing its significant power in social media”. The CMA launched an investigation last year into Meta’s $400m (£290m) takeover of Giphy, the largest supplier of animated gifs to social networks such as Snapchat, TikTok and Twitter, after identifying competition concerns. The regulator said Meta could cut off the supply of gifs to rivals, or demand more user data from them in order to keep using Giphy. The CMA said that a takeover would also remove a potential competitor from the £7bn UK display advertising market, where Facebook is the biggest player accounting for about half the market. The CMA said it was “particularly concerning” that Facebook terminated Giphy’s advertising services, which the company was poised to expand, at the time of the merger. “By requiring Facebook to sell Giphy, we are protecting millions of social media users and promoting competition and innovation in digital advertising,” said Stuart McIntosh, chair of the independent inquiry group that carried out the CMA’s in-depth investigation into the deal. “Without action, it will also allow Facebook to increase its significant market power in social media even further, through controlling competitors’ access to Giphy gifs.” Meta, which is considering appealing against the decision, said that the deal would be good for Giphy, consumers and businesses. “We disagree with this decision,” said a spokesperson for Meta. “We are reviewing the decision and considering all options, including appeal. Both consumers and Giphy are better off with the support of our infrastructure, talent, and resources. Together, Meta and Giphy would enhance Giphy’s product for the millions of people, businesses, developers and partners in the UK and around the world who use Giphy every day, providing more choices for everyone.” Responding to the CMA’s provisional findings in August, which indicated that a sell-off of Giphy was the only option, it accused the UK regulator of “engaging in extraterritorial over-reach”. Meta said at the time that blocking the deal to buy Giphy, which is based in New York and does not have operations in the UK, would “send a chilling message to startup entrepreneurs: do not build new companies because you will not be able to sell them”. The CMA and Meta have been at loggerheads through the investigation process. In October, the CMA moved to fine Meta £50.5m for “deliberately” refusing to supply information to prove it was following an order to keep Giphy’s business separate from Facebook during the investigation period. “This should serve as a warning to any company that thinks it is above the law,” said Joel Bamford, a director of mergers at the CMA, at the time.Is Boris Johnson really the best Britain can do? I don’t care what your politics are. Do you honestly think that a guy who rambles on about Peppa Pig, U-turns on important decisions every five seconds and spent years refusing to disclose how many children he has is the most qualified person to lead the UK? I am not saying Keir Starmer would be much better in the top job, mind you. I am saying there are 67 million people in the UK. Surely, among them, there is someone who would make a far better leader than Johnson? If we lived in a meritocracy – if opportunity were equally distributed – then we would be doing a lot better than this. But we don’t live in a meritocracy. We live in a world where success isn’t so much about merit but money, a world in which there are established routes to power. In the case of Britain, these take in Eton and Oxford. Johnson is the fifth of the 15 prime ministers since 1945 to have been educated at Eton. Twenty-eight prime ministers went to Oxford (13 of them to Christ Church). Fourteen went to Cambridge (six to Trinity College). Is this because the Eton-Oxbridge pipeline produces the people best suited to lead? Or is it that we just assume they will be good leaders? We talk a lot about leadership, but we tend to talk around the subject. We don’t often stop to interrogate our ideas about what qualities a leader should embody. We don’t often examine the biases that make us assume someone has what it takes to be in charge. But it is crucial that we do this, because every crisis the world faces is ultimately a crisis of leadership. Before we can solve anything – from the climate crisis to social inequality – we need to solve the mediocre-man crisis. We need to understand why so many incompetent men are in power. (And before all the men’s rights activists start yelling at me about incompetent women, please take a look around: this point stands because the vast majority of people in charge are still men.) How do so many incompetent men bluster their way into high office? The short answer is confidence. Lots of studies show that confident people are more convincing – and humans have a lamentable tendency to confuse confidence with competence. There is, of course, a class element to this. One of the most valuable aspects of an elite education may well be the entitlement it imbues. A series of recent studies by researchers from Stanford University and the University of Virginia found that “individuals with relatively high social class are more overconfident”. Others buy into the hype. The result is that “advantages beget advantages”. But while class is a catalyst of confidence, so is gender. Research has found that girls as young as six believe brilliance is a male trait. Because the idea that geniuses are predominately male is so ingrained, society tends to reward men for overconfidence and narcissism, while punishing women for the same qualities. Women tend to be reviled if they self-promote “too much” – and so they are inclined to do it far less than men. As a female writer, I can also tell you that women are punished for pointing out that men aren’t perfect, so let me quickly tell you that a guy has said the same thing. The organisational psychologist Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic wrote a book in 2019 called Why Do So Many Incompetent Men Become Leaders?, arguing that men dominate positions of power because they are more likely to exhibit toxic traits such as self-absorption, which we then mistake for markers of high ability. “Women are better leaders,” Chamorro-Premuzic told the Financial Times. “I am not neutral on this. I am sexist in favour of women. Women have better people skills, [they are] more altruistic, better able to control their impulses. They outperform men in university at graduate and undergraduate levels.” A 2019 study that analysed the performance assessments of more than 60,000 leaders found that women rate higher than men in 17 out of 19 leadership skills. I agree with Chamorro-Premuzic on a lot, but I want to make something very clear: I don’t think women are hardwired to be better leaders. I am not interested in having more women in power for the sake of it. Who cares about having more women in charge if those women simply lean into a toxic model of leadership that men have created? I am interested in advancing a more “feminine” model of leadership, for men and women. Because while I don’t believe that men and women are hardwired differently, we are certainly socialised differently. All the “feminine” traits that women have been told are weaknesses in the workforce (empathy, collaboration, altruism) are, in fact, strengths. It is high time – and I think the pandemic has dramatically underscored this – that we stop telling women to “lean in” to a male style of leadership. Instead, we should tell everyone to start leading like women. And, if you will excuse the terribly unfeminine self-promotion, I have written a book called Strong Female Lead that argues exactly that – and explains what a “female” model of leadership looks like. The next decade may be our last opportunity to solve the climate crisis, create more ethical artificial intelligence and determine our future. As Christiana Figueres, the leader of the 2015 Paris accord and one of the women I interviewed for my book, has noted, it is crunch time for humanity. Here is the thing, though: we aren’t going to be able to change anything if we don’t drastically change how we think about leadership. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist Strong Female Lead by Arwa Mahdawi (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, £18.99) is out now. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe new masks mandate on public transport and in shops in England was patchily observed in London and Manchester on Tuesday morning, judging by a Guardian snapshot survey. But as the public balanced frustration at new restrictions with the hope they could prevent another lockdown, there were clear signs far more people were covering their faces. In Manchester city centre, 97 out of 147 people surveyed on public transport and in shops were wearing masks. Some who were not were oblivious to the new rules and cited a lack of faith in government policy. In London, only seven of about 85 passengers counted in Northern line underground carriages were maskless while on the buses about two-thirds complied. Staff at Sainsbury’s in Camden, the borough where one of the 14 current suspected or confirmed UK cases of Omicron was discovered on Monday, handed out 300 masks to customers without masks in the first hour of trading. But once in the store, nine in 10 customers were masked. Among both the maskless and the masked, some complained of infringed liberties and being “controlled”. Others saw the logic of trying to slow the advance of the Omicron Covid “variant of concern” and accepted the advice of the government’s scientific advisers that increased mask-wearing, at least for three weeks, would help. Few contravening the rules paid much heed to the threat of £200 fines rising to £6,400 for multiple offences. The National Police Chiefs Council said officers would be more visible “in high-risk and crowded areas, such as towns and shopping centres, and near transport hubs”, although none were seen in Camden on Tuesday morning. Police will “explain the risks and encourage [non-mask wearers] to comply with the new rules,” said Owen Weatherill, assistant chief constable and the national lead on Covid. The Metropolitan police said it could resort to fines. Hair and beauty salons are covered by the new rule, while restaurants, cafes, pubs and nightclubs are not. For a short while the staff of the Turkish Barber Line barbershop in Camden had not caught up. “We are not wearing masks, but I think we have to again,” said Arum Karim, one of the barbers, who soon donned a mask when asked about the new rules. “If it prevents a lockdown I have no problem doing it,” said JP Lombard, a 20-year-old veterinary student having his beard trimmed. “But it is contradictory that tomorrow night I will be getting on a bus in a mask and going to a packed night club without a mask.” In Manchester, Richard William, 47, a sales manager highlighted a similar contradiction. “I went to a theatre in London a few days ago, where I was sitting shoulder to shoulder with people, and there I wouldn’t have to wear a mask but on public transport I do,” he said. But on a tram in Manchester, where compliance appeared to be greater than in shops, Edgar Ogbewe, 54, a civil servant, said: “I don’t see why it is a debate. It protects everyone. I do feel safer now.” Mask-wearing on public transport in the capital has remained mandatory since “freedom day” in July led to the lifting of restrictions elsewhere, but the national rules seemed to boost compliance. More people were wearing them on the 390 bus from Archway to Victoria, according to one of the drivers, Dawit, 50, but he was tired of having to tell passengers to adhere. “I have a [audio] machine that tells them to wear a face covering, but they just ignore it,” he said. Lola, 23, an unmasked hospital receptionist, said the rules made her feel “controlled”. “What happened to human rights?” she said. “Why can’t it be a choice? They say it protects other people, but I don’t know if that’s another way to control.” She said she got her news from Instagram and Twitter. It looked like it could be a long day for the store staff posted at doorways to remind the public of the new rules. “I can’t enforce it,” said Steph, the manager at Saves, a discount chemist. “That’s the police’s job. Some people just don’t want to wear it and I can’t prove if they are exempt. If they don’t want to wear it, that’s their choice.”This production brings its enchantments but one enthralling moment on its first night comes after Michael Pennington’s Prospero takes his bows, with a tribute to Stephen Sondheim from the theatre’s artistic director, Tom Littler. Sondheim supported this postage-stamp sized space from the start, as far back as 1994, he tells us, and when Littler’s revival of Saturday Night transferred to the West End in 2009, Sondheim visited every actor’s dressing room before delivering his notes on the show, which “was the closest thing to receiving notes from God”. Under Littler’s direction, the magic spark in this production lies largely in Pennington’s Prospero, although Whitney Kehinde is bewitching as Ariel, too, bringing a wide-eyed, naughty energy and archness. Pennington makes for a physically wizened but still mighty magician and displaced duke. His voice carries a storm as he speaks of his usurping brother, Antonio (Richard Derrington) but dips to tenderness as father to Miranda (Rachel Pickup, barefoot, with a touch of Robinson Crusoe) and then hardens to steel as the ruthlessly colonising sorcerer who holds this island in enslavement. Pennington reads from a script throughout but, rather incredibly, this does not take away from his performance although we wish for more eye contact. Caliban (Tam Williams), streaked with mud, blood and scars, does not quite have enough dark charisma, and is sometimes hard to understand beneath his gimp-like mask, but Ariel sings, bedazzles and stokes the comedy that the production places at its fore. The drunken antics of Trinculo (Peter Bramhill) and Stephano (Richard Derrington, doubling up) amuse while Ferdinand (Williams, doubling up) and Miranda’s starry-eyed love carries its own humour but it is slightly too gentle, slow in pace, and not all of the physical comedy lands. Several shipwrecked characters wear pyjamas, dressing gowns or smoking jackets – a nod to a play that could be a somnambulist’s dream. But others wear suits and top hats and this inconsistency in Neil Irish and Anett Black’s costumes, however deliberate, gives the production a motley, incohesive spirit that feels like a game of dress-up in which some characters are only half-dressed. The pyrotechnics that sometimes augment the illusion and magic in this short and most fantastical of Shakespeare’s plays are bypassed here for something more old-fashioned. This has the feel of a masque play with a homemade box of tricks, from a miniature ship beached on the floor to a cloth sketch of an island, drawn across the back of the stage, which could be a bed-sheet. Black and Irish’s set design uses the yellow and rust palette of a desert island with a diaphanous curtain that suggests a child’s game of make-believe. But it is Max Pappenheim’s clear and intimate sound design that best conjures an enchanted isle, with lapping waves of music, song and sound effects. At Jermyn Street theatre, London, until 22 December.Evidence released by New York’s attorney general on Monday stoked speculation over Chris Cuomo’s future at CNN, showing that the primetime host used media contacts to glean information about women accusing his brother, the then New York governor Andrew Cuomo, of sexual harassment – then sought to make his sibling aware of upcoming coverage. A transcript of an interview with the younger Cuomo showed that at one point the TV host texted Melissa DeRosa, his brother’s top aide, to say “I have a lead on the wedding girl”. It was a reference to Anna Ruch, a woman who accused Andrew Cuomo of attempting to kiss her at a wedding. Chris Cuomo told investigators a “source” told him about Ruch and a friend told him that “maybe she had been put up to it”. The broadcaster also used his contacts to warn his brother, via DeRosa, of yet-to-be-published media reports regarding allegations against him. “I would – when asked, I would reach out to sources, other journalists, to see if they had heard of anybody else coming out,” Cuomo told investigators. Chris Cuomo has acknowledged that he advised his brother on how to respond to a scandal that engulfed his administration, but the extent of his involvement has only now become clear. Andrew Cuomo resigned as New York governor in August, after 11 women accused him of inappropriate behaviour. He has consistently denied any wrongdoing. CNN said it would conduct a “thorough review” of the new evidence. “We will be having conversations and seeking additional clarity about their significance as they relate to CNN over the next several days,” said a spokesman, according to CNBC. Cuomo has been a primetime host on CNN since 2018. When the allegations relating to his brother emerged he vowed not to cover them, due to the obvious conflict of interest. He has previously apologised for advising Andrew Cuomo during this time. The evidence released by the state attorney general shows that Chris Cuomo typed out a statement on behalf of his brother and sent it to DeRosa. It read: “I will not resign, I cannot resign … I understand the political pressure, I understand the stakes of political warfare, and that’s what this is … And I understand the conformity that can be forced by cancel culture.” Cuomo and DeRosa also discussed upcoming stories in Politico and the New Yorker on the then governor. “I was frequently in contact when we would hear word that there were other people coming out” with stories, Cuomo told investigators.A son launched a knife attack on his mother and her partner, the millionaire businessman Sir Richard Sutton, on the anniversary of his father’s death, seething with resentment over how he felt the couple had treated him, a murder trial has heard. Thomas Schreiber, 35, who killed Sutton, 83, a hotelier and landowner, and inflicted life-changing injuries on Anne Schreiber, 66, believed the pair favoured his two sisters, which left him feeling like an outcast, the jury was told. The court also heard that there had been two violent incidents before the knife attack, including one that erupted during a row over a chandelier and ended with Sutton hitting Schreiber so hard with his walking stick that it broke. Tensions were also rising before the “explosion of violence” in April at the family’s Dorset mansion because Schreiber, his mother and her partner were locked down together at the height of the Covid pandemic, it is alleged. Adam Feest QC, prosecuting, said there was no disputing that Schreiber had killed Sutton and seriously injured his mother, but that the defendant’s state of mind would be a key element for the jury to consider. Schreiber denies murder and attempted murder. Jurors heard a string of messages recorded in the weeks and months before the attack in which Schreiber expressed his hatred for his victims and talked of revenge. He told one friend: “I have a plan which I’m working on … Revenge is at its heart.” He confided to another: “I would like to get a gun and shoot a bullet in my mum’s face and Richard’s.” The month before the attack he wrote: “My mind is consumed with hatred of the very worst kind towards my family … I contemplate murdering them … day and night … I want them to suffer.” Schreiber visited his father’s grave on the day of the attack. His mother told police she was in the kitchen when she turned to see him holding a 15cm long knife. His eyes were “almost frightening to look at because they looked terribly, terribly determined”, she said. He appeared wild and “very, very unusual, very, very out of control”. She suffered as many as 15 wounds and needed about 27 litres of blood products – the human body holds between four and six litres. Among her injuries was a vertical cut to the right side of her face from her eyebrow to her chin, but the most significant was a partial transection of the spinal cord, which had caused “serious, ongoing physical consequences”, the jury was told. Feest said Sutton had been estranged from his wife, Lady Fiamma Sutton, for almost 20 years while Anne Schreiber and her husband, David Schreiber, separated in about 2002-03. This, the prosecutor said, was caused at least in part by David Schreiber’s alcoholism, which put a strain on their marriage emotionally and financially. In the summer of 2003 Anne Schreiber and her three children were invited by Sutton to move to his mansion, Moorhill. David Schreiber moved into a cottage on the estate where he lived until his death in 2013. Feest said the defendant took his father’s side and felt his mother was “toxic” and she and his sisters “gold-diggers”. In Christmas 2018 after a trip to Wincanton races, the family argued over the defendant not offering to drive, the court was told. Sutton intervened, and may have swung a fist at Schreiber, who hit the older man in the face. In November 2020 Ms Schreiber suggested to one of her daughters, Louisa, that she might have one of their grandmother’s chandeliers. Schreiber lost his temper and became abusive to his sister. Sutton stepped in and hit Schreiber across the back with his walking stick so hard it snapped. After the attack on his mother and her partner in April, Schreiber fled and telephoned relatives and friends. He told one friend: “I’ve killed my mum and I’ve killed Richard and I’m here lying in blood and I’m about to kill myself.” In a reference to the chandelier episode, he told another: “I don’t appreciate being knocked around by Richard.” The trial continues.The Home Office has U-turned on plans to deport a leading scientist carrying out groundbreaking research into affordable forms of solar energy and allowed him and his family to remain in the UK. Initially, the Home Office rejected the asylum claim lodged by Dr Nadarajah Muhunthan, 47, who has been living in the UK since 2018 with his wife, Sharmila, 42, and their three children, aged 13, nine and five. Muhunthan, who is working on thin-film photovoltaic devices used to generate solar energy, was given a prestigious Commonwealth Rutherford fellowship. The award allowed him to come to the UK for two years to research and develop the technology. He was based at the University of Bristol. His wife got a job caring for elderly people in a nursing home. The couple’s eldest daughter, Gihaniya, has received outstanding school reports in the UK with a 100% attendance rate and been particularly praised for her achievements in science. She hopes to study to be a doctor when she is older. The family are Tamils, a group that has experienced persecution in Sri Lanka. However, just weeks after the Guardian highlighted the case, the Home Office changed its mind and has now granted Muhunthan and his family refugee status. Muhunthan thanked the Home Office for their decision. “The Home Office has saved my life and my family’s lives. Now I will be able to continue my research without fear,” he said. After reading the previous Guardian article about the case, Prof David J Firmin, head of the electro-chemistry and solar team at the University of Bristol where Muhunthan was conducting research into ways to make solar energy panels more effective and affordable, wrote to the Home Office at the end of October expressing his “deepest concern”. He said Muhunthan’s work was making a significant contribution to efforts to decarbonise the energy generation sector. In November 2019, Muhunthan returned to his home country for a short visit to see his sick mother. While he was there, he was arrested and persecuted by the Sri Lankan government. He managed to escape and returned to the UK, where he claimed asylum on the basis of what he had experienced on his visit to Sri Lanka. After his scholarship expired in February 2020, neither he nor his wife were permitted to continue working. The family’s lawyer, Naga Kandiah of MTC solicitors, welcomed the Home Office’s change of heart. He said:“This is an important victory which recognises there is systematic torture of Tamils going on in Sri Lanka. This scientist and his family will all be assets to the UK.”Lydia Bedford has said she is “unbelievably excited” after being announced as the new manager of Leicester City’s women’s team on a contract taking her to the end of the current season. She will step into the vacancy left by Jonathan Morgan, who was sacked last Thursday after failing to win a single point from the promoted side’s first eight games of the Women’s Super League season. Bedford, who will take over on Monday after leaving her head coach role with England Women’s youth team, will be joined at the club by Brent Hills, a former head of women’s elite development at the Football Association. The former Leicester and England men’s striker, Emile Heskey, had taken temporary charge but will revert to his role as the club’s head of women’s football development following Sunday’s League Cup game at Manchester United. In announcing the appointment, Leicester’s chief executive, Susan Whelan, said: “Lydia is one of the rising stars of the women’s game, whose technical coaching credentials are complemented by an incredible passion for and knowledge of women’s football that can have an immediate impact on our squad. “While addressing the form of the team on the pitch is clearly the immediate priority, I’m excited to see the impact of Lydia’s and Brent’s experiences on our entire women’s football operation, which continues to mature at speed in its second season since turning professional.” Bedford, whose first game in charge will be against 15-times league winners Arsenal on 12 December, added: “Leicester City’s vision for women’s football and the extent of its ambition have been obvious during the last two seasons, so I’m unbelievably excited to have the chance to be part of that. Taking the step into a senior coaching role is something I’ve always wanted to do. “I’m delighted that Brent has agreed to join our coaching staff. His experiences in the women’s game are unrivalled and he will bring invaluable support both to the training pitch and to our strategic planning. “The infrastructure of personnel and facilities that have been put in place since women’s football turned professional in Leicester tells you everything you need to know about where the club wants to go.” Leicester were promoted from the Championship last season with 16 wins from 20 games, finishing eight points clear at the top. Their debut WSL season has so far proved a chastening affair, however, with eight straight defeats, only three goals scored and 19 conceded. They have only scored once in the league since 12 September. Despite their terrible introduction to life in the top tier, they remain only one point from climbing out of the division’s sole relegation place thanks to a little-better season for Birmingham, who have managed one draw from their eight games so far. After Leicester follow their match at Arsenal with a home game against defending champions Manchester City, the two basement sides meet on 19 December.On the surface, the question of whether you will like Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country – the second series of a show about Sarah Beeny’s new life, which is in the country – will depend on whether you like Sarah Beeny, and want her to have a nice life. It feels as if culture has been sharpening like a sword for years up to this point, but I’m going to ask anyway: do you? Do you like Sarah Beeny? And, more importantly, do you want her to thrive in her new life in the country? To figure out whether you like Sarah Beeny it does help to interrogate whether you’ve watched a property show in the last 20 years, because if you have, you probably do. Property TV is a natural fit for a country obsessed with property ownership, and Channel 4 has long since cornered the market, their four horsemen – Conquest (Kevin McCloud), Famine (Beeny), War (Phil Spencer) and Death (Kirstie Allsopp) – leading the march. What is it about owning a property that makes it so soothing to watch other people do things to theirs? Realistically, I’m 20 years and a global banking crisis from finding out for myself, but we live in hope. Until then, Beeny’s busy. The premise of the show is: Beeny and her husband Graham Swift are building a low-carbon stately home in Somerset, and we are supposed to find it interesting that they sold their house in London to fund this. The construction of the shell of the home was documented in the last series, and now they are moving on to actually making it have some rooms inside, while they and the rest of the family live in a casual literal other house they already have onsite. The improvement is piecemeal: this week we see them install a large step. There’s a big reveal at the end where she shows her brother the new hallway. If you’re the kind of person excited about seeing a hallway get done up then, sure, go wild. But the appeal of New Life … , which returns on Tuesday, actually goes beyond property, and hints more broadly at what it means. The programme is intercut with snapshots of Beeny’s jolly family life – the beloved dog gives birth to puppies! A series of well-raised teenage boys flop the hair out of their faces long enough to put down some screed! – and her roll-your-sleeves-up-and-let’s-get-shit-on-our-trousers approach to country life. We see Swift – tortured artist son, ambitious posh lad rising – scratch his head about how to install some cornice, then cut to Beeny on a cluttered kitchen table trying to make combs for a beehive. If you’ve ever ventured over there in recent years, you’ll know YouTube has an interminable trend for “family content”, where shiny young couples document every second of their growing family’s lives, and are always doing pranks or buying a bigger car or something. When I first saw it I thought: “How absolutely pathetic,” but then I learned that it tends to appeal to teenagers who come from broken family units. They gaze at these families and see what it might be like to be loved by your dad in a way where he keeps putting clingfilm over the toilet or dangling toy spiders in your face. Watching Beeny interrupt a piano lesson to take a call from a builder fulfils much the same function: you, a nobody, can watch along and envision what it might be like to be really middle class and have a genuine need to buy a 4x4 and have a special shelf in your hall for wellies. It’s as much “imagine if Sarah Beeny made you a big moussaka” wish-fulfilment as it is “there’s a leak and nobody can quite figure out where it comes from” housing drama. So it’s fluff, sure. And it does rather beg the question: how many mansions will we have to watch Sarah Beeny overhaul before we die? But it’s wholesome in a way I didn’t expect to be quite so charmed by, and that in itself is disarming. Do you like Sarah Beeny? Come on, you can be honest now. You find her reassuringly straightforward but didn’t understand that era when she was doing a dating website. It’s fine, you can say it. Admit it: you like Sarah Beeny. Well, here’s some footage of her running around a ping pong table with her big, posh family, all laughing and having fun. There you go, look. Shh, shh. Everything’s going to be OK. Beeny’s here. Mummy’s here. Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country starts on 30 November on Channel 4In 1984, the documentarian Jon Alpert began filming three petty criminals on the streets of Newark, New Jersey. With a camera hidden in his clothing, Alpert captured the twentysomethings’ ingenuity and braggadocio – they mostly targeted retail stores with eager confidence and schemes as brazen as walking out with a box full of goods – as well as the fraying seams of their lives: abusive relationships, arrest warrants, spiraling drug use. Alpert, part of the New York non-profit Downtown Community Television Center (DCTV), released his first installment on the group, One Year in a Life of Crime, in 1989, after all three had been incarcerated for armed robbery or drug offenses. A follow-up in 1998, Life of Crime 2, caught up with two of the men, Rob and Freddy, fresh out of prison and struggling to stay clean, along with Rob’s ex-girlfriend Deliris, herself incarcerated and dogged by a heroin addiction that led her in and out of jail and prostitution since she was a teenager. By the mid-2000s, over two decades since Alpert first met Rob and Freddy, the film-maker had given up on the project. Both men had succumbed to their addictions, and Alpert assumed Deliris was gone, too. Then he received a phone call from her, still in Newark and by then sober for years. She told him to meet her, and to bring his camera. The result, in part, is Life of Crime: 1984-2020, an achingly candid and at times brutal documentary for HBO spanning 36 years of crime, incarceration and the compounding ravages of addiction. Despite the title, the two-hour film is less about the crimes themselves than the ebbs and flows of harrowing drug abuse, the ceaseless mental burden of addiction, and the near impossibility of breaking out of a system that, over the course of the 1980s and 90s, incarcerated and stigmatized rather than treated drug addicts. One Year in a Life of Crime premiered in 1989, the same year as the verité-style reality show Cops, which glorified police aggression and pathologized crime for 32 years as one of America’s longest-running TV shows (Paramount cancelled the program, one of the most influential shows on attitudes toward law enforcement, amid the nationwide protests for racial justice in 2020; Fox News’s nascent streaming network, Fox Nation, announced plans to reboot Cops this September.) Life of Crime, Alpert told the Guardian, was meant as somewhat of a corrective. DCTV was “not interested in following the cops around”, he said, and keen to ask: “Who were the criminals? Why are they doing this? Can we understand them?” Rob and Freddy, whom Alpert met through a friend of a colleague at the time, were open books, eager, at least in the mid-80s, to demonstrate their ingenuity and particular skillset. “They were very, very creative, they were very, very smart,” Alpert recalled. “I was fascinated by what they were doing and their inventiveness.” The first two-thirds of the film chronicle Rob, Freddy and eventually Deliris’s journeys from functional lives of petty crime, doing what it takes to make money (“I’m not going to make $150 a week when I could make $150 a day,” Freddy says of his life off the books) to all-consuming vicious cycles of addiction. Alpert maintains astounding access and intimacy throughout, a product both of the trio’s openness and friendships with Alpert that evolved over years of shadowing their hustles – in the back of a car, in the motel room where Deliris prostitutes herself for drugs and money, in the mid-80s kitchen where Rob and Freddy count their bills. The 80s war on drugs was, as things go in America, never just about drugs; the decades-long effort disproportionately targeted and incarcerated black people, broke up black families and recast longstanding racism equating blackness with “dangerous” in new terms. That context largely goes undiscussed in this film – Rob is white, Freddy and Deliris are Hispanic. They are frequently surrounded by mostly black people both in and out of prison, and in one of his free stints, Rob is reprimanded by a white officer concerned for his safety hanging around in what appears to be a black neighborhood. But the vast majority of the film is hauntingly personal, embedding in Rob, Freddy, and especially Deliris’s cycle through prison, parole officers both cold and caring, recovery, relapse. A handful of moments, particularly those harkening to a legacy of disappointment and trauma that has already played out, off-screen, in our timeline, are simply devastating: the time Freddy’s teenage daughter declares a rare day she has spent with him one of the best of her life; Deliris’s daughter Kiky, witness to so much of her mother’s suffering and abandonment, bargaining with her, at age nine or so, to not leave at night – “we know how much we love you but we don’t know how much you love us”. Portions of the film are shockingly graphic, even as inured as we are to gore and despair: Freddy injecting a woman in the neck when he can’t find another vein; Deliris picking at her scabs or taking money from a trucker picked up on the street; the coroner opening up a bag to reveal Rob’s decomposed body, discovered days after a fatal overdose following years of intermittent sobriety. Alpert is resolute on the film’s no-holds-barred approach to depicting the indignities of addiction. “There needs to be a reason for that to be included,” he said of numerous scenes of injections, parental abandonment, prostitution. “Here we are, 36 years into this timeline, and more people are dying from drugs this year than ever before in the history of the United States. We are not paying attention to this problem, and it is slaughtering us. “As unpleasant as it is and as emotionally wrenching as it is, it’s ‘you’ve got to watch this, and you better watch this,’ because this is what’s happening,” or, I guess, what’s happened.” The final section of the film follows Deliris, who after several years in prison in the 90s returns to her children and, after several false starts, remains sober for over a decade. By 2019, she had been clear of heroin for 12 years, received a city award for her service helping others get into addiction treatment, and had a loving relationship with her three kids. Alpert had been in talks with city officials for a celebration, until the pandemic shut down all plans. Like countless Americans, Deliris found her sober support systems suddenly stalled and unavailable during lockdown; on 12 July 2020, after 13 years of sobriety, three days after she last talked to Alpert on the phone, she died of an overdose. Her funeral, and reflections from her adult children, form the final scenes of the film. “It’s not the closure that I wanted,” Alpert said of the film’s final notes, which were originally supposed to be celebratory, not a devastating reminder of how the shadows of addiction never fully dissipate. There is no narrative redemption, nor consolation for her family. But Alpert hopes, as Deliris kept an eye on legacy both on and off camera, that the film will offer a potent warning. “This is them, by sharing, giving back to society,” he said of Rob, Freddy and Deliris’s decision to keep filming, year after year, decades apart. “They believed it, and then I believed it, otherwise we wouldn’t make the film.” Life of Crime is now available on HBO with a UK date to be announcedAdele has become the latest – and arguably the biggest – artist to announce a Las Vegas concert residency. Weekends With Adele will take place between 21 January and 16 April 2022, with two shows each weekend. Tickets go on general sale on 7 December. The concerts at The Colosseum, Caesars Palace Hotel, come in the wake of her fourth album 30, released earlier this month to general critical acclaim and huge commercial success. It is at No 1 in the UK and US, where it became the year’s biggest-selling album after just three days on sale. Adele performed two one-off concerts to mark the album’s release, her first shows since June 2017 when she closed her world tour with two nights at Wembley Stadium (two final shows were cancelled due to damaged vocal cords). Her concert at London’s Palladium, screened on TV, was given five stars in a Guardian review by Rachel Aroesti: “Adele’s singing is incredible … There’s little doubt Adele surpassed whatever expectations anyone might have had of her hosting skills: it’s hard to imagine anybody doing this better.” The Vegas shows, which diminish the pressures of international touring, are a canny move from an artist who lives primarily in Los Angeles, and the relatively small 4,100-capacity venue will play to her strengths as a between-song conversationalist. Adele told one audience during her previous world tour that “touring isn’t something I’m good at. Applause makes me feel a bit vulnerable. I don’t know if I will ever tour again. The only reason I’ve toured is you. I’m not sure if touring is my bag.” She becomes the latest star to take on a Vegas residency, with Jennifer Lopez, Lady Gaga, Céline Dion, Britney Spears and Elton John all securing lucrative concert deals in the city in recent years. Tickets for Weekends With Adele will first be available via a presale to registered fans, who must sign up by Friday. Ominously, Ticketmaster states: “If demand from Verified Fans exceeds supply there will not be a Public Onsale.”For the first time since Labour’s 2019 rout, the government is in serious trouble. After being allowed to get away with their fatal handling of the pandemic, the Tories self-detonated over scandals and broken promises from rail to tax. Enter the Labour deputy leader, Angela Rayner, with a speech – over which her team toiled for weeks – hammering Boris Johnson over corruption and setting out proposals to combat it. You’d imagine any competent, strategic operation around Keir Starmer would gladly throw its weight behind such an endeavour. But his team had other ideas. By launching a shadow cabinet reshuffle without consulting his deputy, Starmer has ignited a new round of internal conflict. Rayner’s operation is adamant that the deputy leader had no adequate forewarning and was not consulted, despite Starmer’s team briefing to the contrary. There is a consistent pattern when it comes to Rayner’s treatment at the hands of the leadership. They scapegoated her for Labour’s catastrophic defeat in Hartlepool earlier this year, sacking her as party chair; criticised her choice of clothing; repeatedly briefed against her, including when she was on bereavement leave; and only belatedly defended her when she was subjected to death threats. As for the reshuffle itself, as one senior Labour source told me: “The Blairite coup continues.” Wes Streeting (who some in Starmer’s team see as the next leader) and Bridget Phillipson from the party’s right have been promoted to shadow health and education minister respectively. Any remaining hopes that Labour will offer a radical economic alternative were kiboshed by the promotion of Pat McFadden – who blamed the party’s 2015 defeat on Ed Miliband “turning the page on New Labour” – as shadow secretary to the Treasury. Starmer has received much kudos for appointing Yvette Cooper to her former role as shadow home secretary. If her tenure between 2011 and 2015 is anything to go by – during which she scored vanishingly few political hits against the minister she shadowed, Theresa May – we may see the party again taking a harder line against migrants. At the time she legitimised anti-migrant rhetoric, demanding it become harder for migrants to receive jobseeker’s allowance and described the pace of immigration under the Labour government as “too fast”. Those on the left and centre-left lost out during the shake-up. Leftwinger Cat Smith has resigned, citing the failure to readmit Jeremy Corbyn to the parliamentary Labour party and lack of support for proportional representation. Business and industrial strategy was taken away from Ed Miliband, although allies believe he emerges enhanced with full control of the green new deal brief. The party’s right want him gone altogether and have repeatedly briefed against him, not least because he unforgivably sinned by suggesting Starmer’s promises on public ownership still stood. Faces in the shadow cabinet have changed, but Starmer’s strategy, it seems, has not. Despite promising to unite the party – something members took Starmer’s word for – since his election he has marginalised the left. Whatever justified criticisms can be made of Corbyn, he did not pursue a similar strategy: his first shadow cabinet was stacked full of internal critics before they resigned en masse. But a leadership team with a strategy only for marginalising the left lacks a coherent vision for the country. With Boris Johnson’s Tories willing to turn on the spending taps to shore up their new voter coalition, and with interest rates at an all-time low, Labour should be offering bold, distinctive solutions to both the inequality highlighted by the pandemic and to the climate emergency. Although self-evidently not enough to win, the 2017 election – in which the electorate were offered radical policies – remains the only time Labour has increased its number of seats in the last two decades. As well as learning from failures, positive lessons should be extracted, which is exactly what Starmer’s leadership pitch promised. But with a top team now largely bereft of advisers and politicians committed to such a prospectus, that seems far-fetched. Instead, much of Starmer’s team believe that the desirability of positions and policies taken by the party directly correlate to how much they offend the progressive sensibilities of Labour members and core voters. It seems as though factional vendettas are a substitute for a political strategy. As one disillusioned Labour MP who voted for Starmer told me, they will look for any excuse to marginalise and purge the left further. All of this is a gratuitous violation of Starmer’s pledge to unite the party and support policies such as public ownership, scrapping tuition fees and championing migrants’ rights. Those on the Labour right have long wished to have their party “back”, but by dashing the trust of members, and failing to adjust their thinking to the political and economic moment of today – a completely different era to 1997 – there is a risk that their backwards-looking politics will fail to inspire enough voters to get Labour over the line at the next election. What happens next is on them alone. • This article was amended on 1 December 2021. The 2017 election is the only time Labour has increased its number of seats in the last two decades, not quarter of a century as stated in an earlier version. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistAll nine cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland trace back to a “single private event” held on 20 November, Nicola Sturgeon has told the Holyrood parliament in her weekly Covid update. The first minister told MSPs that all nine were tested on or around 23 November and that none had so far required hospital care, nor had they any recent travel history to the countries in southern Africa where the variant was originally detected. Earlier on Tuesday, Scotland’s health minister, Humza Yousaf, confirmed three more cases of the Omicron variant had been identified, raising the total to five in Lanarkshire and four in Greater Glasgow and Clyde health boards, as questions continued to be raised about how the variant came to Scotland, with particular scrutiny around the climate summit held in Glasgow over the first fortnight in November and the Scotland v South Africa rugby match at Murrayfield on 13 November. Sturgeon said health protection teams had established that all nine cases were linked to the private event on 20 November, adding that she “fully expected” more related cases to be identified in the coming days. But she added: “There is so far nothing in the wider look-back exercise that Public Health Scotland has undertaken to suggest that community transmission of the new variant is either sustained or widespread.” That look-back exercise has examined PCR test samples dating back to 1 November to identify any with the S gene dropout, which is indicative of though not conclusive evidence of the Omicron variant. She also stressed that there remained no evidence that the cases were linked to the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. Sturgeon also told MSPs that her government did not plan to introduce new restrictions at this stage, pointing out that “some protections that the UK government has announced in recent days in relation to England – for example a requirement to wear face coverings in some settings – are already in place, and in fact more extensive, here in Scotland”.The timing of Keir Starmer’s shadow cabinet shake-up on Monday came as a surprise to many, not least Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, who felt blindsided by it. But everyone knew the botched reshuffle earlier in the year was a job only half done. When the Labour leader shook up his top team back in May, he did so from a place of weakness, amid the announcement of poor election results. Allies of Rayner were furious when it emerged that Starmer was attempting to sack her, particularly as those results were still rolling in. This week, with improved personal approval ratings and a narrow lead in the polls, Starmer was in a better position to complete the task. Starmer’s original shadow cabinet saw the most senior roles go to those thought of as quietly competent: Anneliese Dodds as shadow chancellor and Nick Thomas-Symonds as shadow home secretary, for example. Both have been demoted this year. The most vocal people in the parliamentary party, whether Corbynites or Corbyn critics, were initially left out. Fresh faces also dominated at the beginning of the Starmer era. Some MPs privately expressed concerns that there may be a lack of ballsy communicators, save for Rayner, and that there was nobody at the table who could “say the unsayable”. But the new leader’s priority was projecting a calm and sensible image, while forging a path through factional warfare. Eighteen months into the job, Starmer has changed tack dramatically: he wants assertive media performers and Westminster favourites who have a chance of “cutting through”. This preference favours figures from Labour’s right. Perhaps Starmer is eschewing the “party unity” commitment made in his leadership campaign because he is acting on his real politics at last, or perhaps he simply thinks the best talent happens to be found among Labour’s “moderates”. Whichever is true, the most important factor is that the next general election is fast approaching. With Labour strategists believing it is most likely to take place in May 2023, a more experienced and energetic team was needed. For Starmer, this meant bringing back someone who has actually served in government: Yvette Cooper. Her promotion to shadow home secretary worries leftwing members who believe that she will take on the Tories by trying to out-Tory them, on immigration especially. For them, her time in the same role during the Ed Miliband years was typified by the infamous “controls on immigration” mugs, which affronted activists while failing to come across as a sincere policy pledge to voters. Critics also point out that her opposite number was Theresa May, home secretary for six years before becoming prime minister. But those close to her counter that Priti Patel has never performed well against her at the home affairs committee, and Cooper has spent five years gathering evidence exploring the how, where and why of Home Office failures. It is clear that Cooper’s appointment was the centrepiece of the reshuffle. Sources say the reason for the pause in proceedings halfway through the day was that she wanted a conversation about the shape of her role, cross-departmental working and who would lead on what. But the changes were wide-ranging, affecting most shadow cabinet members. They also tightened up the team, making it smaller and ensuring that the roles mostly now mirror existing ones in government (with the notable exception of Miliband’s new climate change and net zero brief). The leadership is pleased that the gender balance is skewed towards women, and the most senior posts are tilted more towards the north of England than north London. Starmer’s choice of top players suggests he has gained confidence. Along with Cooper, Wes Streeting and David Lammy are often tipped as potential future leaders; the same goes for Lisa Nandy although she says she wouldn’t stand again, and Bridget Phillipson is seen as a rising star. Most have been in parliament longer than their leader. While not without risks, this approach gives the positive impression that Starmer is not threatened by colleagues who may be judged to have more star power or more political experience. Starmer got everyone he wanted in place. The only snub was Cat Smith, who – when offered to stay in post – quit, citing concerns over Jeremy Corbyn’s continued suspension from the parliamentary party. But she had a smaller role that did not shadow a government post anyway. The only real concern from the leadership’s perspective is that tensions remain between itself and Rayner’s team, despite staffing changes in the leader’s office since the last big row around the deputy leader. Starmer cannot remove Rayner from the shadow cabinet due to her personal mandate, so unless he actively wants briefing wars to dominate what could be entirely good news days, he still needs to improve that crucial relationship. But he can take comfort in the reshuffle itself being a clear success. • Sienna Rogers is editor of LabourListRihanna’s designation as a national hero of Barbados, to coincide with the country’s transition to an independent republic, could not be more apt. Not only has she been an official ambassador for culture and youth in the country since 2018, the singer remains the country’s most famous citizen and indeed advocate. She has never softened her Bajan accent, and her music, while tapping into pop, R&amp;B and dance music, has remained rich with her Caribbean heritage. In her investiture ceremony, the country’s prime minister Mia Mottley addressed the pop singer, fashion icon and hugely successful entrepreneur as “ambassador Robyn Rihanna Fenty: may you continue to shine like a diamond” – a reference to 2012’s global hit Diamonds – “and bring honour to your nation, by your words, by your actions, and to do credit wherever you shall go. God bless you, my dear.” Rihanna’s career began with Pon de Replay in 2005, a track that used a bass-heavy dancehall beat and insistent handclaps to usher listeners to the dancefloor, with Rihanna singing instructions in patois to a DJ over the top. She was clearly a charismatic singer with a distinctive voice, but in the mid-00s there were plenty of Caribbean pop-dancehall stars whose international fame didn’t last beyond one hit, even if domestic careers endured: Wayne Wonder, Kevin Lyttle, Gyptian, and Puerto Rican-American vocalist Lumidee, whose Never Leave You was a clear antecedent of Pon de Replay. Rihanna’s star potential was given some equally starry support, though. A demo of Pon de Replay and other songs reached the office of the Def Jam record label, where Jay-Z was then president and CEO. She nailed an in-person audition to him and record industry veteran LA Reid, and they signed her to a six-album deal on the spot. Her Bajan roots shone on debut album Music of the Sun – released when she was just 17 years old – with lilting roots reggae backings, digital dancehall beats, and a cover of Jamaican singer Dawn Penn’s classic No, No, No. The swift follow-up A Girl Like Me (2006) had predominantly the same dancehall, skanking reggae and Destiny’s Child-ish R&amp;B, but with a voice that could be commanding or earnestly vulnerable, Rihanna was capable of more than pretty, summery material. Unfaithful expanded into classic pop balladry, and with an insistent sample of Soft Cell’s Tainted Love, SOS had no Bajan swing to it all, giving her a club stomper that even the most inebriated could clomp about to – it diversified her audience and became her first US No 1. She continued to branch out with her true breakthrough, Good Girl Gone Bad (2007), which used heavy, highly synthetic guitars while her enormous hit Umbrella rode a hip-hop breakbeat – yet you can still detect Barbados in Don’t Stop the Music’s syncopation. Umbrella installed Rihanna as one of the world’s biggest pop stars, and in 2008 her country’s prime minister David Thompson announced an annual Rihanna Day. She maintained a remarkable work rate, releasing an album a year for the next four years. She leaned into her sexuality – her raunchy track Rude Boy remains one of her best, and one of her most audibly Bajan – and as she got older, there was a greater rawness, and keenness of feeling, to ballads such as Russian Roulette. She endured a shocking physical assault at the hands of R&amp;B singer boyfriend Chris Brown (and the tabloid melee around it) to emerge with arguably the best track from the early 00s EDM-influenced pop bubble – We Found Love with Scottish producer Calvin Harris – and forged other megastar musical pairings in Drake, Eminem and Britney Spears. 2016’s Anti is regarded by many as her masterpiece, and its lead single Work saw her return to the patois of her home region: “He said me haffi work”, a sophisticated double entendre that is both sexual come-on and a call for emotional labour. No new solo music has emerged since (it was once rumoured that she was making a reggae album), but her cultural standing has continued to grow via her remarkable Fenty group of companies. Makeup brand Fenty Beauty and lingerie line Savage x Fenty spotted shamefully under-served gaps in the market, namely women of colour and those who didn’t cleave to the slim figures lauded by underwear rivals such as Victoria’s Secret. Her companies, authentically represented by Rihanna who remains proudly sexual and body positive, have made her hugely wealthy: Forbes estimated her fortune at $1.7bn earlier this year, making her the world’s richest female musician. Some of that wealth has been diverted to her Clara Lionel foundation, named after her grandparents, which has frequently benefited Barbados with emergency hurricane relief, healthcare and education programmes. Dressed in a form-fitting gown and with the poise of a now-veteran star, Rihanna, masked due to the pandemic, did not make any remarks following the acceptance of her country’s highest honour. Fans have got unhappily used to that silence and took her claims in September that “you’re not gonna expect what you hear [next]” with a pinch of salt, but whenever that music eventually arrives, Rihanna will remain Barbados’s defining icon. • The subheading of this article was amended on 1 December 2021. Barbados is newly republican, not newly independent as stated in an earlier version due to an editing error.An internal European Commission document advising officials to use inclusive language such as “holiday season” rather than Christmas and avoid terms such as “man-made” has been withdrawn after an outcry from rightwing politicians. The EU executive’s volte-face over the guidelines, launched by the commissioner for equality, Helena Dalli, at the end of October, was prompted by an article in the Italian tabloid il Giornale, which claimed it amounted to an attempt to “cancel Christmas”. A series of politicians on the right, including the former president of the European parliament Antonio Tajani, a member of Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, subsequently jumped on the issue to voice their opposition to the “absurd” advice. “Inclusion does not mean denying the Christian roots of [the EU]”, Tajani tweeted. In response, Dalli, who had tweeted a picture of herself with the guidelines on 26 October, along with comments speaking of her pride in launching the document, issued an apologetic statement. She said: “My initiative to draft guidelines as an internal document for communication by commission staff in their duties was intended to achieve an important aim: to illustrate the diversity of European culture and showcase the inclusive nature of the European commission towards all walks of life and beliefs of European citizens. “However, the version of the guidelines published does not adequately serve this purpose. It is not a mature document and does not meet all commission quality standards. The guidelines clearly need more work. I therefore withdraw the guidelines and will work further on this document.” The European commission, along with other EU institutions, has long been criticised for the lack of diversity among its staff. There are no non-white commissioners. As part of an update of the language to be used by its staff, the commission had asked officials to be more sensitive in their communications. Officials working with the 27-strong commission college, led by Ursula von der Leyen, were advised to avoid assuming that everyone is Christian, white and married. Rather than refer to Christmas, officials should say “the holiday season”, the document suggested. Officials were advised to avoid gender-specific pronouns and gendered words and phrases such as “chairman”, “ladies and gentleman” or “man-made”. It was suggested that officials ask people what their pronouns are and to be careful using terms such as “gay” and “lesbians” as a noun. “Transgender, bi or intersex are not nouns.” … “Say trans people, gay person, etc or refer to the person explicitly,” it was suggested. Following Dalli’s U-turn, Tajani tweeted that the rethink was a victory for common sense. He was joined in celebrating the move by the former Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi, who tweeted: “It was an absurd and wrong document. A community is not afraid of its roots. And cultural identity is a value, not a threat.” Sophie in ’t Veld, a liberal Dutch MEP, said she was concerned by the commission’s sudden retreat on the issue. She said: “Commissioner Dalli deserves praise for having the courage to address the issue, be it in a somewhat clumsy way. “The concerted misinformation and attacks on her by the far right and the subsequent response to these by the commission are concerning. We need to recognise that Europe and its institutions represent everyone. The institutions should be strictly neutral: let’s not forget the majority of Europeans are not religious.”Everyone eats their share of dung beetle surprise on Succession – HBO’s unrepentant daddy issues drama – but the women’s portions come heavily seasoned with the patriarchy’s favourite ingredients: sexism and misogyny. Even billionaire’s daughter Shiv Roy (played by Sarah Snook) can’t escape it. “It’s only your teats that give you any value,” her brother Kendall (Jeremy Strong) shouts after she rejects his offer to join him in another one of his patricidal business plans. Even before then, he couldn’t help but put a pin in her dreams of taking over the company: “You are too divisive … you’re still seen as a token woman, wonk, woke snowflake.” “I don’t think that, but the market does,” he explains. Kendall’s comments represent the kind of primitive sibling warfare Succession does beautifully, as well as the wider state of gender politics. Women aren’t permitted to succeed in this world as women – only as proxies or pillars for male power. Even then, good luck getting a man to take you seriously. Shiv’s husband, Tom (Matthew Macfadyen), offers cordially to hold her ageing dad’s “sceptre” while he urinates, but quails at the threat to his masculinity that taking a direct order from his wife would represent. “Of course it’s a minus,” booms Shiv’s father, Logan (Brian Cox), in season two after she wonders if her sex is an impediment to being taken seriously as his successor. “I didn’t make the fucking world.” Now in the final leg of its third season, the series puts society’s attitudes towards women in the foreground. Its full-throated embrace of the ubiquity of discrimination – at home and at work – is revelatory. Despite much humour, there is a fundamental seriousness evident in its depiction of this world in all its brutishness. No one on the show escapes the sadistic exercise of patriarchal power, but the women are cannon fodder of a different kind. They are held in place by their perceived value, which, in season three, is briefly inflated by the #MeToo-inflected scandal that has blown up around Waystar’s cruises division. Post #MeToo, “girls are worth double”, says Kendall. As he and Logan prepare for battle again, they pay big money to shore up their female flanks. Expensive professional women pop up beside them like thought bubbles. Kendall wins the hand (and credibility) of the lawyer Lisa Arthur (Sanaa Lathan), while Logan names Gerri (J Smith-Cameron) interim CEO and recalls his estranged wife, Marcia (Hiam Abbass) – a costly rehire for the philanderer. Kendall collects PR-savvy female employees, offering up an enlightened spin on the Playboy mansion, complete with one real oversized bunny for his kids. “All these brilliant fucking women,” he tells Greg (Nicholas Braun). “I must be doing something right.” When Lisa takes him to task for his arrogance, however, her dazzle dims and she is fired. “Turns out she’s a toxic person,” Kendall clucks. Kendall and Logan compete to win Shiv’s female credibility. Logan, who spent most of season two avoiding his daughter, now checks his phone relentlessly, concerned she may have jumped ship. Kendall courts her by saying: “You’re the one I want.” Prior to her entry into the family business, Shiv’s wealth conferred many protections and helped her defend her significant ego. When she is wooed into the family fold and named Waystar president, however, it turns out she is not much more powerful than the cruise ship dancers. Shiv may not think she is on a par with the women the Waystar “wolf pack” gobbled up and spat overboard, but the show’s writing suggests parallels. Shiv’s career as a Waystar chorus girl starts in season two. After she joins her brothers on a panel to defend the company from the unfolding scandal, she describes the act as a performance. “I was dancing,” she says. This season, her big corporate coming-out party, Waystar’s town hall, demands yet another performance from Logan’s only daughter, but Shiv’s debut is drowned out by Nirvana’s Rape Me. It’s a hard song to dance to – all Shiv can do is stagger off humiliated. At Kendall’s joyless birthday party, Shiv is dancing again – badly. She kicks off her heels and goes full-on Elaine Benes on the dancefloor. Her performance doesn’t go unnoticed. Greg wonders whether she is dancing her “demons” out. Roman mocks her mercilessly and, like Kendall, affirms her sex as the liability that will always relegate her to token dancer for this army of hurt boys. “You thought it was going to be ladies’ night,” he sneers. “You were wrong. All the men got together in Man Club and decided: ‘Sweetheart, everything’s fine, so …’” Indeed, the Man Club has consolidated in season three and become darker. The man her family anoints as the next president of the US, the fascist social media influencer Jeryd Mencken (Justin Kirk), pokes a hole in Shiv’s fantasy of reforming Waystar’s rotten corporate culture “from the inside”. Logan and Roman are programming a primitively persuasive form of rogue male power for the future and Shiv isn’t a power player here. “Are you a part of this family or not?” Logan snarls when she balks at joining a family photo with Mencken. Shiv’s acquiescence is her vanquishing moment – she is an insider now, the lone pretty face in an ugly crowd. It is a source of endless frustration that Shiv never connects Brightstar’s dots, that she assumes declaring that she eats “red meat” with the randy carnivores inverts the food chain rather than affirms it. But Succession’s greedy, ambitious women aren’t much smarter than its men – and neither are they exempt from paralysing daddy issues. Although Succession makes hay of sexism and misogyny, Shiv’s failures suggest that oestrogen isn’t the hormonal equivalent of cultural disinfectant; like testosterone, it might just be another primitive force that throws out mixed results when courage is absent and the market is the only thing anyone cares about. Succession is on Sky Atlantic/Now TV in the UK and HBO in the USChina is at risk of “miscalculating through over-confidence” over Taiwan, said the MI6 head, Richard Moore, in a statement clearly intended to warn Beijing to back off any attempt to seize control of the island. Giving a rare speech, Britain’s foreign intelligence chief said in London that China was at risk of “believing its own propaganda” and that the country had become “the single greatest priority” for MI6 for the first time in its history. Moore did not mention Taiwan explicitly, but the status of the country, whose independence is not recognised by Beijing, remains the most acute issue of tension between China and the west. Moore, at the event, organised by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, said: “The Chinese Communist party leadership increasingly favour bold and decisive action on national security grounds. The days of Deng Xiaoping’s ‘hide your strength, bide your time’ are over. “Beijing believes its own propaganda about western frailties and underestimates Washington’s resolve. The risk of Chinese miscalculation through over-confidence is real.” The UK remains keen to cooperate with China across a range of issues, including climate change and on trade and investment, and generally avoids remarks critical of Beijing. But Moore’s remarks are some of the most pointed comments made by a British intelligence chief or other senior security official about China. The MI6 chief also warned about the spread of Chinese surveillance technology, which he said was used in “targeting the Uyghur population in Xinjiang” and said the UK needed to recognise that “technologies of control are being increasingly exported to other governments”. Moore concluded that “adapting to a world affected by the rise of China” was “the single biggest priority for MI6”. It is understood that China now forms the largest part of the agency’s work for the first time, greater than its traditional but still substantial focus on Russia and Islamist terrorism. A particular point of concern, Moore said earlier in an interview with the BBC, was China’s use of “debt traps and data traps” to get smaller countries “through its economic policies to try to sometimes … get people on the hook”. Trying to define the data trap, Moore said: “If you allow another country to gain access to really critical data about your society, over time that will erode your sovereignty, you no longer have control over that data.” MI6 has been concerned for some time about China’s interest in acquiring large datasets, including personal and medical information, whether through hacking or by reaching a commercial agreement with a smaller country that allows it to take control of data and send it to its home market. Worries similar to those about a debt trap have been expressed about Beijing’s Belt and Road economic development initiative, in which Chinese development projects in Africa and elsewhere are funded by its own banks. This week, it emerged that Uganda was at risk of losing control of Entebbe international airport to China after struggling to payback a $200m loan as intended. Russia, added Moore, remained an “acute threat”, its foreign interference being on an “upward trend”. He reinforced remarks made by British ministers in support of Ukraine. “Ukraine is a separate sovereign country, with a separate sovereign Ukrainian people,” he said. Western spy agencies are particularly concerned about the buildup of Russian troops on Ukraine’s eastern border, and the possibility that Russia will support destabilisation operations in the country. At the end of last week, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said his intelligence agents had uncovered a pro-Russian coup plot. Moore said MI6 would have to become “more open to stay secret” and work more closely with tech companies to counter threats posed by China and Russia, which sought to gain advantage by mastering artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies.With Christmas around the corner many of us are searching for that perfect gift for our loved ones, something unique and gorgeous that will bring much needed festive cheer. So we would like to hear about your favourite independent shop, whether it’s one that sources hidden treasures from makers across the world or a shopkeeper that champions home-grown talent. Whether it is Bertie’s of Bay, a heritage clothes brand reviving the nautical styles traditionally worn on the Yorkshire coastline or Angela Flanders in London which immerse itself in the heady world of perfumery, we would like your recommendations on those independent shopkeepers that stock quirky and joyful presents to fill our baskets. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 7 December at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereThe Prince of Wales’s acknowledgment of the “appalling atrocity of slavery” that “forever stains our history” as Barbados became a republic was brave, historic, and the start of a “grown-up conversation led by a future king”, equality campaigners have said. Uttering words his mother, the Queen, would be constitutionally constrained from saying, Prince Charles’s speech, at the ceremony to replace the monarch as head of state in the island nation, did not demur from reflecting on the “darkest days of our past” as he looked to a bright future for Barbadians. Slavery is a tricky subject for the royal family, with recent calls for the Queen to apologise and for the UK to make reparations for the huge wealth the UK reaped through the inhumanity of the Atlantic slave trade. Successive monarchs supported or made money from it during the 17th and 18th centuries. Lord Woolley, the founder and director of Operation Black Vote, who attended Tuesday’s ceremony as the only black Barbadian in the House of Lords, and a descendant of an enslaved African, said of the speech: “It was a very brave statement.” “Prince Charles being here, saying ‘we’ve had a very dark past, but Barbados has a very bright future’ is the start of a grown-up conversation which is being led by a future king. “It enabled us to acknowledge, at the very highest level, the dark and tragic past from which the nation was born. But, yesterday marked the rebirth of a new nation.” The subject of slavery was not just tricky for the royal family, he said, “it’s tricky for the UK. And that’s why him coming out and saying what is, actually, the blinding obvious, moves the debate to say we urgently need an adult conversation about these uncomfortable truths, and on how the past still influences the present in systemic inequalities that were predicated on exploitation. “I heard Barbadians say: ‘You hear this white man, you hear this future king, telling some truths?” While some in the UK may not like Charles’s words, Woolley said, “if you’re black, and many others, they will say it is the right thing to do at the right time.” Dr Halima Begum, the CEO of the Runnymede Trust, said: “For Prince Charles to speak so frankly about slavery is actually historic.” With the Queen, reportedly, having offered an understanding of Black Lives Matter, “taken together, that is the royal family giving a national lead on both current and historical aspects of the international dialogue on racial equality, and Britain’s place in the world.” She had no doubt, she said, that the decision “emanated” from the Queen. With the prince one step removed constitutionally from his mother, “Charles can say what she can’t,” said Joe Little, the managing editor of Majesty magazine. “Clearly it is a contentious issue, one that couldn’t be avoided under the circumstances, so it had to be addressed. But, obviously, addressing it leads to other things, such as calls for apologies and reparation,” he said. The Queen has faced several calls to apologise for her forbears, while Jamaica has recently said it will demand compensation, possibly seeking billions of pounds in reparations. “How far back do your apologies need to go, how many forbears must you apologise for?” said Little. “And what do you do about parts of the national collection acquired through slavery, or as a consequence of slavery? So it is difficult to find the right balance.” He said it was difficult to recall a speech in which the Queen has addressed the issue of slavery so directly: “I would be amazed if she ever went near it.”Germany’s chancellor-to-be, Olaf Scholz, supports making vaccination against Covid-19 mandatory, German media have reported, as neighbouring Austria is debating how to enforce obligatory jabs from February. Scholz, a Social Democrat, who is expected to be sworn in as Angela Merkel’s successor in the coming week, reportedly told a meeting of regional leaders he was in favour of a cross-party initiative to make vaccines mandatory, as well as requiring customers at non-essential stores to show proof of vaccination or recovery from the virus. “As a delegate I would certainly vote in favour, to make that very clear,” Der Spiegel reported Scholz as saying. The outgoing finance minister proposed a general vaccine mandate coming into effect from the end of February, by which everyone should have had a theoretical chance to receive two doses of vaccine of their own accord. Meanwhile, Germany’s southern neighbour Austria announced it is pushing ahead with plans to make vaccination against Covid-19 mandatory among its wider population from February, after consulting scientists and legal experts. “We didn’t want a vaccine mandate, let me make that explicit,” said the minister for EU and constitutional affairs, Karoline Edtstadler. “But 20 months on from the start of the pandemic we are in a situation that is dramatic if you look at intensive care units at hospitals.” Only a general vaccine mandate would get the country closer to its goal of avoiding a fifth or sixth wave of the virus, said Edtstadler, of the conservative Austrian People’s party (ÖVP). Austria is halfway through a 20-day lockdown, its fourth of the pandemic, after experiencing one of the steepest surges in cases in Europe. The chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, announced on 19 November that his government would prepare the ground for vaccination against Covid-19 to become mandatory from 1 February, which would make it the first country in the west to take such a step. “Of course, it represents an intrusion into our basic and civil liberties” which is why the government had set up discussions with the centre-left Social Democratic party of Austria (SPÖ) and the New Austria and Liberal Forum (NEOS), the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, said. The far-right Freedom party (FPÖ), which is seeking to challenge the vaccine mandate legally, was not invited. A draft law will not be presented until the week of 6 December, but several politicians have signalled that vaccination would be made mandatory but not compulsory, meaning no one would be forcibly injected. Constitutional lawyers have advised making vaccination mandatory for anyone over 14, which is the age of criminal responsibility in Austria. One report in Die Presse newspaper suggested it could be mandatory from 12, with exceptions for those who are advised not to take the jab for underlying health reasons. Those who refuse to be vaccinated would receive two warnings, followed in case of non-compliance by an administrative fine of €3,600 (£3,000), which could be issued twice. The government declined to comment on Tuesday about the details of the law mentioned in the press. As of this week, 67% of Austria’s population are considered fully vaccinated, and 70% have received one dose. In Germany, 68.5% of the population are fully vaccinated, while 71% have had one shot.The editor of the Sunday Times has said British newspapers have made mistakes in their coverage of Muslims, ahead of the launch of a report that concludes the British media is highly critical of Islam. Emma Tucker, who took over as editor of the newspaper last year, said she welcomed the report by the Muslim Council of Britain “in the full knowledge that it contains criticisms of the press, my own paper included”. She said: “Some of those criticisms are valid. Some I would respectfully disagree with. All, though, are useful. To move forward in serving that broad readership, we want to hear views from every part of it.” Tucker, tipped as a potential successor to John Witherow as editor of the Times, said her newspaper needed to hire more diverse staff to ensure it improved its coverage of Islam while making clear “sometimes we will just see the issues differently”. She also avoided criticising her predecessor, Martin Ivens, who edited the Sunday Times during the period covered by the survey. She said: “By its nature, a report like this must focus on the past. My job is to focus on the future. I want our news coverage to be fair but fearless, and our commentators to be robust but responsible.” The report was produced by the Centre for Media Monitoring, a project of the Muslim Council of Britain. After analysing 48,000 online articles published between late 2018 and 2019 by British-based news providers, its researchers concluded that 59% associated Muslims or Islam with negative behaviour or qualities. In general, rightwing outlets were more critical about Islam than left-leaning publications. The Spectator had the highest proportion of articles about Muslims classed as “antagonistic”, with 37% of pieces thus categorised. The New Statesman had the highest proportion of articles considered to be “supportive” of Muslims, at 16%. The Centre for Media Monitoring was founded by Miqdaad Versi, who has spent years pushing the British media to change the language it uses to describe Muslims. He regularly uses press regulator Ipso to push for corrections to stories about Islam and recently launched libel proceedings at the high court against the writer Ed Husain. Earlier this week, the Spectator columnist Charles Moore criticised Tucker for agreeing to speak alongside Versi to promote the report. Moore claimed that Versi “lobbies for special treatment of Muslim subjects” and is trying to “make a free press impossible” by controlling what can be written about Islam. The report’s authors said they did not want uncritical coverage of Muslims, but sought to improve the quality of reporting in the British media. They said: “Even stories which report on a Muslim having achieved something noteworthy are framed by their supposed embrace of western liberal values whilst breaking free of the shackles of their own faith or tradition.” The Spectator has been approached for comment on the findings.Rain will replace snow as the Arctic’s most common precipitation as the climate crisis heats up the planet’s northern ice cap, according to research. Today, more snow falls in the Arctic than rain. But this will reverse, the study suggests, with all the region’s land and almost all its seas receiving more rain than snow before the end of the century if the world warms by 3C. Pledges made by nations at the recent Cop26 summit could keep the temperature rise to a still disastrous 2.4C, but only if these promises are met. Even if the global temperature rise is kept to 1.5C or 2C, the Greenland and Norwegian Sea areas will still become rain dominated. Scientists were shocked in August when rain fell on the summit of Greenland’s huge ice cap for the first time on record. The research used the latest climate models, which showed the switch from snow to rain will happen decades faster than previously estimated, with autumn showing the most dramatic seasonal changes. For example, it found the central Arctic will become rain dominated in autumn by 2060 or 2070 if carbon emissions are not cut, instead of by 2090 as predicted by earlier models. The implications of a switchover were “profound”, the researchers said, from accelerating global heating and sea level rise to melting permafrost, sinking roads, and mass starvation of reindeer and caribou in the region. Scientists think the rapid heating in the Arctic may also be increasing extreme weather events such as floods and heatwaves in Europe, Asia and North America by changing the jet stream. “What happens in the Arctic doesn’t stay there,” said Michelle McCrystall at the University of Manitoba in Canada, who led the new research. “You might think the Arctic is far removed from your day-to-day life, but in fact temperatures there have warmed up so much that [it] will have an impact further south. “In the central Arctic, where you would imagine there should be snowfall in the whole of the autumn period, we’re actually seeing an earlier transition to rainfall. That will have huge implications. The Arctic having very strong snowfall is really important for everything in that region and also for the global climate, because it reflects a lot of sunlight.” Prof James Screen of the University of Exeter in the UK, who was part of the research team, said: “The new models couldn’t be clearer that unless global warming is stopped, the future Arctic will be wetter, once-frozen seas will be open water, rain will replace snow.” Scientists already agree that precipitation will increase significantly in the Arctic in future, as more water evaporates from increasingly warmer and ice-free seas. But the research, published in the journal Nature Communications, found this would be hugely dominated by rain, which will more than treble in autumn by 2100 if emissions are not cut. The scientists concluded: “The transition from a snow- to rain-dominated Arctic in the summer and autumn is projected to occur decades earlier and at a lower level of global warming, potentially under 1.5C, with profound climatic, ecosystem and socioeconomic impacts.” Snow is important in producing sea ice each winter, so less snow means less ice and more heat absorbed by open oceans. The research shows rain increasing on the southern coast of Greenland. This could further accelerate the sliding of glaciers into the ocean and the consequent rise in sea levels that threatens many coastal areas. Much of the land in the Arctic is tundra, where the soil has been permanently frozen, but more rain would change that. “You are putting warm water into the ground that might melt the permafrost and that will have global implications, because as we know, permafrost is a really great sink of carbon and of methane,” said McCrystall. The impacts in the region include the melting of vital ice roads, more floods, and starvation for herds of animals. When rain falls on snow and then freezes, it stops the animals feeding. “The reindeer, caribou and musk oxen can’t break through the layer of ice, so they can’t get to the grass they need to survive and suffer huge die-offs,” she said. Prof Richard Allan, at the University of Reading in the UK, who was not involved in the research, said: “Exploiting a state-of-the-art set of complex computer simulations, this new study paints a worrying picture of future Arctic climate change that is more rapid and substantial than previously thought. This research rings alarm bells for the Arctic and beyond.” However, Gavin Schmidt of the Nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies in the US said the claim of more rapid change was “unsupported”, because some of the new climate models forecast warmer than expected future temperatures.I couldn’t stomach this pointless and dull drama about the FBI hunt for loathsome serial killer Ted Bundy. It comes on the heels of the Zac Efron biopic and Netflix’s documentary series based on prison tape recordings with Bundy, who eventually confessed to murdering more than 30 women (and was suspected by police of killing many more). What this film adds to the Bundy frenzy is a portrait of the serial killer at work: driving around in his VW Beetle stalking and abducting young victims. It’s not that these slickly shot scenes are particularly gruesome, but they do feel cheap and voyeuristic. We watch his unsuspecting young victims, oblivious to what’s coming. Look, he’s behind you! That said, Chad Michael Murray is a more convincing Bundy than Zac Efron; he plays it bland, dreary and dull, more inadequate. Even his nice-ordinary-guy charm has a skin-crawling quality. The film goes to some lengths to show off Bundy’s predator instincts. In the first murder shown, he uses a prop: hobbling on crutches in a car park pretending to have an injured leg. He makes a show of dropping his car keys. The victim – he preys on kindness – bends down, on her hands and knees to retrieve his keys from under the car. Another time he impersonates a cop to lure a teenager into his car. This is every woman’s worst nightmare. We watch the fear on their faces as they realise what’s happening. Do we really need to see it over and over again? It doesn’t help that the victims are mostly indistinguishable – an interchangeable series of pretty young white brunettes. Investigating Bundy is cop Kathleen McChesney (Holland Roden) and FBI agent Robert Ressler (Jake Hays), a lightweight duo who stare furrow-eyebrowed at photos of blood-stained mattresses and bashed-in decomposed skulls. Honestly, there is no earthly reason for the existence of this film; it might work for the Bundyphiles but it leaves a nasty taste in the mouth for everyone else. • Ted Bundy: American Boogeyman is released on 6 December on digital platforms.Vladimir Putin has warned Nato countries that deploying weapons or soldiers to Ukraine would cross a “red line” for Russia and trigger a strong response, including a potential deployment of Russian missiles targeting Europe. Nato countries have warned Putin against further aggression against Ukraine as foreign ministers gathered in Latvia to discuss the military alliance’s contingencies for a potential Russian invasion. Tensions have soared following a buildup of nearly 100,000 Russian troops, as well as tanks, artillery, and even short-range ballistic missiles, within striking distance of Ukraine’s borders. While a similar crisis played out over a Russian troop buildup in April, officials from the US and Ukraine have warned that the threat of a Russian offensive this winter remains very real because of a failing ceasefire agreement and a worsening political climate. In his most expansive comments on the crisis yet, the Russian president on Tuesday complained of Nato’s historical expansion to Russia’s borders and warned that substantial Nato military support for Ukraine would cross a “red line” for Russia. “You asked about Ukraine, where are these red lines?” he said in televised remarks during an investment conference. “They are above all in the creation of threats to us which could come from [Ukraine].” In particular, he warned against the stationing in Ukraine of missile defence systems similar to those in Romania and Poland. Putin claimed they could serve as cover to deploy offensive weapons such as Tomahawk missiles capable of reaching Moscow in minutes. “We would have to create a similar threat for those who are threatening us,” he said, warning that Russia could deploy hypersonic missiles. “And we can do that already now,” he added. Putin’s remarks seemed designed to echo the fears of Europe’s cold war missile crises. Nato countries such as the United States have supplied Kyiv with military aid, including lethal weapons like Javelin anti-tank missiles. But aside from isolated discussions among lawmakers, there are no plans to station air defence batteries in Ukraine. In Riga, the capital of Latvia, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said on Tuesday that the west was on alert over Russia’s “increasingly bellicose rhetoric” and “unusual” troop movements. “Any escalatory actions by Russia would be a great concern to the United States … and any renewed aggression would trigger serious consequences,” he told reporters ahead of Tuesday’s talks. Western countries have sanctioned Russia for sending its soldiers and heavy weapons to fight in south-east Ukraine, where more than 14,000 people have been killed since 2014. Since 2017, Nato has deployed four international battalion groups to Poland and to the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, in order to deter Russia from launching an attack. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, met British soldiers stationed in Estonia on Tuesday. She called the country, which borders Russia, the “frontier of freedom”. “Britain stands with our @NATO allies to defend liberty and democracy and counter malign threats,” she wrote in a tweet. Speaking to reporters, she added: “Any action by Russia to undermine the freedom and democracy that our partners enjoy would be a strategic mistake.” Across, the border, Russian officials hurled accusations at Nato countries, saying that they had been forced to send troops to the borders with Ukraine and Belarus because of Nato’s aggressive posture. Sergei Lavrov on Tuesday compared the situation in Ukraine to that of Georgia in 2008, indicating Russia would be ready to launch a larger war over its support of the separatist territories it controls in Ukraine. Fyodor Lukyanov, an expert on Russian foreign policy, wrote last week that Russia was seeking guarantees that Ukraine would never join Nato even in an an unofficial capacity as an ally against Russia. Belarus has also threatened to join Russia if war breaks out with Ukraine. Minsk on Monday announced it would hold joint military exercises with Russia on Belarus’ southern borders. It claimed they were provoked by Ukraine’s deployment of troops to the border area due to the growing migration crisis sparked by the Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko. In remarks on Tuesday, Lukashenko said he was ready for the country to host Russian nuclear missiles if western countries were to do similar. “We are ready for this in Belarus,” he told an interviewer from Russian state television, adding that he believed the infrastructure like silos for holding nuclear weapons was in working order.Measuring 12 metres long and just 30cm wide, it’s a bridge of miniature proportions. But it is hoped that the square metal tube – set to become the first “dormouse bridge” across a UK railway – could help to save Britain’s endangered wild hazel dormouse population from extinction. The new bridge, which hopes to connect two new dormouse populations in Morecambe Bay, is to be fitted to the side of an existing bridge in summer 2022 on the Furness line in Lancashire. Based on a tried and tested Japanese design, three similar bridges have already been put up in the UK – two over the M1 and one in St Athan in south Wales. But this latest project marks the first time a dormouse bridge will be built across a British railway. Britain’s tree-dwelling hazel dormouse population has been in steady decline since 1950, but in the last two decades it has halved. The species has declined by 51% since 2000 and disappeared from 17 English counties, a 2019 report by conservation charity the People’s Trust for Endangered Species (PTES) found. One of the main reasons for their decline is loss of quality woodland habitat, but insufficient connecting hedgerows and climate change are also factors, said Ian White, the dormouse and training officer at PTES. He said the 30 dormice they reintroduced to the Arnside and Silverdale area of outstanding natural beauty has got off to an “excellent start”, with at least 12 litters born this year. “We hope that this new bridge will enable two neighbouring populations to create a local metapopulation in the area, which will really to help bring this rare and beautiful species back from the brink.” As well as connecting two populations, to be reintroduced on either side of the track, the bridge will also act as a potential hiding place from predators. The dormice will be encouraged to cross the bridge by putting dormouse boxes, or homes, near the entrance to the bridge. By connecting the two populations, it is hoped they will be encouraged to mate, look for food and find better nesting sites. Fragmented populations are especially bad for genetic diversity, said White, adding that he hopes this dormouse bridge will be “the first of many” across railways. He said he is “confident” the dormice will use the bridge if all goes to plan with the reintroduction. When they first tested the design on the Isle of Wight they had dormice on it in just nine hours. The £40,000 conservation project, funded by Network Rail, is being constructed by the consultancy Animex, which works to find mitigation solutions for wildlife. Rory Kingdon, a senior sponsor from Network Rail, said they are “delighted” that hazel dormice will be encouraged to breed by the bridge, “so they have a fighting chance to thrive for generations to come”. “Network Rail is committed to improve biodiversity and protect habitats for the future,” Kingdon added.When I walked into the barbershop today, my barber and I immediately spoke about Virgil Abloh’s passing, and the shock we felt. As he faded my hair, he told me that the American designer had been one of the few whose work he followed, and that the first designer item he purchased was a pair off Abloh’s Off-White trainers. This is by no means a rare story: so many young black people identified with Abloh. In losing him, we have lost a real titan of black creativity, whose influence is felt in every corner – from streetwear kids browsing designs on London estates to the catwalks of Milan, Paris and Tokyo. You have to question why Abloh’s position as a black man at the top of the fashion industry, which draws so intensely from black history and culture, is so rare. But it’s a position that Abloh treated with humility, and a real sense of duty towards young black creatives. He set out to nurture the talent of the future himself: to ensure that the most senior positions in fashion and creativity would not be restricted to just one or two black visionaries. Abloh left an imprint on my own life at an unexpected moment. Around a year ago, after quitting my Westminster policy job to pursue a career in writing, the fashion mogul became one of the first people I ever interviewed. I was panicked before our Zoom call, the typical features of imposter syndrome creeping into my subconscious, as I questioned what I could possibly have to say to one of the great black pioneers of our age. Speaking to me from his home in Chicago, his disposition was instantly warming, he was full of zest and dynamism, with a gentleness and generosity that can be rare among people of his calibre. He was beaming with affirmations, and kept emphasising his commitment to uplift black creative youth across the world: whether they be designing sneakers, writing poetry or indeed conducting interviews. I’d never felt more encouraged to continue with writing. Alongside him in this interview was the poet Caleb Femi – a former young people’s poet laureate for London. Abloh had been looking to connect with black British talent, and via his friend Michaela Coel became aware of Femi, emailing him spontaneously to provide poetry for his fashion campaigns. This partnership led to Femi soundtracking Louis Vuitton’s spring-summer 2021 show in Tokyo, and the two continued a professional and personal relationship up to his final days. To me it’s this kinds of story, and this dedication to pay it forward to the next generation, that defines Abloh. His Post-Modern Scholarship Fund – used to support a new generation of Black fashion industry leaders – is a great example of Abloh throwing his weight and institutional status behind younger people, but it’s the small, intimate acts which we will remember too. He opened his autumn-winter 2020 Off-White show in the Musée du Louvre with Cartier Williams, a young tap dancer from Harlem, who wore a shirt reading “I support young Black businesses.” Williams tap-danced for the entire show, grooving around the models. His commitment to supporting young creatives was interwoven into everything Abloh touched. All of this almost suggests that he wasn’t also young himself: passing away at 41 is truly no age at all. In these few years he has gifted not only the fashion world but a global black community something that is timeless. His rise was meteoric, and inspirational. From interning with Fendi in 2009 for $500 a month, to becoming an artistic director at Louis Vuitton and founder of Off-White, Abloh has opened up opportunities for others and expanded the black imagination. It is a legacy he was well aware of. Speaking to me over Zoom that day, he said his dream was that “a young black kid can go to his parents and say, ‘Hey I’m not going to get a law degree, I’m not going to be working in any corporate space, I want to be a fashion designer.’” He imagined parental resistance to this being assuaged by his own story – he was proud that he had created a blueprint for that possibility. The loss of Abloh can not be overstated. I was just a journalist who interviewed him for two hours, and found a new-born confidence to continue in my career and believe in my own potential. It’s not possible to estimate just how many people he touched and inspired, and that is perhaps the greatest legacy any person could hope to leave. Jason Okundaye is a London-based writer and researcherThe Australian government was warned in mid-July that the worsening security situation in Afghanistan and Covid restrictions were making it “extremely difficult” to help former Afghan employees escape the country, previously secret documents reveal. At least five weeks before the Afghan capital fell to the Taliban in mid-August, government officials predicted more people would seek to flee the country and they were discussing the possibility of chartering direct flights from Kabul to Australia. Guardian Australia can also reveal the governor general, David Hurley, sought a private briefing from the immigration minister in July about the program to assist former Afghan colleagues – as the government was facing increasing public criticism about its handling of the longstanding scheme. Documents obtained by Guardian Australia under freedom of information (FOI) laws reveal a charter flight option was initially “considered a high risk”, even though officials also warned on 12 July that commercial flight options “will become very limited”. Later in July, officials began making more concrete arrangements for a charter flight, amid concerns pandemic border rules were slowing arrivals of Afghan nationals to Australia in the weeks leading up to the Taliban’s takeover. The revelations will add to the concerns of critics who say the Australian government was too slow to help Afghan nationals as it pulled its troops and diplomats out of Afghanistan, culminating in the emergency military-led evacuation effort in the final fortnight of August. “It’s one of the most tragic examples of this government doing too little, too late,” Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said. Home affairs cites ‘ongoing challenge’ The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, was briefed on 12 July about the visa program to settle Afghan nationals who previously worked alongside Australian troops and diplomats. These former colleagues, including interpreters and security guards, are known as locally engaged employees (LEEs) and feared Taliban retribution for working with Australia. The home affairs department said at the time there were “ongoing challenges to the processing of humanitarian program applications, including Afghan LEE applications”. Those challenges included “continuing restrictions on the department’s offshore activities and those of our partner agencies due to Covid-19, for example an inability to conduct medical assessments”. “This, combined with the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan, makes it extremely difficult to not only process visas but uplift people from Kabul,” the 12 July ministerial submission to Hawke said. The same document raised concerns about the impact of a move by the United Arab Emirates on 11 July to “suspend arriving and transiting passengers from Afghanistan”. “With the suspension of flights to the UAE, commercial flights will become very limited,” the submission said. “The department has discussed the possibility of charters from Kabul directly to Australia with Dfat and Defence; however, noting the security situation, this is considered a high risk.” The same document said it was “highly likely that as the security situation deteriorates people will seek to leave Afghanistan and cross the border into other countries where they may seek resettlement and engage with UNHCR”. Hawke was briefed on rigidities in the existing LEE scheme, including that relatives are “often refused as they are not found to be dependent on the primary applicant”. A single parent of an Afghan employee was eligible but married parents were not. The government was considering options to broaden the eligibility for the LEE scheme, with officials noting former employees were attracting “significant support from advocate groups including former Defence personnel”. Home affairs officials said an increased intake “should be manageable within the current budget”, but also warned of increased security risks if the pool was widened. “If the cohort is expanded, the security risk would increase and therefore a deeper investigation would be required to ensure that visa applicants satisfy security and character requirements,” the 12 July document said. Governor general seeks briefing Ten days later, Hawke received another brief from home affairs to prepare him for a meeting with the governor general. Hurley, who serves as the Queen’s representative in Australia but is a former defence force chief, requested a briefing about the Afghan LEE program. Hawke briefed him on 23 July. “The governor general sought the briefing because of his interest in the program and professional connection to Australia’s mission in Afghanistan,” a spokesperson for Hurley told Guardian Australia. “He was grateful to the minister and government for the briefing.” At the time of the briefing, Australia had granted more than 1,600 visas to Afghan LEEs and their family members since the program began in 2013, and there were a further 76 applications on hand – covering 369 people. But home affairs told Hawke the “main visa processing impediment” was that most of these people were awaiting mandatory health examinations by the International Organisation for Migration in Kabul. The same document added: “The ministers for Defence and foreign affairs need to finalise any additional certifications as soon as possible to enable the LEE to lodge visa applications in a timely fashion so that home affairs officers in Amman can finalise the visa processing.” That is because the program requires the employing minister to certify the applicant is at significant individual risk of harm because of their support to the Australian mission in Afghanistan, before home affairs formally issues the visa. As of 22 July, Defence and home affairs expected a further 49 former employees to be certified, meaning an extra 250 visa applicants. Officials said tighter quarantine caps had seen “arrivals and bookings reduced to less than five passengers per day” – but the NSW government “indicated an additional 100 seats can be made available from late July to early August for humanitarian entrants”. Wong says Hawke ‘ignored warnings’ Despite the earlier reluctance to charter flights, the 22 July brief shows Dfat and the health department were by that point “progressing arrangements for a charter flight to transport up to 200 Afghan LEE and their families to Australia via the Howard Springs quarantine facility”. The flight was “expected to arrive on 30 August 2021”. But that plan was overtaken by events, with the fall of Kabul to the Taliban in the middle of August prompting Australia and its allies to launch a high-risk military-led evacuation effort. The Australian defence force flew 4,168 evacuees out of Kabul, including 2,984 Afghans with visas. The government offered emergency visas to applicants who had applied for the LEE program but were not certified – a move triggered by the practical challenges with visa processing in Afghanistan at that time. Officials argue the government rapidly adapted its response to include one of Australia’s largest humanitarian airlift operations. The documents show a gradual increase in visas granted to Afghan LEEs between February and July 2021, before the security situation in Afghanistan quickly deteriorated in August. A spokesperson for Hawke said on Tuesday: “The government has successfully evacuated more than 4,000 Afghan Locally Engaged Employees and their families to Australia since 2013. This is in addition to more than 10,000 Afghans that Australia has granted permanent protection in that time.” But Labor said the documents showed “tragic” delays. “Veterans and former prime ministers were calling on the prime minister to act for months,” Wong said. “Minister Hawke ignored warnings from his own department that commercial flights would become very limited. Days later he was telling journalists that Australia would not join the US airlift, and had ‘no plan’ to mount a similar operation.” Comment was also sought from the foreign minister, Marise Payne, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton.Australia has recorded the lowest number of new HIV diagnoses in a year since 1984, but doctors are concerned a high proportion of people are being diagnosed late in their infection. Data published by the Kirby Institute on Wednesday shows 633 HIV cases were recorded in 2020, a substantial drop from the 901 diagnoses in 2019. Cases have been declining in Australia since 2015 thanks to a combination of prevention measures, treatment and testing, though experts believe the particularly stark drop last year is due to Covid-19 restrictions. The epidemiologist Dr Skye McGregor, who heads the Kirby Institute’s public health surveillance innovation group, said with social restrictions in place “people have been having less sex and were less likely to go and get tested”. “There has also been less travel in and out of Australia,” she said. “Nevertheless, these low numbers are good news and should be celebrated.” The chief executive of the Australian Federation of Aids Organisations, adjunct professor Darryl O’Donnell, said elimination was “entirely achievable with political will and investment”. “It will deliver a remarkable health achievement while also saving taxpayers billions of dollars in long-term costs,” he said. The Kirby data shows a substantial reduction in cases among gay and bisexual men, from 765 in 2016 down to 426 in 2020. Each year, a greater proportion of new HIV cases are attributed to heterosexual sex, and McGregor said further prevention strategies would need to target this group. In 2020, 67% of cases were attributed to sex between gay and bisexual men, while 24% were attributed to heterosexual sex. The remaining cases were attributable to injecting drug use and other exposures, with needle and syringe programs including safe injecting rooms helping to maintain low cases in this group. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning However, 44% of people diagnosed with HIV in 2020 were considered “late diagnoses” – meaning they had been living with the infection for four or more years without knowing it. “Without treatment, a person’s immune function can deteriorate and they will become immunocompromised and may end up in hospital, so delayed diagnosis and treatment is not ideal for an individual’s health,” McGregor said. “If they are unaware they have HIV they may unknowingly pass on the infection to someone else. Thus regularly testing and early treatment is key to controlling HIV.” People living with HIV who take their medication as prescribed can maintain an undetectable viral load, which means they have effectively no risk of transmitting the virus to others. It makes early treatment a crucial part of preventing new HIV cases. There were 18 new HIV diagnoses in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in 2020, representing a 28% reduction since 2019. However, with small numbers, caution needs to be taken when interpreting the results. Kirby’s manager of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health research, Robert Monaghan, said sustained and culturally appropriate prevention efforts were needed to eliminate HIV in Indigenous communities. “It is especially important that these programs are maintained alongside Covid-19 prevention programs,” he said. While the declines are promising, McGregor said eliminating transmission in Australia would mean investing in access to a range of effective prevention options, including pre-exposure prophylaxis (taking HIV treatment to prevent infection in the first place), early treatment of new cases, and high HIV testing rates. “We also need to ensure continued efforts to reduce stigma and discrimination,” she said. “In combination, this will help Australia to achieve elimination of HIV transmission.” On Wednesday, which is World AIDS Day, the health minister Greg Hunt announced more than $50m in new funding to improve access to HIV treatment and to support the health and mental wellbeing of people living with blood borne viruses and sexually transmissible infections. “This investment will benefit an estimated 1,000 people currently living with HIV in Australia each year, providing access to appropriate and equitable HIV treatment and care,” Hunt said. Access to new testing has also been made possible through recent changes by the Therapeutic Goods Administration to increase the availability of the Atomo HIV Self-Test, the only HIV self-test approved for sale in Australia.It’s rare to see an issue unite the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, independent senator Rex Patrick and One Nation’s Malcolm Roberts with such passion. But all three in the past week have launched extraordinary attacks on the prime minister’s department for insisting that national cabinet documents remain secret under FOI laws, despite the government losing a case brought by Patrick in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal on that very point in relation to a previous FOI application. On Tuesday, Patrick escalated the dispute in the Senate, labelling the department’s secretary, Phil Gaetjens, a “disgrace”, a “henchman” for Morrison, and a “cover-up expert” over what he alleges is the department’s improper use of the cabinet documents exemption. Patrick also used the Senate to name two officials from the department – Angie McKenzie and Hugh Cameron – as rejecting his freedom of information requests for national cabinet documents on the basis of the disputed exemption, which he argued amounted to bureaucrats ignoring justice Richard White’s decision in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. The Morrison government insists national cabinet is a subcommittee of the federal cabinet, despite justice White finding in the AAT in August that the evidence before him in a dispute over a previous application by Patrick did not support that view. McKenzie’s decision, from which Patrick read in the Senate last week, explained that she had determined national cabinet to be a subcommittee on the basis of additional evidence not necessarily before the AAT in the prior case. White cited factors including that national cabinet members “did not regard themselves as bound to support decisions” made there. The department did not appeal against the decision. In response to the decision, the Coalition introduced but failed to pass a bill to expressly exempt national cabinet documents from FOI but is now routinely blocking FOI requests on the basis of cabinet confidentiality. In September, the national cabinet reasserted that disclosure of its documents and deliberations would “undermine the trust between the commonwealth and the states and territories and would prevent full and frank discussions that achieve the best outcomes for the Australian public”. At Senate estimates, departmental officials explained they were not bound to apply White’s findings to other FOI cases. Deputy secretary of governance, Stephanie Foster, said White was “making decisions on a particular case, on the basis of the facts in front of him in that case”. First assistant secretary of the government division, John Reid, said the decision “has no precedential force beyond the facts before it”. “The department is absolutely not ignoring the decision of justice White,” he said. “The decision of justice White has been drawn to the attention of all decision-makers.” Nevertheless “the government’s position remains that national cabinet was established … a committee of the federal cabinet”, he said. The stance has irritated not just Labor and Patrick but also One Nation’s Roberts, who told the Senate on 23 November that it was “fallacious” to claim national cabinet documents were cabinet-in-confidence because national cabinet was a “fabrication” and “a pretend concept”. “The name sounds grand, yet it’s nothing more than a meeting of the prime minister and state and territory premiers and chief ministers,” Roberts said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Albanese, who has also attempted to get national cabinet documents under FOI, told Guardian Australia the department’s decision to reject his request was “extraordinary”, warning that the prime minister’s department was “not above the law”. “Mr Morrison’s obsession with secrecy has undermined the law that protects all Australians’ right to know and, if left unchecked, threatens other fundamental rights,” he said. Patrick has been pursuing the issue in the Senate for months, including seeking answers on how much the department is spending defending “untenable” FOI decisions. Patrick has also asked the Office of the Australian information commissioner to send one of the rejections to the federal court for determination. Last week, and again on Tuesday, Patrick in the Senate accused McKenzie, one of the decision-makers who refused one of his requests, of being a bureaucrat who thought it was “in their remit to overturn a judicial officer in favour of the opinion and interests of her political master”. Patrick told the Senate that occurred “either because of an inappropriate direction … or because the decision-maker was trimming her sails to the political winds”. On 26 November, Gaetjens and the Australian public service commissioner, Peter Woolcott, wrote to the Senate president complaining that Patrick had made “derogatory comments” about McKenzie. They said Patrick had “misused” parliamentary privilege to make comments accusing McKenzie of politicised decisions which if they “had been made in most other workplaces they could be characterised as bullying and harassment”. “McKenzie is a highly regarded and competent, professional public servant and conducts herself with the highest standards of integrity,” they said. “As Ms McKenzie’s employer, we strongly object to senator Patrick’s unwarranted and offensive remarks and ask that senator Patrick be directed to withdraw these comments.” On Tuesday, Patrick accused another decision maker in the department, Cameron, of using “what was effectively a pro forma decision-making template” to claim cabinet confidentiality over national cabinet documents to which he had sought access. “Some might think it is unconventional that I come into the chamber and start naming public officials – but there are conventions being broken inside of government that are far more harmful,” he said. Patrick said that Gaetjens “hasn’t lead the public service in a highly professional way” and “has been happy to act as the prime minister’s henchman, covering up all manner of sins and corruption in the government”. He said Gaetjens was a “cover-up expert … helping the PM in sending all manner of dirty secrets and sins off to the governance committee of cabinet to be buried for the next 20 years in the vaults of the national archives”. The government leader in the Senate, Simon Birmingham, said Patrick’s comments were an “extraordinary display” and a “politicised attack” against public servants. Birmingham said parliamentarians ought to respect that public servants were not elected or public officials and should not single them out and impugn their motives. “It was entirely appropriate for the secretary [Gaetjens] to seek to defend public servants from being brought into improper political debate.” The prime minister’s department in a statement said: “PM&amp;C wholly rejects senator Patrick’s latest allegations. These continued personal attacks on APS staff remain unwarranted and untrue.” Guardian Australia approached Gaetjens, McKenzie and Cameron for comment.Australians with adult sons and daughters living overseas are being told their children don’t count as “immediate family” and don’t warrant exemption for entry into the country in the lead-up to Christmas. In October, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced changes to allow parents of Australian citizens to be classified as immediate family, allowing them to travel to Australian jurisdictions with 80% double-dose vaccination rates. “I know that will be very welcome news to Australians right across the country who were hoping to be reunited with their family members, their parents who are overseas,” Morrison said at the time. But the same change has not been applied to adult sons and daughters of Australian citizens, who are non-citizens, live abroad, and are no longer considered dependent on their parents. Ken Galbraith, of Kyneton, Victoria, had been looking forward to seeing his daughter, who lives in the UK and is a British citizen, for Christmas. She had intended to bring Galbraith’s four grandchildren with her. But when she went to apply for the usual tourist visa, she realised she was not eligible for an exemption to the current border restrictions because she was no longer dependent on her father and was therefore not considered his “immediate family”. Galbraith told the Guardian the rule would prevent his family coming together for Christmas, despite Morrison’s stated desire to reunite families of Australian citizens. The government currently defines an immediate family member as a parent, spouse, de facto partner, dependent child, or legal guardian. Galbraith said it was bizarre that the changes announced last month gave vaccinated parents of Australian citizens the ability to travel to Australia, but the same exemption was not afforded to the children of citizens. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The stupid thing is that if we were in England, and our daughter was here, we could come in as a parent of an Australian citizen, but when it’s the other way around, she can’t,” Galbraith said. He is not alone. Hundreds have signed a petition protesting the current arrangements, which has been accepted by parliament. “Covid has created a cruel divide for many families and it has caused further separation in that immediate family members have not been considered as such and have been unable to connect,” the petition says. “Australia’s population is multicultural and for all to thrive, immediate family members need to be recognised as such.” “We hope that if the government are willing to recognise parents of adult children as immediate family members, it will follow that they will give the same regard to adult children.” Galbraith wrote to the minister for home affairs, Karen Andrews, complaining of the absurdity of a system that does not recognise his daughter as his immediate family. He was referred to the department, who directed him to a range of visas and exemptions that can be applied for. Exemptions are given to people on compassionate grounds, but that does not apply to Galbraith’s circumstances. “No one in the department or in the minister’s office is prepared to even consider the fact that there’s a massive anomaly here,” he said. He could also conceivably travel to the UK to see his daughter, but the trip there would be fraught. Galbraith said his family could simply not afford the cost of accommodation, should they be shut out of returning home to Australia by the new variant. “With all the lockdown, my wife hasn’t seen our daughter and our grandkids since December 2018. I did one trip over in 2019, and then of course Covid hit,” he said. Comment from the Department of Home Affairs has been sought.Harold and Maude is a movie that celebrates the 1970s. By turns exuberant, psychedelic, hilarious and heartbreaking, it’s a product of the most prolific decade of Hal Ashby’s directorial output: his skewed, sweet-natured stamp is all over it. From the opening minutes – a macabre mismatch of suicidal scene-setting to the accompaniment of Cat Stevens’ uplifting Don’t Be Shy – Ashby leaves viewers in no doubt about what they have signed up for. What follows is 91 minutes of sunlight and shadow juxtaposed in a way that will have them laughing and gasping in the same breath. Twentysomething Harold Chasen (Bud Cort) spends his leisure time devising attention-seeking suicide scenarios within sight of his emotionally unavailable mother (an inspired Vivian Pickles). After his 15th staged suicide, Mrs Chasen – not averse to the occasional display of amateur dramatics herself – sends him to a psychiatrist who asks Harold if all 15 attempts were done for his mother’s benefit. “I would not say benefit,” says a deadpan Harold, a master of the judicious use of looking straight to camera. His other pastime is going to funerals, which is where he meets 79-year-old Maude (Ruth Gordon), a fellow funeral aficionado, occasional life model and self-described sunflower. Maude is given to “borrowing” other people’s vehicles and, at one of the funerals, pulls over to offer Harold a lift in his own car, a secondhand hearse. Their friendship develops over the course of the week, a busy one for Harold. His mother has decided he should marry and signs him up for a computer dating service, 70s-style. ‘They screen out the fat and the ugly,” his mother assures a bemused Harold. As she reads out the questionnaire – “Do you sometimes have headaches after a difficult day?” – and responds “Yes I do indeed,” Harold casually loads a gun and points it at her before turning it on himself for suicide attempt number 16. There follow three more blood-spattered performances – one for each of his prospective wives-to-be – that include self-immolation, a self-inflicted machete attack and a spectacular seppuku that ends in a copycat performance by would-be actor date No 3. In between engagements, Harold and Maude have a picnic at a demolition site, save a tree, steal a couples of vehicles including a police motorbike, frolic in a field of daisies and fall in love. “What flower would you like to be?” Maude asks Harold. “One of these [daisies] maybe,” he says. “Because they’re all alike.” “But they’re not,” Maude replies. “I feel that much of the world’s sorrow come from people who are this,” she holds up a single daisy, “yet allow themselves to be treated as that.” She points to the sea of daisies. It’s a glimpse of a darker alternative to the light-filled, bohemian past Maude has painted. When Harold catches sight of a row of numbers tattooed on her forearm, we get an inkling as to what has formed her character and what drives her towards the film’s final act. Harold and Maude bombed at the box office on its release but its combination of black humour with an undercurrent of optimism has won it – and Ashby – a legion of devoted fans in the 50 years since. His was an irreverent, anti-establishment but above all humanistic approach to film-making. When Ashby won an editing Oscar in 1967 for In the Heat of the Night, his acceptance speech was one of the shortest in the history of the Academy Awards: “I only hope that we can use all of our talents and creativity towards peace and love.” Harold and Maude is the kind of cinema that draws you in for the storyline and keeps you there for the beating heart. It’s a film unapologetically of its time – the wardrobe, cinematography and Cat Stevens soundtrack place it firmly in the 70s – but its themes of joy and redemption resonate now more than ever. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgFour years ago, Analiese Gregory shook things up. After a career spent working as a chef at fine dining restaurants like Paris’s Michelin-starred Le Meurice and Sydney’s Quay, she packed up and moved to a small town in Tasmania. The idea was to pursue a simpler, more sustainable life – one where she could raise animals and grow her own vegetables, rather than spending 16 hours a day in a commercial kitchen. “It was a huge, huge change for me,” she says. “The first day I bought the house I drank champagne out of plastic cups and was jumping around on the bed like, this is amazing! I burned all the curtains in a bonfire because they were so ugly. And then the second day, stuff was just falling apart. There were spiders everywhere. Everything was dirty. I hated it and I sat in the kitchen and cried. So it’s been a rollercoaster.” Her tree change – one which, spoiler alert, Gregory ended up loving – has been documented in a new SBS series, A Girl’s Guide to Hunting, Fishing and Wild Cooking. The eight-episode program began on SBS Food this month and will be available to stream on SBS On Demand as each episode drops. Whichever part of the world she’s in, Gregory rates her collection of knives as her most cherished possession. Here, she tells us about those indispensable utensils, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I would save my knives because they’re the tools of my trade. My knives are a mix of things I bought around the world – some are from small Japanese makers from when I walked into a tiny shop in Kyoto, others I bought in Paris. My favourite is a sashimi knife I got when I was cooking in California one time. I was in America to do a thing at the CIA – the cooking school, not the bureau! – and realised that I had to cut raw fish and hadn’t brought a knife with me. So I treated myself and went to this place called Bernal Cutlery, which is the highest end knife store in San Francisco, and splashed out on a really nice knife. I’ve collected my knives from all over the world, so they’re quite special to me. They’re all different and I’ve got over 60. Instead of taking souvenirs from places that I go, I buy a knife. My most useful object My V60, which is a filter coffee pour-over thing. Coffee is my biggest vice and the thing that I’m most addicted to. But I’ve cut back so now it’s about quality over quantity – it used to be the opposite. These days I’ve moved into filter coffee. It’s the thing I take travelling with me everywhere, and making one is the first thing I do when I wake up in the morning. The item I most regret losing When I was young, about 13 or 14, my mum gave me my grandmother’s watch from the 1930s. It was a really cool, silver art deco thing that you had to hand-wind. And you know when you’re young, and you just don’t fully grasp the significance of items, or you play fast and loose with everything? So yeah, I just lost it. Now I really regret losing it because my grandmother has passed away and that was the item that connected me with her. I’m really annoyed at young Analiese for just not looking after stuff! I haven’t told my mum yet. She lives in New Zealand, so hopefully she won’t read this.‘Hello, I am your new doctor.’ “Fuck off.” The man has been in hospital for weeks, but no amount of care has altered his dishevelment or malnourishment. Now, I am supposed to “fix” the problem. “What’s the story?” I ask my team. These days, every story begins the same way. This patient has neither Covid nor sCovid, shorthand for suspected Covid, and is vaccinated. He has pneumonia and likely cancer. But since the suspect lumps have been present “forever”, and don’t bother him, he refuses a biopsy. The trainee pauses and the patient interjects, his face dripping with disdain. “You are all the same, you have no idea.” “So, you tell me your story”, I say. “When they brought me here, my dog escaped. I don’t know where he went and whether he is even alive. Doctor, I am pleading with you. I promise you I will come straight back to hospital. I just need to know he is safe.” We share guilty glances, shaken by his fervour. I came expecting to rule on the complex medical problems based on the stories of professionals, pieced together with countless blood tests, scans and expert opinion. But given an opportunity to tell his own story, he sums it up in one sentence. “My dog is my only friend – I need to know he is safe.” “Let me figure out how to help you”, I comfort him. Outside, I tell my team that we simply must let him find his dog. For an anxious moment I wonder how my defence of “patient temporarily discharged to locate dog” might sound; nonetheless, I sense the right thing is to let him go and his nurse agrees. He bolts into a cab before I can change my mind. And behold, three hours later, just as he promised, he is back! The intensity of my relief matches the colour of his happiness. “I never trusted that neighbour”, he marvels before conceding that the same neighbour has adopted the dog. The patient remains hospitalised but never asks to go home. It’s as if securing his dog’s safety was the only thing on his checklist. The irony is not lost on us that of all the costly and ultimately unhelpful interventions, the thing that made the greatest difference to the patient was seeing his dog. Medicine has been said to be gradually slipping away from really listening to patients, but the past two years have made things worse. First, there is the tension of Covid. The must-ask, yes or no questions this entails leaves even less room to engage the patient. Then, there is the absence of relatives from the bedside which has had a dreadful impact on patient advocacy. Nurses are great but nothing beats a devoted relative as the strong voice of a disfranchised patient. This problem is particularly pronounced for the frail elderly, the cognitively impaired, disabled people and those who don’t speak English well. Banning visitors from their bedside is a worrying barrier to holistic care. Last, but not least, is our new attire. The mask and face shield are important for protection, but they hinder conversation. Good medicine relies on detecting nuance and observing expressions, all made virtually impossible from behind layers of protection. It’s now more tempting to ask only the “necessary” questions and get on with the job. In the process, we miss the real story. But of course, there is a difference between what doctors and patients think of as “the story”. For doctors, increasingly busy and stressed by patients returning to seek care, the story is the history of presenting complaint. Where is the problem? What tests can diagnose it? What treatments can fix it? But for patients, the story is as much the presenting complaint as being the frail wife of a dying husband, the frazzled mother of a depressed child, the worried spouse of an unemployed worker, the weary child of bickering parents. Illness has a context and so does recovery. In one study, 62% of cancer patients reported that it is important that their doctor know their personal priorities yet only 37% reported that preference discussions happened prior to treatment and only 36% of doctors reported recording preferences in the medical record. In this time of disruption, it has never been more important to know our patients thoroughly – where they live, how they manage, who and what they care about. To the uninitiated these details can seem irrelevant. To the initiated, they can seem an indulgence amid the daily rush of patients. But for medicine to be truly therapeutic, there is no choice but to stop and listen. Good medicine has always been about understanding stories. The remarkable Oliver Sacks observed that in medicine there is one cardinal rule – one must always listen to the patient. In seeking to heal our patients, this is the time to redouble our efforts.Eight more cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in England, the UK Health Security Agency said. These are in addition to the previous five confirmed cases of the Sars-CoV-2 variant also known as B.1.1.529. The total number of confirmed cases in England is now 13. The new cases include six in London – one each in Haringey, Sutton, Camden, and Westminster, and two in Barnet – and one in Liverpool, and one in north Norfolk. Nine cases have also been identified in Scotland, with five cases in the Lanarkshire area and four in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, bringing the UK total to 22. The individuals who have tested positive, and their contacts, are all isolating, health officials said. Work is under way to identify any links to travel to southern Africa. The health agency has now identified cases in the east Midlands, east of England, London, and the north-west and is carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to be infectious. Dr Jenny Harries, the agency’s chief executive, said: “It is very likely that we will find more cases over the coming days as we are seeing in other countries globally and as we increase case detection through focused contact tracing. That’s why it’s critical that anyone with Covid-19 symptoms isolates and gets a PCR test immediately.”SADNESS IN HIS EYES The Fiver isn’t in any position to accuse anyone else of living in the past, given we’ve spent the last 20 years banging on about ZX Spectrum games, regional ITV and Spurs. But really, the folk who vote for the Ballon d’Or will have to stop pretending it’s still 2011 at some point. Did winner Lionel Messi really have a better year than 53-goal Robert Lewandowski? Was sixth-placed Cristiano Ronaldo really better in 2021 than Mohamed Salah, Kevin De Bruyne, Kylian Mbappé, Gianluigi Donnarumma, Erling Haaland, Romelu Lukaku, Giorgio Chiellini, Leonardo Bonucci, Raheem Sterling, Neymar, Luis Suárez, Simon Kjær, Mason Mount, Riyad Mahrez, Bruno Fernandes, Lautauro Martínez, Harry Kane, Pedri, Phil Foden, Theme Pub O’Fiver, Nicolò Barella, Rúben Dias, Gerard Moreno, César Azpilicueta and Luka Modric? Was he? OK, we’ll give you Theme Pub O’Fiver, but other than that, our point stands. It was a glittering ceremony, though, we’ll admit that. Most of the glittering was done by Messi’s suit, miniature versions of which were worn by his three kids, eerily lined up in order of height like characters in a Wes Anderson movie. Lewandowski sat by Messi’s side during the show, dressed comparatively soberly, with a face to match. He certainly exuded less showbiz sparkle as the winner was announced, smiling sportingly before looking on with discernible sadness behind his eyes, the corners of his mouth sliding down a little, as Messi bounded up to take all the plaudits despite the undoubted brilliance of the Bayern striker’s performances. If nothing else, Lewandowski now knows how Xavi and Andrés Iniesta must have felt. Let’s hope Lewandowski – who broke Gerd Muller’s 49-year-old Bundesliga scoring record, for goodness sake – enjoyed the rest of the evening. He probably didn’t, though, given that host Didier Drogba’s patter was beyond teeth-grindingly inane, the low point in an evening-long masterclass in depth-plumbing coming when he asked Spanish-speaking Ballon d’Or Feminin winner Alexia Putellas a question in English, then admitted he didn’t speak Spanish so couldn’t understand her answer. Zero out of 10 for research, though we’re sure Didier will have a much better time of it at next year’s ceremony. He’ll be one of the favourites, you see, having inspired Chelsea to glory in the 2012 Big Cup. You know how the jury rolls. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Luke McLaughlin from 7pm GMT for England 7-0 Latvia in Women’s World Cup qualifying and Scott Murray at 7.30pm for Newcastle 0-0 Norwich in the Premier League. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … today! In about four three two-and-a-half hours! Tickets are available now. QUOTE OF THE DAY “What is written there is false. I said it was shameful and I was outraged for having to play. I said that in the presence of the police, firefighters and referees. We will see in the courts what really happened” – Belenenses president Rui Pedro Soares says he is planning to sue the Portuguese league official who said his team wanted to play last weekend despite having only nine players. FIVER LETTERS “To Barry Glendenning (yesterday’s Fiver): ‘plus the likelihood of Cristiano Ronaldo throwing his second very public strop in as many days when he is beaten to the men’s award by either Messi or Robert Lewandowski.’ It seems to be a national British journalistic pastime to try to publicly ridicule and underrate the achievements of one of the world’s best ever sportsmen. I haven’t quite understood if it is just some sort of ‘chip on the shoulder’ that he is not British or that the press just don’t understand him. I’m quite sure he doesn’t give an @rse as long as he keeps shining in the PL every weekend and keeps smacking goals past the England goalkeeper for Portugal in internationals (and there have been quite a few over his career). By the way, Barry, you might like to check out his reply to Ballon d’Or’s Pascal Ferré’s farcical comments about his version of why Cristiano Ronaldo is not attending. It will be right up your nose and prove my point” – Pedro Tavares da Silva. “Many thanks to Richard Fernandez (yesterday’s Fiver letters) for pointing out the proper use of ‘smote’ (versus smited). Well correcteded” – Declan Houton. “Down here in Sussex I’m expecting some interesting pre-season friendlies in 2022” – Tony Crawford. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Declan Houton. RECOMMENDED LOOKING Warning: this week’s David Squires cartoon features a topless Sean Dyche. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Ralf Rangnick won’t be in the dugout for Manchester United’s game against Arsenal on Thursday thanks to visa delay knack. John Sillett, FA Cup-winning manager with Coventry, has died aged 85. Jürgen Klopp says Virgil van Dijk won’t have forgotten what happened to him in his last Merseyside derby. ““We are human beings so it is probably difficult to forget and ignore something like that of course, but the situation was a situation that can always happen in football,” shrugged the Liverpool manager. Lydia Bedford has been appointed as Leicester Women manager Pep Guardiola says his Manchester City squad is down to the bare bones. “We are in an emergency for the intensity of the squad. We have few people. I never complain,” he cheered. “I never miss the players who cannot play for any reason and I trust a lot the players. When one is out, another one comes in. But to sustain it in December - the toughest month of the year – the fact is we are in trouble because we have few players.” Watford’s Ismaila Sarr, Ben Foster and Nicolas Nkoulou are all out until January but Claudio Ranieri is putting a brave face on it. “I don’t like to cry, I want to react,” he sobbed. STILL WANT MORE? Suzanne Wrack on Ballon d’Or winner Alexia Putellas, the majestic midfielder who is the pick of Barça’s dominant pack Jonathan Wilson on Ballon d’Or winner Leo Messi: past his best but a seventh gong feels right Hassanin Mubarak on three forgotten men and the birth of Iraq’s national football team And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! WHERE’S THE TEA-TIME EMAIL OF THE YEAR AWARD?That’s all for Tuesday’s live coverage. Thanks as always for following along with us. Be sure check out the full report here. At the close of the presser, Carlsen is informed that he shares a birthday with Winston Churchill. Asked if he believes he shares any qualities with the former PM, he says: “There was this quote from Churchill on one of his opponents, that he was a very modest man and he had great reasons to be modest. So I would say for (Nepomniachtchi), he is not a modest man and with good reason.” Both players are asked whether the current format is the best way to determine the world chess champion. “It’s hard to say because I believe the importance of traditions in chess is really big,” Nepomniachtchi says. “I guess whatever works you shouldn’t try to make it work better in order not to break it. I believe this system with the matches is more or less fair.” Says Carlsen, who’s spoken on multiple occasions about changing the format: “There’s a saying that if you don’t have anything nice to say, you shouldn’t say anything at all. So I’m going to invoke that particular saying right here.” Carlsen is what he was hoping for out of 18. Nh4!?, the first new move of today’s game. “There are insanely complicated lines,” he says. “The approach that (Nepomniachtchi) chose is not the only one that black can choose. In other variations it’s insanely complicated and really, really risky for black. To be honest, the one he chooses, it looks really, really risky to leave the knight on f8 and bank everything on the a-pawn. If you’ve miscalculated something, you just lose without any chances. But it’s a lot easier of course when you’ve studied it and you know that it’s a draw and you can kind of work it out from there. But believe me, there are many, many other options for black that lead to much more complications than what happened in the game.” He continues: “I think what he did was just very sensible. An approach that looks a bit dubious at first since your knight is going to be a bit locked in, but with concrete calculation you can make it work and that’s how you usually solve your opening problems. You try to avoid the lines where you have to remember everything and try to choose something that you can sort of remember the main points.” Carlsen is asked whether he felt like today’s peaceful result feels like a setback. “It’s OK,” he says of the fourth straight draw. “I’ve started with a lot more draws than this [in the 2016 and 2018 world title matches]. When you play a forced line as today, you don’t expect to hit very often. But the idea is to hit once in a while, take your opponent by surprise, and the other times you’ve usually got to be very safe. “Obviously I would have loved to win, would have loved to find more chances than I did, but I think overall it’s a normal result against a world-prepared opponent.” Nepomniachtchi is asked whether he felt like he was in any difficulty during today’s game. “The line which happened should be known by many who play Petrov,” he says. “It’s one of the lines which is quite principled. Despite this, I believe (18. Nh4!?) is a very interesting try. Perhaps I even want to play this as white one day. But in general the task was more about not to mix up things and not to do something stupid, because as far as I know this line is more or less safe for black. Of course I was checking twice everything and also calculating a lot, but in general I think this is quite safe.” Asked whether the half-point is a satisfying result, the challenger is to the point: “Since I played Petrov, indeed.” Asked again whether he was surprised by Nepomniachtchi’s Petrov, Carlsen re-states that it was one of the openings he was well-prepared for. “It was one of the main openings that I expected seeing that he played it in the Candidates and also, in the first black game, he went for a more classical approach rather than a sharp one,” he says. “So it was very much expected. Couldn’t know obviously which exact Petrov line he was going to go for, but the Petrov in itself was very much expected.” Asked to expound on the opening in general, Carlsen doesn’t have much to offer. “What can I say?” he says. “I tried something concrete and it didn’t work. But that’s I think a normal result. I didn’t expect him to have missed the line that I played completely but, yeah, in some other iterations there can be a lot of difficult decisions to make for black. But I think the way that he played, there was just ... there are some different tries but there’s just nothing. State of modern chess. Not much else to say.” Asked about all the time he spent on moves in the endgame when a draw appeared likely – more than 22 minutes on 25. Nf6+ and nearly 35 minutes on 30. Ne8+ – Carlsen said he was simply being thorough in his hunt for winning chances that even he suspected were not there. “I think it sometimes happens at world championships that you work a lot before the match and you work a lot during the match on openings and such and somehow this makes you work less over the board,” he says. “My approach was very clear there that I didn’t think particularly that I had anything, but I had two hours for the game so I should spend them all looking for whatever chances could be found.” At the post-game press conference, Carlsen is asked whether playing on his 31st birthday affected his approach or mindset. “I would have of course loved to have had a rest day on the eve of my birthday so I could have had at least a token celebration. Apart from that, I would say it’s pretty good. I think I won at least one game in the World Cup against (Farrukh) Amonatov in 2005. And obviously the match in 2016 was decided on my birthday in the tiebreak. It’s going to take a lot for me to have bad reflections of me playing on my birthday, even though I lost to (Wesley) So last year.” “This Bc3 instead of Qb7 is a little bit rare,” says Carlsen moments after stepping out of the studio. “This whole plan, it’s pretty dangerous for him. The computer shows theories in many lines, but practically it’s not so easy. I thought what he went for looked a bit dangerous, but I couldn’t see it so I assume it was just a draw.” Carlsen is asked whether he was frustrated during those long thinks in the endgame. “I wouldn’t say I was frustrated,” he says. “I was just trying and I didn’t find it. It seemed pretty normal.” He also brushes off the notion that he was surprised by Nepomniachtchi’s Petrov: “He played it in the Candidates so it was one of the main openings to prepare for.” Carlsen plays 32. Ne8+ after more than 14 minutes. Nepomniachtchi takes one minute before answering with 32. ... Kg8. It’s the moment of truth for Carlsen: if he retreats his knight we’re looking at a draw by repetition. And that’s what he opts for: 33. Nf6+. That leaves Nepomniachtchi with only one correct move (Kg7), which is a draw. He stops the clock to inform the arbiter before making it on the board and Game 4 is in the books as a draw after 33 moves and two hours and 37 minutes! Carlsen has been inspecting this position for the last 10 minutes. The champion is look for some way, any way to extend what’s been a dry encounter compared to the first three contests. Carlsen finally goes with 30. Ne8+ after 34 minutes. Nepomniachtchi responds with the essentially forced 30. ... Kg8. The Norwegian plays 31. Nf6+ and the challenger answers with 31. ... Kg7. The champion is back on the clock. If he plays Ne8+, we’re likely looking at a draw. That might be his course, rather than complicating matters in search of a winning chance, given the considerable time advantage of more than 67 minutes (and counting) for Nepomniachtchi. Another very long think for Carlsen, 23 minutes and counting. He’s under 45 minutes on the clock with 11 moves until the time control. Carlsen ends up playing 28. Nf6+ and Nepomniachtchi answers with 28. ... Kg7. And The Norwegian immediately opts for 29. g5. He’s playing for a win. The challenger responds with 29. ... a3 after three and a half minutes. Nepomniachtchi plays the automatic 27. ... a4, spending more than seven minutes. Several plausible responses for Carlsen, including Kf1, Nf6+ and g5. Meanwhile, Chess.com’s broadcast transitions to a break with these hot bars from freestyle rapper and YouTuber Harry Mack. Carlsen takes nearly eight minutes before deciding on 27. d5. By declining the draw by repetition (Nf6+), it’s a statement of intent from the world champion that he’s still going to try for the win. “I think personally that there is a trap somewhere and Magnus with his time usage is setting it up,” Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says. Carlsen plays 25. Nf6+ to put black’s king in check after more than 22 minutes of deep thought. Nepomniachtchi runs away from the check with 25. ... Kg7, the only feasible option as Kh8 is losing. Nepomniachtchi returns with 26. Kg8. The engines suggest there’s no way for Carlsen to gain an advantage from this position. Will he play a move that complicates it to perhaps create an opening? Carlsen has been on the clock for 20 minutes and counting. The engines suggest that bringing his knight forward to put white’s king in check is best (Nf6+), though another option is taking white’s pawn on the queenside (Nxb6). Fabiano Caruana, who played the Petrov in the sixth and 11th games of his world championship match with Carlsen three years ago, has been speaking extensively about the opening on Chess.com’s broadcast. “I thought that the most logical thing for Ian would be to play the Berlin,” Caruana says. “That seemed like a natural choice for him in case Magnus were to play 1. e4. But the Petroff is interesting. I really did not expect this.” Nepomniachtchi spends more than 10 minutes before initiating the exchange of dark-squared bishops (21. ... Bxf4 22. Nxf4). An exchange of pawns follows (22. ... Rxc3 23. Nxd5). More quick moves follow (23. ... Rd3 24. Re7 Nf8) and now Carlsen settles in for his first lengthy think of the game. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse evaluates the position as dead even. Incredibly, both players appear to still be in their opening preparation after 19. ... Nd7 20. Ng2 Rfc8 21. Bf4. This is particularly remarkable considering that many of these positions haven’t included many forced moves but several viable options. Nepomniachtchi is on the clock but he’s stepped away from the board. Carlsen’s head is in his hands as he looks over the board, calculating the variations. A quick draw today would might be a half-point on paper, but it would no doubt feel like a setback for Carlsen playing with the favored white pieces. The queens are off the board after the next series of moves (13. ... b6 14. cxd5 cxd5 15. Qb5 Qd7 16. a4 Qxb5 17. axb5). Nepomniachtchi, who’s spent five more minutes of clock in the early stages, plays 17. ... a5. The many early exchanges suggest this encounter will fizzle out to a draw, though Carlsen answers immediately with the unusual 18. Nh4!?. Says grandmaster Judit Polgar in the commentary booth following 18. ... g6 19. g4: “It’s quite amazing how concrete it’s going to become so fast.” Nepomniachtchi takes more than two minutes before playing 8. ... c6. Carlsen quickly answers with 9. Re1 and the challenger answers with 9. ... Bf5. Carlsen then bypasses the more popular Qc2 for 10. Qb3. More quick moves follow: 10. ... Qd7 11. Nc3 Nxc3 12. Bxf5 Qxf5 13. bxc3. Still no major surprises, though Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri notes on the Chess24 broadcast that Carlsen’s last move has historically led to many draws. Carlsen, wearing a white blazer on his 31st birthday, opens with 1. e4 and it’s no Sicilian for Nepomniachtchi, who answers with 1. ... e5. And the challenger is going with the popular, solid Petrov Defence (2. Nf3 Nf6). A minor surprise as he’s not known for playing it, although he did in the Candidates Tournament. The players fly through their opening moves (3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. O-O O-O 8. c4) before Nepomniachtchi steps away from the board. Carlsen will be playing with the white pieces for today’s Game 4. Asked following Sunday’s third game what the difference-maker will be in a match that’s been played on level terms so far, the Norwegian said: “It’s three games in. There’s a lot of time to go and as you saw [on Saturday], it could have easily been a decisive result. Obviously, for each game the most likely result is a draw. Saying otherwise would be quite disingenuous. But any game could explode. Not today.” Will today be the day? Interestingly, Carlsen has not held the lead in the classical stage of a world championship match in more than seven years, since he first defended the title in a 2014 rematch with Vishy Anand. In 2016, he fell behind Sergey Karjakin with a Game 8 defeat before prevailing in Game 10 to force a series of quickfire tie-breakers, which he went on to win. In 2018, he played to 12 consecutive draws with second-ranked Fabiano Caruana before retaining the title on tie-breakers once again. For Monday’s rest day, our Sean Ingle took a closer look at why there are so few women’s players in the upper echelons of chess. There is not a single active woman’s player in the top 100 now that Hou Yifan of China, who is ranked 83rd, is focusing on academia. For Carlsen, the subject was “way too complicated” to answer in a few sentences, but suggested a number of reasons, particularly cultural, were to blame. Some, though, still believe it is down to biology. As recently as 2015 Nigel Short, vice-president of the world chess federation Fide, claimed “men are hardwired to be better chess players than women,” adding: “You have to gracefully accept that.” That claim raises the eyebrows of the greatest female chess player, Judit Polgar, who was ranked as high as No 8 in the world and, amusingly, has a winning record against Short. “It is not down to biology,” she tells the Guardian. “It’s just as possible for a woman to become the best as any guy. But there are so many difficulties and social boundaries for women generally in society. That is what blocks it.” Polgar, who defeated 11 current or former world champions in either rapid or classical chess, including Garry Kasparov and Magnus Carlsen, before retiring in 2014, believes that an early start, encouraging girls to think big, and better teaching are crucial factors. “All champions and big players start to play chess and get familiar with the game at a pretty early age,” says the Hungarian grandmaster, who is now a commentator on the website Chess24. Hello and welcome back for the fourth game of the World Chess Championship. We’re back following Monday’s rest day after draws in Game 1, Game 2 and Game 3 that were notable for longtime champion Magnus Carlsen making early pawn sacrifices in exchange for long-term initiative. In each of those contests, Ian Nepomniachtchi’s opening material advantages ultimately didn’t hold up and he was forced to rely on accurate endgame play to emerge with a result. For those of you just coming aboard, Carlsen, who celebrates his 31st birthday today, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Viswanathan Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, also 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April with a round to spare. It’s the culmination of a rivalry that started nearly two decades ago when they first met across the board as boys at the 2002 European Under-12 Championship in Peniscola, Spain. Notably, Nepomniachtchi enters the title tilt with a winning lifetime record against Carlsen in classical matches (four won, one lost and eight drawn). That makes him unique among today’s top players, even if two of those victories came in youth championships. The best-of-14-games match is taking place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games, as happened in Carlsen’s second and third title defenses). We’re a little more than 40 minutes from today’s first move, so not much longer now. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s his report from Sunday’s third game from Dubai.Every eligible adult in the UK should be offered a Covid booster by the end of January as ministers race to increase protection against the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has announced. “We’re going to be throwing everything at it, to ensure everyone eligible is offered a booster in just over two months,” the prime minister said, adding that he would be getting his own third vaccine on Thursday. He said the government’s aim was for the pace of the rollout to match that seen for earlier courses of the vaccine. “There will be temporary vaccine centres popping up like Christmas trees,” he said. As before, age groups will be invited one at a time, eldest to youngest, to receive their booster. “We’ll move down the cohorts rapidly,” Johnson said. The prime minister was speaking at a Downing Street press conference alongside the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and the chief executive of NHS England, Amanda Pritchard. Shortly before the briefing began, the UK Health Security Agency announced that a further eight cases of the Omicron variant had been discovered in England, bringing the UK total to 22. The prime minister urged the public not to be gloomy about news of the emergence of the new variant, insisting the country was in a much better position with vaccines available. “Right now, our best single defence against Omicron is to get vaccinated and to get boosted,” the prime minister said. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) recommended on Monday that all over-18s be offered a third jab, and the gap between the second and third doses be halved to three months. Javid said: “We’re now able to put our booster programme on steroids, and protect even more people, even more quickly … If we want to give ourselves the chance of a Christmas with our loved ones, the best thing we can do is step up, roll up our sleeves, and get protected when the time comes.” Pritchard said for the time being only those already eligible for a booster, which includes over-40s whose second jab was six months ago, would be able to book an appointment, and it would later be opened more widely. She urged people to wait until they are contacted by the NHS before trying to book. Pritchard said the NHS now has almost 3,000 vaccination sites available across the UK. But she stressed that while the NHS was confident it could meet the end-January target for offering all adults a booster, she warned “it can’t happen overnight”, pointing to the pressures on health service staff.Glowing tributes from across the game of football have been paid to Ray Kennedy – one of the finest players to grace Highbury and Anfield – following his death, aged 70. Kennedy, who was once rejected in his youth by Stanley Matthews at Port Vale, went on to lift three European Cups and five league titles with Liverpool, whom he joined from Arsenal in 1974 having won the league and FA Cup Double in north London three years earlier. Bill Shankly’s final signing at Anfield played almost 600 club games in a distinguished career in which he won every major domestic honour. Following his time in the game, Kennedy was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease in 1984. Born in Seaton Delaval, Northumberland, Kennedy turned professional for Arsenal in November 1968 and broke through as a forward. After his debut in 1969, he scored 71 goals in 212 games at Highbury, top-scoring as the club won the Double in 1971, before Shankly brought him to Merseyside for a club-record fee of £200,000. Kennedy was Shankly’s parting gift to the club as the legendary manager bade farewell to Anfield in July 1974. During a glorious eight years at Liverpool he scored 72 goals in 393 appearances and became a firm favourite with supporters, often timing his runs from midfield to devastating effect. Bob Paisley’s inspired decision to convert him to a left-sided midfielder made him a key component in the Anfield machine, sweeping up league titles and also a Uefa Cup and a League Cup before leaving in January 1982. The previous year he had scored the pivotal away goal in the European Cup semi-final second leg at Bayern Munich. Kennedy started all three of the finals when Liverpool won the European Cup in 1977, 1978 and 1981. Featuring in one of the club’s most dominant midfield units – alongside Graeme Souness, Terry McDermott and Jimmy Case – he was once described by Paisley as “one of Liverpool’s greatest players and probably the most underrated”. Liverpool said in a statement: “The thoughts of everybody at Liverpool FC are with Ray’s family and friends at this sad and difficult time.” Arsenal added via Twitter: “Everyone at Arsenal is greatly saddened to hear of the passing of Ray Kennedy. One of the giants of 71, Ray will be sorely missed by his friends, family and everybody at the club. Rest in peace, Ray.” His career was all the more impressive after an early setback when he was shown the door at Port Vale. Having signed schoolboy forms, Kennedy was let go by Matthews for being “too slow”. He kept the letter informing him of his release and returned to his Northumberland roots to work in a sweet factory and play for the amateur side New Hartley Juniors. “Of course, there is always one lad who slips through the net and for me that was Ray Kennedy, who went on to find fame and fortune with Arsenal, Liverpool and England,” Matthews wrote in his autobiography. “Ray turned out to be a superb player, and all I can say in my defence is he was a late developer!” It was Kennedy who scored the goal away against Tottenham that won the title in 1971, sparking the long-lived chant: “We won the league at White Hart Lane.” The former Liverpool striker John Aldridge paid tribute to Kennedy, tweeting: “Yet another magnificent Ex LFC star has passed away folks. Ray Kennedy what a player and lovely bloke who suffered so much with Parkinson’s disease for most of his life. He will definitely never walk alone. RIP Ray ynwa.” Kennedy’s former captain Phil Thompson tweeted: “More sad news with the passing of Ray, what a great player and such a wonderful teammate RIP pal YNWA.” Ronnie Whelan described his former teammate as “an absolute legend at both Arsenal and Liverpool”, with the midfielder adding “learned so much by watching him play”. Kennedy scored three goals for England, his first on his debut, against Wales in March 1976. A tweet from the national team’s account read: “We are deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Ray Kennedy at the age of 70. Ray won 17 caps for the ThreeLions between 1976 and 1980, scoring three times. All of our thoughts go out to his family, friends and former clubs.” After leaving Liverpool in 1982, Kennedy had spells at Swansea and Hartlepool before he spent a brief time as the player-manager of the Cypriot club Pezoporikos. Following his Parkinson’s diagnosis, a testimonial game between Liverpool and Arsenal was held in 1991 but later that year Kennedy sold his medals and 17 England caps to help raise funds for his care. The city of Liverpool will come together on Wednesday evening before the Merseyside derby to honour a man who always showed courage and fight on the field before taking on another battle with Parkinson’s. As he began the long walk away from Anfield in 1974, Shankly had the final word on Kennedy. “He is big, brave and strong. His signing means that we now have the greatest strength in depth that we have ever had. He fights all the way and he was at the top of my list of my wanted men. I’ve seen him in training and he looks good. He reminds me of Rocky Marciano.”During his two decades at the National Consumer Council, John Ward, who has died aged 83 of heart failure, brought about improvements in practice and law from which many now benefit. John widened the notion of consumer protection beyond its focus on shoppers’ rights, taking in previously neglected areas such as public services. These ranged from simple ideas such as paying utility bills at local post offices (thus helping their survival) and plain-language explanations for tax returns and insurance forms, to setting up consumer organisations for previously underrepresented groups. At the Home Office community development programme set up by Harold Wilson’s Labour government in the 1960s, John developed the blueprint for a community-based advice and advocacy system that became AdviceUK. In the early 70s he worked at the National Council of Social Service (now NCVO, the National Council for Voluntary Organisations), where he persuaded WEA, the Workers’ Educational Association to put on courses in welfare rights, a radical concept for that time, later to be widely adopted. John joined the NCC as head of its social policy unit soon after Shirley Williams, then secretary of state for prices and consumer protection, set it up in 1975 to provide an independent voice for consumers, especially those from a disadvantaged background. For example, local authority housing departments were embarrassed into improving their one-sided tenancy agreements, setting out tenants’ rights and responsibilities in clear language, removing archaic language such as: “The bath shall be used for the purpose for which it is intended.” Further work on private-sector tenancies led to changes in the law so as to prevent the unfair loss of rental deposits paid by tenants, and stricter safety legislation was applied to private houses containing multiple bedsits. During a time of much hostility towards users of social and public services, the NCC investigated the underuse of public services, such as why those most in need of a doctor were often the least likely to want to “trouble” one, and why some of the people most in need of state benefits did not apply for them. The council published the first guide to NHS patients’ rights, including the right to ask for a second opinion. Other surveys showed how the most vulnerable people, such as patients with dementia and children in local authority care, needed to be listened to. Running through this work were the themes of representation, information and advice. John instigated and supported a range of representative and advisory bodies such as the Tenant Participation Advisory Service, to help council tenant involvement in the running of estates, pulling together the Money Advice Association and advisory groups for consumers caught up in county court proceedings. He chaired the Greater London Citizens Advice Bureaux (1985-91) and the London Advice Services Alliance (1990-96). One spectacular success came form his work with the Plain English Campaign, founded in 1979 and led by the redoubtable Chrissie Maher, with the backing of the NCC, which hosted, backed and publicised annual plain-English awards, dishing out booby prizes, the “Golden Bull”, to the worst gobbledygook offenders and special awards for the best writers of plain English. The eminent judge Lord Denning handed out the prizes in 1982 and himself nominated the Home Office for a Golden Bull for obscure drafting of legislation. (They declined the invitation.) The media coverage of the awards swiftly changed official practice despite some diehard reactions such as that from one official who told John, in all sincerity: “But surely people will feel patronised if we use such simple wording!” In 1981, the government asked Sir Derek Rayner to review official forms, which ultimately resulted in 58,000 being rewritten and simplified. Commercial bodies followed suit. Three former prime ministers – Margaret Thatcher, John Major and Tony Blair – all praised the campaign. Such relentless work eventually rubbed off on the Major government, in the form of the Citizen’s Charter, which set performance standards for individual services, with redress systems for consumers if things went wrong. John was born in the North Yorkshire village of Hudswell, near Richmond, son of Elsie (nee Johnson) and William Ward, a local postmaster. He began his education at the one-room village school. After grammar school and national service as a psychiatric nurse, he obtained a social science degree from Birmingham University during the 60s and won a Fulbright scholarship to study for a master’s in social work at Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania. After retiring from NCC in 1996, John returned to his Yorkshire roots, acquiring a home in Richmond, where he could indulge his passion for gardening and for local community regeneration activities, still participative in his later years. John’s first marriage, to Helen Ogilvy-Webb, ended in divorce. In 2005 he married Caroline Woodroffe. Caroline had run the Brook Advisory Centres, the first in the country to provide contraceptive advice to young unmarried people. The couple divided their time between Richmond and their home in Highgate, north London, entertaining their many friends at both, until John’s failing health necessitated their remaining in London. He is survived by Caroline, his son, Matthew, from his first marriage, two grandchildren, and by Caroline’s children, Jessica and Nick. • John Ward, community worker and consumer advocate, born 13 October 1938; died 13 October 2021Britain’s next government will be some kind of coalition. That can be said with confidence, not because the outcome of the next general election is predictable, but because all governments, even those consisting of one party, are some kind of coalition. Boris Johnson’s administration consists of the traditional Conservative party, with both liberal and authoritarian tendencies, fused to a newer radical nationalist movement that, confusingly, uses the same name and has the same leader. An alliance that came together for the pursuit of Brexit is struggling to cohere around any subsequent governing purpose. Its electoral base straddles economic, geographical and social fault lines. Tory MPs make conflicting and incompatible demands of the prime minister. If Labour were to win a majority at the next election it would suffer from equivalent structural deformities. Regaining seats lost in the rout of 2019 requires a demonstration that the party is no longer what it was under Jeremy Corbyn. That strategic imperative is obvious to anyone who has listened to the ex-Labour voters who need coaxing back. But it is rejected by a chorus on the left that prefers continuity Corbynism, not so much as a formula for electoral recovery (it would be the opposite), but as a soothing balm for wounded socialist self-esteem. That tension was on display in the reaction to Keir Starmer’s shadow cabinet reshuffle on Monday. Younger MPs who have proven themselves as media performers were promoted. Wes Streeting and Bridget Phillipson will speak on health and education respectively. Yvette Cooper is now shadow home secretary. Unlike nearly all of her colleagues, she has served in a real cabinet. It was a much-needed transfusion of political heft to the frontbench. But to the continuity Corbynites it was a rightwing revanche, executed with headline-poaching spite on the very morning of a speech by Angela Rayner, deputy leader and the old regime’s ambassador in the shadow cabinet. There is no escaping this fault line. If, by some combination of dogged opposition and government implosion, Starmer should find himself in Downing Street, the Labour faction that mistrusts his methods would waste no time complaining that victory had been bought at too high a price in moral compromise. The left has been kept busy protesting against a Tory prime minister, but would adapt easily to complaining about betrayal by a Labour one. Starmer could stun his critics into silence by winning a commanding majority, but a majority of one would require more than 120 gains and no losses. Nothing about the lay of the political land suggests it is poised to slide on that scale, which makes the more feasible route to No 10 look like collaboration with other parties. MPs know it, but never say it aloud because it sounds like defeatism. The members have understood it, too, which is why a large majority of constituency delegates supported a motion backing electoral reform at the party’s annual conference. Their voice was drowned out by trade union bloc votes. That reflects institutional reluctance to accept that the party’s exile from power has causes more complex than a sticky pendulum that has favoured the Tories as if by some mechanical fault with the public, and will eventually swing leftwards again. The obstacle is not so much a fetish for the existing voting system as emotional attachment to the idea that Labour and Conservative are equal contenders in a title race, while everyone else is scrapping in lower divisions. That is broadly true, especially given the presidential slant of election campaigns. Only the leaders of the two biggest parties can claim to be candidates for No 10. But it is also true that power-sharing is a normal feature of British politics. The Scottish government is a coalition of Nationalists and Greens. In Wales, Labour has signed a cooperation agreement with Plaid Cymru (an arrangement on which Starmer has been pointedly silent). In local government, “no overall control” is a routine outcome requiring cross-party deals. Only in Westminster is the absence of a decisive win treated as an offence against the natural order. In a hung parliament, the gap between the largest party and the majority it needs is abhorred as an electoral obscenity that must be covered to protect the dignity of the constitution. And yet two of the last four elections – 2010 and 2017 – have produced such a result. It is possible that Boris Johnson’s 2019 victory marks the end of volatility, but just as likely that his pro-Brexit coalition is the temporary patch, beneath which allegiances are as volatile as ever. Nigel Farage has not renounced politics and could mount a challenge to the Tories from the populist right. Greens and Liberal Democrats could benefit if moderate Conservatives want to flee somewhere other than Labour. Scots who support independence are reluctant to vote for parties that don’t. That is a problem for Starmer whose path to power gets a whole lot steeper if it has to be paved with only English seats. He insists there could be no deal with Nicola Sturgeon, which is a position that sounds sturdier now, when no one is testing it, than it might in the heat of a general election campaign with polls all pointing to a hung parliament. It goes against the grain of English political culture, and Labour pride, to accept that the shortest route to power involves evicting the Tories by some method of collaboration with other parties. There is a longer route, quietly mapped by many in the Labour machine, that involves Starmer losing an election, but whittling down the Tory majority in the process. A successor then gets a clearer shot at the prize. Neither route is easy, but the incumbent leader has an interest in preferring the one that doesn’t use him as a disposable electoral battering ram. It is risky for Labour to admit that it is in the coalition business with smaller parties, but risky also to pretend that it is not, and the public might prove surprisingly receptive to the idea. The myth that a Commons majority insures the nation against chaotic government is daily being debunked by Johnson. Besides, you have to win power before refusing to share it. Since Labour is now in its second decade of opposition, it can ill afford to guard so jealously something it doesn’t even have. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistThe water regulator has raised a red flag over the financial health of three of Britain’s biggest water companies as concern grows over the industry’s poor record on tackling flooding, leaks and pollution. Ofwat called out Southern Water, Yorkshire Water and SES Water for “weak levels of financial resilience” and levels of customer service which lag behind the rest of the industry. David Black, the regulator’s interim chief executive, said: “It is vital that water companies are financially resilient and also that they are transparent about their financial decisions. On both fronts, they have work to do.” Ofwat’s report into the financial health and service levels of water companies in England and Wales found that Southern Water, which received a record £90m pollution fine earlier this year, has one of the lowest credit rating scores in the sector and was one of the worst performing companies in its service delivery report. The company, which supplies water to 4.6 million customers across Sussex, Kent, Hampshire and the Isle of Wight, received £1bn pound equity injection from the controversial infrastructure investor Macquarie earlier this year, alongside a promise to a further invest £2bn over the next four years. Macquarie is best known in the water sector as the owner of Thames Water between 2006 and 2016, a period in which it extracted hefty shareholder dividends while the company’s debt soared and its customer service deteriorated. The regulator warned that Southern Water and Yorkshire Water were both carrying debt piles, including liabilities such as financial derivatives and its defined benefit pension scheme, which would be higher than the regulated value of the companies. A spokesperson for Southern Water said Ofwat’s report was undertaken before the Macquarie investment which would allow the company to increase its financial resilience and increase investment to £2bn. It added that it was “on track to reduce pollution incidents by 80% by 2025 and to reduce 80% of storm overflows by 2030”. Yorkshire Water, which supplies water to 2.3m households and 130,000 business customers, withdrew its corporate credit rating from the Moody’s rating agency earlier this year. Ofwat warned that this could result in the loss of information about a company’s financial resilience, which it considers important for regulatory purposes. The water company rebuffed the regulator’s findings in a statement which claimed that its finances are “robust and resilient and pose no risk to customers”. “In recent years we have taken a number of steps to make our finances more transparent and were the first company to announce the removal of offshore structures,” the statement added. SES Water, which supplies water to about 735,000 people in parts of Surrey, Kent and south London, appeared on the regulator’s list of financial weak water companies and its list of companies which are failing to deliver good service for their customers. A spokesperson for SES Water said it maintained “strong levels of financial resilience” and would continue to make improvements to overall performance but will also review Ofwat’s report and “respond accordingly in our discussions with them in the coming months”.A conservative Canadian MP has accused the country’s environment minister of breaching parliamentary protocol after his bicycle appeared on screen during a hybrid session of parliament. Conservative MP Ed Fast said minister Steven Guilbeault’s purple bicycle, hung on the wall behind him, was a blatant attempt to “make a statement about his environmental cred”. “Mr Speaker, the point is, there’s a rule that you cannot do indirectly what you cannot do directly. What the minister has done is blatantly use a prop because he’s now doing it from the safety of some other office,” said Fast. Guilbeault is a former Greenpeace activist who once scaled Toronto’s CN tower to unfurl a banner that read “Canada and Bush Climate Killers” and was arrested soon after. His appointment as minister of environment and climate change has drawn the ire of Conservatives, who accuse him of being too radical and threatening to the country’s oil sector. But Fast’s comments about the bicycle prompted derision in the House. New Democratic party member Daniel Blaikie rose in the House of Commons to say “only a Conservative could see a bicycle as partisan symbol.” A member of the Bloc Québécois joked that Guilbeault probably attended parliament virtually because he had a flat tyre. Guilbeault later addressed the issue on Twitter, asking if he should also remove his “dangerous props” like books and plants. “The bike has been there long before we started doing virtual parliament. In fact, it has also been there for months as I was taking questions as heritage minister. Strange that after almost a year, it’s become an issue,” he wrote. “Honestly, I didn’t have ‘triggered by bicycles’ on my bingo card here,” tweeted Max Fawcett, a political commentator, as the row shifted to social media. The vehicle in question, a single-speed steel frame hand-built by the legendary Montreal-based Cycles Marinoni, drew praise from online bicycle connoisseurs. Speaker Anthony Rota told lawmakers earlier in the day that the use of props was “contrary to our rules and practices” but did not comment on the appropriateness of bicycles.Adam Peaty, the British Olympic gold medal swimmer, has said he believes there is “not enough funding, not at all, and not in any sport” and called on government to do more to support grassroots activity in the UK. Addressing MPs at a session of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee on Tuesday, Peaty joined the Paralympians Lauren Rowles and Ellie Robinson in speaking bluntly about stresses across every level of sport, and the consequences for individuals and society that result. “I just think there needs to be more support as a whole,” Peaty said. “There’s not enough funding for the grassroots, not at all, not in any sport. It’s seen as people doing it for fun. [Grassroots] should have a greater share of the pie, especially around the teenage years.” Asked by MPs where he thought increased funding should come from, Peaty gave an amused response. “Government, like everything. The investment [in sport compared to] other areas from government is minuscule. I think you can find the money, you always do. “It comes down to money and giving it to the right places. Giving it to the leisure centres that are closing at an alarming rate. [If not] it’s going to cost you so much more in the long run because sport gives you such health benefits, such mental health benefits.” In Peaty’s and Robinson’s sport of swimming, as many as 40% of English pools are set to close by the end of the decade according to research by Swim England. Those that remain are often ageing and inaccessible to people with disabilities. Robinson endorsed Peaty’s observation but said: “Making leisure centres affordable is really important too. If you create shiny new facilities but the price of going for a swim is extortionately high then you’re excluding a lot of the population. We need to be able to make sport accessible for all incomes.” Called to the committee as part of an investigation into the future of the national lottery, the athletes were also asked about the funding they receive through the lottery-supported Athlete Performance Award [APA]. Rowles, a rower who has won gold at the past two Paralympic Games, argued there is extreme instability even at the elite level. “The APA is granted by UK Sport and is completely based on your performance as an athlete”, she said. “You get your funding granted for a year essentially, but if you retire or are pulled up on a disciplinary issue you will come off the funding. You [also] have to continue to perform. If you are gold medallists you receive the top level of funding but … if I don’t do as well in a year or get injured my funding significantly drops.” Rowles argued that the APA system leaves governing bodies, and UK sport, with no accountability regarding the welfare of their athletes. “We’re not classed as employees”, she said. “We’re contractors … they will dispose of you when they need to and they will invest in you when they need to. It very much feels like that. We are not employees, it is not a relationship, we are temporary things.” Robinson said a reliance on the APA was especially pronounced for para-athletes. “National lottery makes up 60% of funding”, she said. “It’s very important for para athletes because our sport is young and we don’t attract the same level of sponsorship. We can’t make a living from swimming so we also need the money to support our next step.”It is the most mythic animal in the ocean: a white sperm whale, filmed on Monday by Leo van Toly, watching from a Dutch merchant ship off Jamaica. Moving gracefully, outrageously pale against the blue waters of the Caribbean, for any fans of Moby-Dick, Herman Melville’s book of 1851, this vision is a CGI animation come to life. Sperm whales are generally grey, black or even brown in appearance. Hal Whitehead, an expert on the species, told the Guardian: “I don’t think I’ve ever seen a fully white sperm whale. I have seen ones with quite a lot of white on them, usually in patches on and near the belly.” Only a handful of pure white whales have been recorded this century. The last one to be photographed appeared off Sardinia in 2015, an individual that had not been seen for nine years before that. A white whale is not necessarily albino. Some have a condition known as leucism, an irregular distribution of melanin pigment in the skin that can affect many animals, from the common crow to orcas and dolphins. True albinos have pink eyes, and since this rare film was taken at a distance, it is difficult to diagnose the animal’s condition. A celebrated albino humpback whale, Migaloo, has been seen off the Australian coast since 1991. Melville’s white whale bit off Captain Ahab’s leg and sent the maddened seafarer halfway round the world in pursuit of it, seeking revenge. In the book, the whale becomes a shapeshifter, able to be present in more than one place at the same time. Ahab invests his cetacean foe with a sense of malignity – but Melville’s tale makes clear there is only one animal on Earth who exhibits evil, and that is his own species. The author goes further, seeing the whale’s whiteness as something eerie in itself, as he compares it with the great white shark or the polar bear. “It was the whiteness of the whale that appalled me,” his narrator, Ishmael, remarks. Many critics believe Melville was using the whiteness of the whale to critique the widespread abuse of enslaved people in the North American states. Even as he wrote his book, the author was aware of the potential violence that the struggle for abolition would bring to his country. Sperm whales, which can reach 18 metres in length, have the largest teeth of any animal. They also boast the biggest brain, use different dialects in their communicative clicks from one group to another and possess an intergenerational culture that is passed on matrilineally. Their sense of social expression and cohesion defines them: one feels this when in the water with them, as their sonorous clicks permit them to communicate with one another over great distances. This highly unusual sighting of an almost heraldic beast speaks to the paradoxical fragility of whales - the largest animals on earth, yet whose fates we hold in our hands. Video courtesy of Leo van Toly, with thanks to Annemarie van den Berg of SOS Dolfijn, and Jeroen HoekendijkThe Tennessee education department declined to investigate the first complaint under a new state law that bans some teaching approaches to issues of race and bias – a complaint that included a book about the Rev Martin Luther King Jr and the March on Washington. The bill, passed in the spring, includes among its targets critical race theory, or CRT, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. CRT is rarely taught below college level but Republicans across the US have exploited fears about it for electoral gain. The Tennessee complaint was filed by Robin Steenman, chair of the Williamson county chapter of Moms for Liberty, a conservative parents group, the Tennesseean reported. The 11-page notice alleged that a literary curriculum, Wit and Wisdom, in use by Williamson county schools and at least 30 other districts, presented a “heavily biased agenda” that caused children to “hate their country, each other and/or themselves”. The group took issue with several books adapted for younger readers on topics including King’s leadership of the civil rights movement of the 1960s, the integration of schools in California by the activist Sylvia Mendez and the autobiography of Ruby Bridges, the first Black child to desegregate an all-white primary school in Louisiana. “The classroom books and teacher manuals reveal both explicit and implicit Anti-American, Anti-White and Anti-Mexican teaching,” the complaint claimed. “The relentless nature of how these divisive stories are taught, the lack of historical context and difference in perspective, and the manipulative pedagogy all work together to amplify and sow feelings of resentment, shame of one’s skin color, and/or fear.” The complaint also alleged that the curriculum “implies to second-grade children that people of color continue to be oppressed by an oppressive ‘angry, vicious, scary, mean, loud, violent, [rude], and [hateful]’ white population”. In a letter obtained by the Tennessean, the state education department explained its decision not to investigate. Officials said the complaint concerned the 2020-2021 school year, but the department was only authorized to investigate complaints from 2021-2022. Officials also said the complaint was filed outside the time frame required and did not follow outlined process. It was also filed before Tennessee had adopted a process for how to handle complaints. “Please note that in declining to investigate these claims, the department has not made a determination regarding the merits of these allegations,” the letter read. “We encourage you to work with the Williamson county school district to resolve the issues and concerns related to your complaint and ensure compliance with state law.” The curriculum, Wit and Wisdom, is still used in Williamson county schools and in neighboring districts. A spokesperson for Great Minds, the company that produces it, told the Tennessean in July the curriculum did not include any concept banned by the new legislation. As of 22 November, no appeals had been filed against the first ruling. A Williamson county committee is reviewing the curriculum and other content flagged by parents. Results are expected in December.A Texas man was sentenced to nine years in prison after fraudulently obtaining $1.6m in Covid-19 relief loans and spending it on a Lamborghini sports car and other luxury items. In March 2020, then president Donald Trump signed a $2tn emergency relief and spending bill to alleviate economic stresses faced by individuals, businesses and healthcare facilities. The DoJ has since prosecuted more than 150 defendants in more than 95 cases for attempts to defraud the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). In Texas, Lee Price III, 30, pleaded guilty in September to charges of wire fraud and money laundering, according to the US Department of Justice. Price submitted multiple fraudulent PPP loan applications with banks across the US and on behalf of three entities. The DoJ did not specify how Price was connected to the companies. Price also submitted fraudulent tax records and applied for a loan using the name of an individual who died shortly before the application was submitted, the DoJ said in a statement. Price sought more than $2.6m in loans and received more than $1.6m. According to prosecutors, he bought a $233,000 2019 Lamborghini Urus and a $14,000 Rolex watch and spent $2,000 on a trip to a Houston strip club. He also used government money to buy a Ford F-350 truck and pay off a loan on a property. The DoJ and law enforcement partners seized more than $700,000 of the funds Price obtained. According to officials, more than $75m has been seized back from fraudulent PPP claims. Some cases have made national headlines. In March, another Texas man pleaded guilty to orchestrating a fraudulent scheme to obtain approximately $24.9m in PPP loans by submitting 15 fraudulent applications. Dinesh Sah, 55, obtained more than $17m and splashed out on luxury cars and homes. In May, a Massachusetts pizza parlor owner fraudulently obtained more than $660,000 and used the loan to buy an alpaca farm. Dana McIntyre, 57, also bought at least two vehicles – including a 1950 Hudson – and weekly airtime for a cryptocurrency-themed radio show that he hosted. His case is ongoing. If convicted, he faces up to 40 years in prison. In Price’s case, his lawyer, Tom Berg, told the Washington Post: “Mr Price hopes that others will learn from his reckoning that there is no easy money. “He has the balance of the 110-month sentence to reflect, repent and rebuild his misspent life.”Éric Zemmour, a controversial French far-right TV pundit who has convictions for inciting racial hatred, has declared he will run for president next spring, claiming he wants to “save” traditional France from “disappearing”. In a 10-minute video posted on social media, Zemmour sat at a desk reading a speech in front of an old-fashioned microphone, designed to look like Charles de Gaulle’s famous June 1940 broadcast to Nazi-occupied France – provoking anger from the traditional Gaullist right. To a Beethoven soundtrack, the video jumped to unexplained clips of rioting and CCTV footage of fights, as well as women with headscarves, Black men on the Métro, sports players taking the knee and prayers in the street. Zemmour said: “It’s no longer time to reform France, but to save it. That’s why I have decided to stand in the presidential election.” Footage of the Palace of Versailles and clips of the films of Joan of Arc and Napoleon illustrated what Zemmour deemed the former glory of France. French media reported that at least one film company was investigating the legal issue of rights to use certain footage. Zemmour, a former newspaper columnist who has no political party and no election experience, has been attacked by historians for claiming the Nazi collaborator Marshal Philippe Pétain saved French Jews rather than aiding their deportation to death camps. He has been described by the French justice minister as a dangerous racist and Holocaust denier. Human rights groups and anti-racism organisations have condemned his presence on the political scene. His latest trial on charges of incitement to racial hatred opened this month over a television appearance last year when he called unaccompanied child migrants “thieves, killers and rapists”. His official announcement that he is joining the presidential race comes after widespread media coverage and a meteoric rise in opinion polls this autumn – when some showed he could make it to the final round against the president, Emmanuel Macron. But polls in recent weeks have shown his position beginning to slip. A Harris Interactive poll of voting intentions published on Tuesday, which surveyed people before Zemmour confirmed his candidacy, showed him down three to four percentage points at about 13% for the first round of the presidential election in April. Opinion surveys have shown that although he could take voters from the far-right Marine Le Pen and the traditional right Les Républicains party, he was considered by voters as not having presidential standing or competence. This weekend he was photographed giving the middle finger to a protester in Marseille, which led critics on the right to round on him for being impulsive. On a recent tour to promote his latest book on the supposed decline of the nation, Zemmour claimed immigration and Islam would destroy the country and warned of a “war of races”. At book signings, he has argued that the “white, heterosexual male” was under threat from ethnic minorities and a so-called “gay lobby”. Zemmour’s election announcement did not feature any concrete proposals or propositions – he has said he believes a president’s role is to give a “vision” and not get into fine details. He must still gather 500 signatures from elected officials in order to stand, as well as raise funding – both of which could prove difficult. Fabien Roussel, the French Communist party’s presidential candidate said he would field a parliamentary resolution this week seeking to make it impossible for anyone convicted of inciting racial hatred to run for election. The government spokesperson Gabriel Attal dismissed Zemmour as a kind of counterfeit Trump. Sébastien Chenu, from Le Pen’s far-right National Rally party, which could lose voters to Zemmour, said: “We don’t see him bringing anything new.” Zemmour’s announcement was deliberately made just before Nicolas Sarkozy’s Les Républicains begins a four-day internal party vote on Wednesday to choose its candidate for president.Trevor Noah Trevor Noah returned to the post-Thanksgiving Daily Show with concerning global health news: the discovery of Covid’s Omicron variant, which preliminary evidence suggests is more transmissible than previous variants. “I understand the frustration of facing yet another new variant,” said Noah. “I mean, how did that happen after everything we did? For two years now, people, we wore masks – for some of the time. We social distanced, when it was convenient. And like half of us got vaccinated. What more is it going to take?!” Though the World Health Organization has declared Omicron a cause for concern, there’s still much that’s unknown about the variant, such as how long it’s been around, if it causes more severe illness, or if it could evade vaccines. “We know less about this variant than your grandmother knows about Jojo Siwa,” Noah remarked. Yet skittish governments have reacted swiftly, imposing travel restrictions on South Africa, where Omicron was first sequenced, and several neighboring countries. “It gives us time to take more actions,” Joe Biden said of US travel bans. “To move quicker, to make sure that people understand: you have to get your vaccine.” “Yes, if you give America just a couple more weeks, surely all the anti-vaxxers will finally come around and get their shots,” Noah deadpanned. Though he understood the US rationale – “if you can slow down the spread of Omicron, even a little bit, then you have time to research it, you have time to work on new vaccines, and you have time to consult with Joe Rogan on a treatment plan,” he joked – Noah explained that, as a South African, “I think this travel ban is total bullshit, I really do.” Omicron has already been identified in a dozen countries around the world – “it’s everywhere from Hong Kong to Israel to Spain, so why aren’t you banning travel from all those countries too?” he wondered. “Only the African countries? What’s the difference between the African countries and – ohhh,” he joked. “Don’t forget about the costs of this action, too,” he added. “Because you do realize that other countries are paying attention, and they realize that if they’re going to get punished for telling the world about new variants, they’re going to stop telling the world whenever their scientists discover new variants.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert celebrated Cyber Monday, AKA the online shopping day of the year. “It’s the highlight of the holiday season: children lie awake in their beds listening for the click click of their mom entering promo codes,” he said. “And it might be hard to find the perfect gift this season because the supply chain is still a mess.” Due to concern over delivery times, many holiday shoppers are stockpiling their favorite gifts. “That’s why really smart shoppers don’t wait till Black Friday – they start trampling people weeks ago,” Colbert joked. One survey found that 20% of shoppers plan to order more gifts in case some orders are delayed or canceled. “So if you’re doing the 12 days of Christmas, be safe and double your order,” said Colbert. “That’s 16 maids a-milking, that’s 20 lords a-leaping, and forget about 12 drummers drumming – just hire the Texas A&amp;M marching band.” The host quoted a retail expert who described the market as: “We see a consumer who is anxious to spend … They are eager to shop and anxious about the execution.” “Coincidentally, ‘eager to shop and anxious about the execution’ was also the title of Marie Antoinette’s memoir,” Colbert quipped. Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel also discussed the Omicron variant. “Experts are hoping it ends up like the second season of Tiger King, where everybody talks about it but nobody actually experiences it,” he noted. “But of course, the right wingnuts have a theory on this. Their theory is that the variant is some kind of ploy concocted by the Democrats to help them win elections.” The former White House physician Dr Ronny Jackson, now a Republican congressman from Texas, tweeted that Omicron heralded the arrival of the “Midterm Election Variant”. “Let me get this straight, Dr Ronny: Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi developed this variant to encourage Democrats to vote by mail, is that how it goes?” Kimmel marveled. “Seems like maybe you’re giving them too much credit. You think Democrats are that organized? They can’t even get Joe Manchin to support maternity leave, I don’t think they’re creating viruses.”MPs have approved tougher Covid rules that came into force overnight making masks mandatory in more places in England and changing isolation requirements due to concern over the Omicron variant. Parliament had 28 days from the new regulations coming into effect to formally endorse the plans announced by the prime minister, Boris Johnson, over the weekend, designed to limit the spread of the newly discovered variant, which some scientists fear could be much more transmissible and resistant to vaccines. The first measure, making the wearing of face coverings mandatory in shops and on public transport, was passed by 434 votes to 24. It will expire on 20 December 2021 – shortly after parliament breaks up for the Christmas recess. The second measure, which will force close contacts of a positive Covid case carrying the Omicron variant to isolate for 10 days regardless of their vaccine status, amends existing regulations on isolation, due to expire in mid-March 2022. It was passed by 431 votes to 36. Among the dozens of Conservative rebels were Sir Graham Brady, who chairs the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers, Steve Baker, the deputy chair of the Covid Recovery Group, and the former cabinet minister Esther McVey. They were joined by three DUP MPs. Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister, said Omicron was an “emerging threat, one that is familiar but not yet well known” and called the measures “proportionate, precautionary and balanced”. There were eight more cases of the Omicron variant discovered in the UK on Tuesday, taking the total in England to 13 and to nine in Scotland. Alex Norris, the shadow public health minister, said it was “right to be acting urgently” but that it was sad to be debating the measures “after the fact”, adding parliamentary approval of Covid rules was vital to instil public confidence. Some Conservative MPs were worried that the government had said people would be told to isolate for simply a “suspected” case of close contact with someone who had Omicron, without adequately defining what suspected meant. Brady raised “serious concerns” about the “efficacy of what is being proposed”, and warned against “mission creep”. Steve Brine, a former health minister, said the isolation rule change “bothers me a great deal more” than extending the use of masks. He said if a child in a class of 30 was a suspected close contact of someone with the Omicron variant, he feared that would mean all remaining members of the class would also have to stay at home. He said: “We’re not just looking at a pingdemic in our economy and in our businesses, we’re looking at a pingdemic that’s going to devastate education again.” He also said there was “an element of the Salem witch trials” about the government’s failure to define a “suspected” Omicron case, and that he was concerned about “the chilling effect” of the regulations on people’s behaviour. Craig Mackinlay, another Tory MP, said it was “madness” to move through a cycle of restrictions, vaccines and accompanying freedoms, followed by the emergence of variants and new restrictions. The former government chief whip Mark Harper also voiced concern that the stricter rules on face masks could be extended when parliament was in recess, and said it would be unacceptable for ministers to do so “by decree”, calling for the Commons to be recalled to vote on any such measures. Other Tory backbenchers voiced concern the measures approved on Tuesday were a “gateway to lockdown over Christmas”. Johnson has promised they will be reviewed three weeks from his announcement on Saturday.The daughter of the founder of the Spanish retail giant Inditex, which owns the high street chains Zara, Bershka and Massimo Dutti, has been named as the company’s next chair in the culmination of a “generational handover process”. Marta Ortega, 37, the daughter of Amancio Ortega, 85, the majority shareholder of the world’s largest fashion retailer and Spain’s richest man with an estimated £53bn fortune, will be installed as head of the board from 1 April. Ortega, who has worked at the company for 15 years starting out as a shop assistant at a Bershka shop on London’s Kings Road, said: “I have always said I would dedicate my life to building upon my parents’ legacy, looking to the future but learning from the past and serving the company, our shareholders and our customers. “I have lived and breathed this company since my childhood, and I have learned from all the great professionals I have worked with over the last 15 years,” she said. The surprise stock exchange announcement was intended to clear up uncertainty surrounding the company’s succession plan, but some analysts said her elevation was premature. Shares in the company dropped 6% on the news. Ortega, who has most recently been in charge of Zara’s brand image and campaigns including Charlotte Gainsbourg by Zara, will replace Pablo Isla who was appointed chair in 2011 replacing Amancio Ortega himself. Isla, who has been credited with leading Inditex’s global expansion into Spain’s largest company with a €88bn (£75bn) market value and almost 7,000 stores, said now was the right time to make the change as the company’s sales recovered to pre-pandemic levels. “These changes that we are announcing today are very well thought out changes, which are part of a process within the company and we understand that now is the right time to address this new stage,” Isla said in a video news conference on Tuesday. “With the changes … we are confident that the company will continue to develop successfully.” Inditex also announced that Oscar García Maceiras, currently Inditex’s general counsel and secretary of the board, will take over immediately as chief executive. Many see Ortega as the natural choice to succeed her father, who founded the company with his ex-wife Rosalía Mera in Galicia in 1975 and is still widely referred to as the “the Boss” despite officially retiring in 2011. However, some analysts raised concerns that she may be taking the reins too soon. “We think that the changes are bad news for Inditex,” the Spanish investment firm Alantra said. “We would have expected a more orderly and smoother transition period, with Isla supervising in a non-executive role.” The broker Kepler said the reshuffle was “moderately negative”, saying it was a big change to make during the pandemic. “We believe that the timing is not the best,” the broker said. “We believe that both Marta Ortega and the chief executive, Oscar Maceiras, have a lot to prove when it comes to their ability to run this big monster in the middle of the Covid crisis.” Marta Ortega has said she first fell in love with fashion as a teenager when she went behind the scenes at a Zara shoot with Kate Moss in Barcelona. She was educated at a Swiss boarding school, from which she took weekend trips to compete in equestrian Grand Prix show-jumping events. Ortega, who still takes part in amateur competitions, recalled in an interview recently that her billionaire father only allowed her to compete in the events if she maintained high grades. After studying business management in London, she got a shop assistant job at Bershka on Kings Road. “The first week, I thought I was not going to survive,” she told the Wall Street Journal. “But then you get kind of addicted to the store. Some people never want to leave. It’s the heart of the company.”My son, Douglas Boyes, who has died suddenly aged 25, was a well-respected entomologist whose groundbreaking research led to new insights into the impact of light pollution on insects. Born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire, to me, an NHS manager, and my husband, Simon, an ornithologist, Douglas grew up in mid-Wales, becoming fascinated by moths at the age of 12 on a Field Studies Council (FSC) course. At 16, he became the youngest county butterfly recorder, a voluntary position with Butterfly Conservation. After Welshpool high school, he studied at Brasenose College, Oxford, graduating with a first-class degree in biological sciences. His undergraduate project on moths in bird nests resulted in Douglas becoming a nationally recognised expert in the tineid moth group, which includes clothes moths, and he recently pioneered the recording of the ultrasounds of these tiny insects. Continuing at Oxford, he earned a distinction for his MSc in biodiversity, conservation and management, and won the Wallace prize for his dissertation on several trend-bucking moth species whose numbers are actually increasing. At the time of his death, Douglas was a PhD student at the UK Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, researching the impact of light pollution on moths. This work gave him the opportunity to combine his exceptional field skills with scientific investigation. His recent paper in Science Advances, outlining the detrimental impacts of LED streetlights on caterpillars, was reported on by media around the world, including in the Guardian. Devon and Norfolk councils have already changed their streetlight policies because of his work. Life for Douglas was never quiet. Besides his PhD research, he was undertaking a comprehensive survey of the moths of Oxford University’s Wytham Woods, and collaborating with the Darwin Tree of Life project to sequence the genomes of UK moth species. He was reviewing the impacts of invasive non-native moths for a global assessment for an intergovernmental policy platform. He was also involved with the long-running Rothamsted Insect Survey, responsible for identifying the moth catches from one of their traps. This summer he had taught butterfly and moth identification for the FSC, coming full circle, and had been asked by a UK tour company to lead butterfly study tours in Europe. Douglas had an outstanding talent for communicating science and natural history, engaging countless people through his Twitter account, talks, interviews and blogs. He was particularly proud of his blog criticising “Obsessive Tidiness Disorder”, which urged the public to leave messy areas for wildlife. Determined and fearless, he was generous with his expertise, and popular with colleagues. One called him “an amazing friend, brilliant scientist and extremely fun man”. Douglas took his own life after suffering from depression. He is survived by Simon and me, and his husband, Jacob, whom he met in the Oxford Botanical Gardens in 2015 and married the following year.Congratulations to the Republic of Barbados for having the confidence and maturity to dispense with the Ruritanian nonsense of monarchy (Report, 30 November). I live in hope that one day we will see the same thing happen here. Tim Barker Eastington, Gloucestershire • Dr Brigid Purcell is correct: ink freezes in sub-zero temperatures (Letters, 29 November). This is why Edwardian-era Antarctic explorers used pencils for writing records once they had left the warmth of the ship or base hut. See the British Library’s website for a photograph of Robert Falcon Scott’s final journal entry, and you will see that those famous last words, “For God’s sake look after our people”, were written in pencil. Karen May London • Marina Hyde rightfully identified Archie Hamilton in his heyday as a contender (Britain, the Stupidest MP contest is back. But who will get your vote?, 26 November). But spare a thought for the voters of Epsom and Ewell in finding that his successor was Chris Grayling. Neither, however, seems to have the necessary level of stupidity to qualify for Johnson’s government. Sam Philps Epsom, Surrey • Marina Hyde asks “Who will get your vote?” Step forward, Nadine Dorries. The competition is closed to further entries. Rod Price Banbury, Oxfordshire • Nick Fletcher MP is worried that young people are no longer seeing appropriate gender-specific role models (Report, 25 November).What is his concern, when they actually have Boris Johnson and Priti Patel to exalt? Graeme Innes-Johnstone Elland, West Yorkshire • The letter above from Karen May was amended on 1 December 2021 to restore the words “once they had left the warmth of the ship or base hut”, which had been lost in the editing process.Britain’s foreign secretary has joined a last-minute push to urge Nato allies to block the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, warning that Moscow would exploit its position if European nations became reliant on it for energy. Liz Truss, at her first Nato foreign ministers meeting in Riga, also warned that Russia would be making a strategic mistake if it invaded Ukraine, promising an economic and diplomatic response by Nato. The UK has been at the forefront of Nato countries, along with Poland, Ukraine and the Baltic states, to question the wisdom of the pipeline, which will take gas from Russia to Europe through the Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine and depriving Kyiv of energy transit fees. In a sign of her determination to challenge Russia, Truss was also pictured in a tank along with British troops in Estonia, in pictures reminiscent of her role model, Margaret Thatcher. It remains to be seen how far the UK can push its opposition to Nord Stream 2 but the prime minister, Boris Johnson, raised the issue’s profile in a foreign policy speech at the Guildhall this month, saying: “We hope that our friends may recognise that a choice is shortly coming between mainlining ever more Russian hydrocarbons in giant new pipelines, and sticking up for Ukraine and championing the cause of peace and stability.” Truss wrote in a Sunday Telegraph article: “Nord Stream 2 risks undermining European security by allowing Russia to tighten its grip on those nations who rely on it for gas.” Yuri Vitrenko, the head of Ukraine’s state energy firm, Naftogaz, speaking at Chatham House in London on Monday, praised Johnson’s remarks as “timely and helpful”. He added: “Britain is an important ally. Boris Johnson does not look like he is afraid to confront Putin and he is calling things by their names.” He pointed out the UK could not be decisive since the outcome could depend on EU energy law. Vitrenko argued the current Russian pipeline through Ukraine acted as “an important deterrent to a full-scale war” since if an invasion happened once Nord Stream 2 gas started flowing, “the revenues of Russia will not be affected, European consumers will not be affected – what we will hear is some deep concerns from European politicians, but it will not change Russia policy or military aggression.” It was thought the long running economic and political battle against the 1,200-mile pipeline had been largely lost since so much of the construction was complete, and because the Biden administration, in a compromise agreement with Germany in May, dropped sanctions against the $10bn pipeline. Germany instead agreed to provide Ukraine with a subsidy to transition to green energy. But British ministers intent on backing Ukraine do not think the battle to contain Nord Stream – one largely conducted inside the EU - is lost. They point to paragraph two in the German-US statement of June, which says: “Should Russia attempt to use energy as a weapon or commit further aggressive acts against Ukraine, Germany will take action at the national level and press for effective measures at the European level, including sanctions, to limit Russian export capabilities to Europe in the energy sector, including gas, and/or in other economically relevant sectors.” The UK claims Russia has been endangering European allies by limiting gas supplies in exactly the way that the agreement sought to rule out, a view strongly shared by many US Republican senators who are now blocking the defence budget to block Nord Stream. Britain is also testing the water to see how the new German coalition will handle Nord Stream 2, noting the coalition agreement was silent on the issue. At least rhetorically, the new government is much tougher about defending Ukraine and Russian human rights abuses, British officials believe. Oliver Krischer, a German Green politician, tipped by some to join the new super ministry for the climate and the economy, told Frankfurter Allgemeine this week: “Since gas demand will not increase in Germany or Europe, I see no need for Nord Stream 2. There is no commitment to this in the coalition agreement.” To add to the sense of policy in flux, certification of the pipeline was temporarily suspended by Germany’s energy regulator on 16 November on the technical grounds that its owners, Russia’s Gazprom, had created a German subsidiary for the German branch of the pipeline that did not meet the requirements of domestic law.How apposite of John Harris to compare 21st-century Britain to that of the 19th century (Opinion, 28 November). Back then, the Liberal MP John Bright spoke against the welfare reforms that limited the hours children could work in the factories, saying this would increase costs, making businesses uncompetitive. This belief that “welfarism’” was an unnecessary burden on industry has remained a firm belief in business and political circles, but a belief that stayed largely dormant until 1979. Since then, ending welfarism is believed to be the means of creating an efficient, dynamic economy. All public spending on people’s welfare has been reduced; even the NHS is under attack from Conservative reformers. What was never mentioned by Brexiters during the EU referendum campaign was their wish to move away from the welfare standards and employment protections of the EU, seen as an unnecessary cost to business. It is no coincidence that the gig economy has boomed, largely devoid of any welfare or employment protections. Industrial Britain in the 19th century polluted its waterways with industrial effluent; 21st-century Britain pollutes it with human effluent and agricultural runoff. Coincidence or a turning of the circle? Derrick Joad Leeds • My late friend, the punk singer songwriter Vi Subversa, once said of the 1980s: “We – ordinary people – had come too far, and must be put back.” In the UK, broadly, there was more equality in the 1970s than in any decade before or since. We know that in the 1980s, one ideological tool for “putting us back” was to disparage the very idea of society. We are coming to realise the extent to which privatisation – selling off public assets such as energy, railways and social housing – is theft. John Harris’s image of Tories spending thousands on their dinner round the corner from underfunded food banks is indeed Dickensian. We have been put back: what now? Janet Dubé Peebles, Scottish Borders • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Hurrah for Tate Britain’s David Bailey (Curator of Tate Caribbean-British exhibition says UK museums must face up to past, 29 November). I recently went to the new Humboldt Forum in Berlin, where exhibits are presented as part of the environment in which they were collected. Its Matter(s) of Perspectives exhibition uses school textbooks, sculptures and interviews to examine how German colonisers and the people of Cameroon, Namibia and Oceania saw each other. Of the German colonisation of Cameroon, the museum says: “The outcome of German colonisation remained disastrous … The objects on display evince the societies and colonial history of Cameroon. The legacy of colonial rule affects Cameroon to this day.” Let’s hope that the Tate exhibition will encourage other UK institutions to acknowledge how our colonisation and slavery has affected their collections. Wendy Barnaby Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Re your editorial (26 November) on Justin Welby’s complaint about the way Anglican clergy are portrayed on television, maybe the problem with the perception of clergy is in part due to the church itself, which has become more centralised and managerial. The role of the parish priest has been diminished, even to the point of disappearance in some rural parishes. When I was a child in the 1960s, my father was a priest in charge of a large parish in north Derbyshire. On a visit back a few years ago, I found that older members of the Mothers’ Union vividly remembered one story about his time there. When he was visiting a new mother, he found that she was in need of urgent medical attention. He knew all the women in the parish who had recently given birth and dashed round them until he found the midwife, who was out on her rounds. While she was tending to the mother and arranging her admission to hospital, I believe my mother looked after the baby. Such a mercy dash may not be necessary in the age of mobile phones, but it would not have been possible without the knowledge my father had of people in the parish. After reading about 23-year-old Saam, who fled Iran after converting to Christianity (‘I come, or I die’: fatalistic refugees say Channel crossing their only option, 26 November), I am left hoping that the parish priest where he is facing being alone in his room at Christmas is able to find him and welcome him into his church – and maybe even, as my parents probably would have done, lay an extra place at the dinner table. Cate Gunn Colne Engaine, Essex • Many years ago, I was rector of a group of small Church of England parishes in mid-Suffolk. One day, after I had been there eight years, I was talking to a little girl, who said to me: “You’re not like a real vicar.” At the time, I was just over 40, fairly energetic, played the electric guitar and hadn’t a grey hair on my head – nor did I speak in a peculiar singsong voice, littering my sentences with “thees” and “thous”. Clearly, I didn’t fit her idea of a “real vicar”, who was usually old, white-haired and archaic of speech and manner. But what was strange about this conversation was that I was in fact the only “real vicar” she had known: I had baptised her, taken weekly assemblies in her primary school and conducted a range of weddings, funerals and baptisms in her extended family. Talking to her, I realised that, for good or ill, TV images of vicars were in fact more powerful than the evidence of real life. In light of this, I suggest that your conclusion that “the bland, benign, bumbling Anglican clergy of the small screen reflect the popular view of the church itself” is naive. In an age when being a TV celebrity is a major qualification for becoming a president or a prime minister, it seems that the Guardian is still in what we might call a pre-industrial mindset as regards the power of contemporary media to supplant real experience with fantasies and caricatures. As a theological educator for the last 30 years of my working life, I have many criticisms of the Anglican clergy (as well as some praise), but I wouldn’t be holding them accountable for “TV vicars”. George Pattison St Monans, Fife • Your editorial reflected a very narrow lens. The series Broken, written by Jimmy McGovern and with Sean Bean in the lead, was outstanding. That is because it reflected a very sanguine, compassionate and authentic observation of a Catholic priest in today’s world. It was no surprise that it picked up a number of awards. To reduce the depiction of vicars and priests on TV to mainly comedy shows and miss something as striking as Broken, and what it says about the fragility of the church today in the inner city, is a glaring omission. Danny Sullivan Basingstoke, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Tiger Woods understandably values nine lives more highly than 15 major championships. Speaking at a press conference for the first time since the February car crash that left him wheelchair bound and fearing he may have to have a leg amputated, the golfer laid bare the scale of his worst fears. “I’m lucky to be alive but also still have the limb,” said Woods. “Those are two crucial things. I’m very grateful that someone upstairs was taking care of me, that I’m able to not only be here but also to walk without a prosthesis.” Woods said removal of his right leg was “on the table”. Instead, a noticeably bulked-up Woods strode into the media centre at the Hero World Challenge in the Bahamas and spoke expansively of his new normal. Without, that is, having any desire to address precisely what happened in the single-car incident in February on a sun-kissed California morning. “All those answers have been answered in the [police] investigation,” he said. “So you can read about all that there in the post report.” Los Angeles police noted Woods driving at between 84 and 87mph in a 45mph zone but there is precious little by way of added detail. What the authorities do not at all cover, of course, are Woods’s own memories. He later admitted initial unwillingness to view external analysis. “I had friends that insulated me from a lot of the things that were said outside,” Woods explained. “I didn’t have my phone. I did have access to a TV and I was just watching sports. I refused to turn on the local channels and news and stuff like that, I didn’t want to go down that road. I wasn’t mentally ready for that road yet. “A lot of things in my body hurt at that time and whether I was on medication or not, it still hurt. And just trying to imagine me coming off of that stuff, how much it was going to hurt, I didn’t want to have my mind go there yet, it wasn’t ready. “People are going to poke and prod and want to know more about my business, I understand that. They can poke and prod at me all they want, just stay away from my family.” Woods said he does not suffer flashbacks to February. “I am very lucky that way.” Woods, the tournament host in the Bahamas, appears fully at peace with what happens next. As he continues with rehabilitation there is acknowledgement that tournament appearances will be minimal, if possible at all. Surgery on Woods’s leg was his 11th overall. The key reference point regarding his positive state of mind was the Masters of 2019; he won at Augusta National in extraordinary circumstances after recovery from a long-standing back problem. “It’s very easy [to be content] given the fact that I was able to come back after the fusion surgery and do what I did,” said Woods. “I got that last major and I ticked off two more events along the way. I don’t foresee this leg ever being what it used to be and the clock is ticking. I’m getting older, I’m not getting any younger. All that combined means that a full schedule and a full practice schedule and the recovery that it would take to do that? No, I don’t have any desire to do that. I have made the climb enough times.” Whether “last” in this context meant final or previous is open to interpretation. There are, however, rough targets. Next year’s Open Championship, the 150th at the Old Course, holds great appeal. “I would love to play at St Andrews, there’s no doubt about it,” said Woods. “It’s my favourite golf course in the world. Yes, I would love to be able to play that Open Championship, there’s no doubt about it. Physically, hopefully I can. I’ve got to get there first. The tournament is not going to go anywhere but I need to get there.” Woods sat down with his family and discussed whether he would “put them through it again” in respect of even attempting to play tournament golf. “The consensus was yes,” he said. “Now, internally, I haven’t reached that point. I haven’t proven it to myself that I can do it. I can show up here and I can host an event, I can play a par-three course, I can hit a few shots, I can chip and putt, but we’re talking about going out there and playing against the world’s best on the most difficult golf courses under the most difficult conditions. “I’m so far from that. To see some of my shots fall out of the sky a lot shorter than they used to is a little eye-opening, but at least I’m able to do it again. That’s something that for a while there it didn’t look like I was going to. Now I’m able to participate in the sport of golf. To what level? I do not know that.” Woods took a swipe at Greg Norman-led plans for a breakaway golf tour, which are backed by Saudi Arabia. “I’m supporting the PGA Tour,” he said. “That’s where my legacy is.” With his foundation benefiting from this week’s tournament, he highlighted how society’s “haves and have-nots” scenario has been sadly emphasised by the pandemic. In closing, there was a gentle reminder that Woods will turn 46 on 30 December. “Thanks, man,” he said with a smile. “This year has been a year I would like to turn the page on. It’s been full of some tough memories and some tough times. It would be nice to turn the page.”Here are today’s main stories: US crude oil has fallen over 6% today, dropping to a three-month low of $65.65 per barrel tonight. The Opec+ group is meeting later this week, and must weigh up the impact of omicron on future energy demand. Here are the key points from Jerome Powell and Janet Yellen’s session at the Senate today, via Bloomberg. Powell indicates taper could end a few months sooner Powell says it’s time to retire the word ‘transitory’ for inflation Powell says price pressures have moved beyond Covid trigger Yellen warns of recession if debt limit not addressed Yellen links recovery’s progress to fight against pandemic And here’s the reaction on Wall Street: After a turbulent day, stock markets across Europe have ended lower. Shares were hit by worries about the Omicron variant, following the warning from Moderna’s CEO about vaccine efficacy. The prospect of America’s central bank ending its stimulus bond-buying programme sooner than expected also hit stocks. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has closed 50 points lower at 7059 points, wiping out most of Monday’s recovery. That means it has lost 2.5% during November, mainly due to last Friday’s plunge, the worst month since October 2020. Mining stocks led the risers, while fallers included catering group Compass (-3.9%), InterContinental Hotels (-3.3%). Germany’s DAX lost 1.2%, and France’s CAC fell by 0.8%, while Spain’s IBEX lost 1.8%. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says that Covid-19 uncertainty weighed on the markets today. It’s difficult for investors to figure out what moves to make when even the clever folk that make vaccines seem to be at odds over exactly where we are when it comes to fighting the fight against Omicron. Will existing vaccines work? Will they need to be tweaked? How quickly can that happen? So many questions troubling markets, governments, and people. Of the big pharma Covid names only Pfizer’s been in positive territory with its share price after the boss said it was not only working on a vaccine with the new variant in mind but that it was confident its Covid treatment pill would already be effective against Omicron. “Whether it was variant vagaries or a taper tantrum, Wall Street’s main indices declined in some choppy trading waters. Increased restrictions might give central banks pause but the pressure of inflation won’t just pop gently out of existence and there was very little joy to be had particularly on the Nasdaq, which struggled to find a stock on the rise in early trading. Shares are falling faster in New York too, where the Dow is now down 600 points. Here’s a clip of Jerome Powell warning about the rising risk of inflation: Jerome Powell’s surprisingly hawkish comments about potentially ending the US central bank’s bond-buying stimulus programme early have “upended markets”. So says Matt Weller, global head of research at FOREX.com and City Index. He thinks chairman Powell has grown “dramatically more concerned” about the risk of sustained inflation, and is therefore looking to end the central bank’s asset purchases sooner than initially outlined. Weller says: Powell’s comments have already sent a tempest through major markets. US indices, fearing the accelerated end of the easy money train, are testing their lowest levels of the month while the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury bond has spiked 6bps off its intraday lows to 1.47%. Gold has shed a quick 30 points to trade back near $1775 and WTI crude oil is losing 4.5% on the day. In FX land, the US dollar surged nearly 100 pips from its intraday lows and is once again trading higher against its major rivals on the week Fed chair Jerome Powell has jolted the markets, by indicating that the central bank could wind up its stimulus programme faster than planned. In his testimony to the Senate Banking Committee, Powell said it could be appropriate to wrap up the Fed’s bond-buying programme more speedily, despite the omicron variant. “At this point, the economy is very strong, and inflationary pressures are high. “It is therefore appropriate in my view to consider wrapping up the taper of our asset purchases, which we actually announced at our November meeting, perhaps a few months sooner.” The Fed decided to cut its $120bn/month bond-buying stimulus programme by $15bn this month, and again in December. At that pace, the tapering would end in June. Powell, though, is signaling a faster taper - which could hurt asset prices, which have benefited from the Fed’s money-printing. The dollar has now jumped higher, wiping out its earlier losses and pulling the pound down to a new 11-month low of $1.323. The threat of a strike action at one of the UK’s biggest oil refineries has ended, after a new pay deal was agreed. Staff at the Stanlow oil refinery in Ellesmere Port have reached an agreement with owners Essar covering pay, bonuses and pensions, after last month voting overwhelmingly to strike. The deal means workers will get a backdated pay increase from January 2021 of 1.5% (the retail price index (RPI) rate for the October 2020 +0.2%), plus a further pay increase of 6.2% (the current RPI rate + 0.2%) from January 2022. Unite regional co-ordinating officer Mick Chalmers said: “The fantastic ballot result by our members was the catalyst to ensure that Essar had to enter into serious negotiations and a fair resolution could be agreed. “This deal is important in the long-term as it will greatly assist in the transition of Stanlow from being an oil refinery into a hub for low carbon energy.” European stock markets are staging a recovery in late afternoon trading. After a session dominated by omicron concerns, the pan-European Stoxx 600 index is now flat, after the founder of BioNTech predicted that Omicron is unlikely to cause severe illness in vaccinated people. The UK’s FTSE 100 has recovered most of its losses, now down only 0.3% today. It had lost over 1.6% at one stage. Heavyweight stocks such as miners and banks are in the risers. The smaller FTSE 250 index is lagging, though, down 0.5%. The co-founder of BioNTech, which created Pfizer’s Covid-19 vaccine, has predicted that vaccinated people will still be protected from severe disease from Omicron. Ugur Sahin said that while the variant could lead to more infections, vaccinated people are likely to remain protected from becoming severely ill, so governments should press on with rolling out booster shots, fast. That’s an encouraging prediction, which could offer reassurance to those concerns about Omicron. The Wall Street Journal has the story: The Omicron variant of the coronavirus could lead to more infections among vaccinated people but they will most likely remain protected from a severe course of illness, according to the inventor of one of the first Covid-19 vaccines. While the new variant might evade the antibodies generated in reaction to the vaccine, the virus will likely remain vulnerable to immune cells that destroy IT once it enters the body, BioNTech SE co-founder Ugur Sahin said. “Our message is: Don’t freak out, the plan remains the same: Speed up the administration of a third booster shot,” Dr. Sahin said in an interview Tuesday. Based on current knowledge about the mechanisms behind the vaccine and the biology of variants, Dr. Sahin said he assumed that immunized people would have a high level of protection against severe disease even if infected by the Omicron variant. U.S. consumer confidence slipped in November amid concerns about the rising cost of living and the ongoing pandemic. The Conference Board’s gauge of consumer morale dropped to 109.5 this month from 111.6 in October. That’s a bigger drop than forecast, to the lowest level since February. The survey was conducted before the discovery of Omicron was announced last week. It shows that concerns about inflation were already hitting confidence, with people less optimistic about economic prospects, and the current situation. The Present Situation index fell to 142.5 in November from October’s downwardly revised reading of 145.5 from 147.4. Meanwhile, the US Consumer Expectations index fell to 87.6 in November from 89.0 in October. The US dollar has weakened today, indicating that traders believe Omicron will deter the Federal Reserve from raising interest rates as quickly as expected. Pandemic uncertainty could also discourage the Fed from cutting its bond-buying stimulus programme at a faster pace. The pound has gained half a cent against the dollar to $1.336, away from the 11-month lows seen last week. Shares in Moderna have dropped by 7% in early trading. Traders are digesting CEO Stéphane Bancel’s prediction that it would take months before pharmaceutical companies can manufacture new variant-specific jabs at scale. Moderna’s share had surged last Friday, and again yesterday, after governments announced travel restrictions following the discovery of the Omicron variant. Wall Street has opened in the red, following the Moderna CEO’s warning that existing vaccines could struggle to tackle Omicron as well as earlier strains. However, it’s not as steep a fall as feared a few hours ago. The Dow Jones industrial Average of 30 large US firms has dropped by 238 points, or 0.7%, to 34,897 points. The broader S&amp;P 500 index is also down 0.7%, while the tech-focused Nasdaq is only down 0.3%, with tech stocks holding up well. The financial, utilities, healthcare and real estate sectors are lagging behind. Concerns that the omicron variant will hit energy demand are pulling the oil prices lower. Brent crude is now down 3.5% today at $70.86 per barrel, the lowest since the start of September, amid fears of new travel restrictions and other curbs. Oil has fallen steadily since Brent hit three-year highs in October, following the rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe. Craig Erlam, analyst at OANDA, says oil prices are unsurprisingly taking another hit as risk sentiment turns negative once again. Brent crude is closing in on $70 now - which looks a big support level - as traders continue to fret about the efficacy of the current vaccines and what it means for the global economy in the coming months. WTI has slipped below but could see some support around $67 after such a severe drop. Elsewhere in the markets, the Turkish lira has slid over 2% today towards last week’s record lows. The lira weakened, again, after Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, pledged he would never defend interest rate hikes nor compromise on the issue, after recent rate cuts hammered the lira. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, warns that the risk of hyperinflation is growing. If it wasn’t already clear enough that Erdogan doesn’t believe in basic economic theory that inflation can be controlled by interest rates, Turkey’s President has let us know once again that he will never defend higher interest rates and that he will never compromise on this issue. Its central bank, which suffers from a lack of independence, has cut its main interest rate three months in a row, despite eyewatering inflation levels of nearly 20%. The country’s inflationary backdrop combined with loosening monetary policy is sharply increasing the risk of hyperinflation, a phenomenon that is deeply troublesome for living standards by destroying the purchasing power of money. The Turkish lira has gained in just one session out of the last eight against the US dollar and is trading close to record lows, reflecting the painful inflationary picture. USDTRY continues its upward ascent, pushing higher by more than 2% today, extending its rally to 37% this month alone. The next major resistance hurdle is at 13.45, the all-time low for the lira hit last week after President Erdogan said Turkey was fighting an ‘economic war of independence’. Canada’s economy returned to growth in the last quarter, as pandemic restrictions were eased. New GDP data shows that Canada’s economy expanded by 1.3% during the third quarter of this year, led by a rise in household spending and exports. That follows a 0.8% contraction in Q2. September’s GDP rose just 0.1% over August, though, as the goods-producing sector declined and the services-producing sector grew. But Statistics Canada reckons GDP jumped by a healthier 0.8% in October. Bank of England policymaker Catherine Mann has warned that the newly detected Omicron coronavirus variant could hit consumer confidence. If so, that would weaken the economy’s recovery from its historic pandemic hit. It could also slow the rebalancing from goods spending back to services, which was expected to slow inflation. Mann told a question-and-answer event hosted by Barclays. “It’s a particular question mark here as to whether or not that (Omicron) is going to reduce consumer confidence and leave us again in a situation of somewhat of a slacker demand for spending than we might have thought going forward,” [Thanks to Reuters for the details]. America’s top central banker will warn today that omicron threatens the economic recovery. Jerome Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, is testifying to the U.S. Senate Banking Committee at 3pm UK time (10am New York). His prepared testimony was released last night, and shows that he will cite the pick-up in infections, and the latest Covid-19 variant, as risks. Powell, who was nominated for a second term as Fed chief last week, will say: The recent rise in COVID-19 cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant pose downside risks to employment and economic activity and increased uncertainty for inflation. Greater concerns about the virus could reduce people’s willingness to work in person, which would slow progress in the labor market and intensify supply-chain disruptions. Powell will also tell senators that the US economy has continued to strengthen, but the rise in Delta variant cases temporarily slowed progress over the summer. Powell can expect a grilling on inflation, which hit a 30-year high of 6.2% last month. He will say: Most forecasters, including at the Fed, continue to expect that inflation will move down significantly over the next year as supply and demand imbalances abate. It is difficult to predict the persistence and effects of supply constraints, but it now appears that factors pushing inflation upward will linger well into next year. In addition, with the rapid improvement in the labor market, slack is diminishing, and wages are rising at a brisk pace. GSK has hired one of the scientists behind Pfizer’s mRNA Covid-19 shot, Phil Dormitzer, as its global head of R&amp;D for vaccines. Dormitzer will join GSK on December 3rd, in a move that bolsters the British pharmaceuticals firm’s vaccine operations. Dormitzer was Pfizer’s Vice President and Chief Scientific Officer, RNA and Viral Vaccines. In that role, he provided “Pfizer scientific leadership for the development of Comirnaty, the RNA-based Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine”, says GSK. The company has lagged behind rivals in the race to develop a Covid-19 shot, and been under pressure to develop a portfolio of new medicines, so poaching Dormitzer from Pfizer could strengthen its efforts. Hal Barron, GSK chief scientific officer and R&amp;D president, says: The importance of vaccines has never been clearer, and the pace of technological innovation has rarely been greater. GSK has an industry-leading pipeline of vaccines and Phil’s scientific expertise and significant experience with key innovative technologies, such as mRNA, structure-based antigen design and synthetic biology, will be key to ensuring we remain a leader in this field.” Back in the markets, share are recovering some of their earlier losses. The FTSE 100 index is now down 42 points, or 0.6%, up from this morning’s seven-week lows when fears about vaccine efficacy hit the City. Travel, hospitality, property and oil companies are still lower today. European stocks are still in the red too, down nearly 1%, Walid Koudmani, market analyst at financial brokerage XTB, says the mood in the markets has worsened after Monday’s minor recovery. “Investors received contrasting views relating to the new variant of the coronavirus which caused a significant pullback at the end of last week and was followed by an attempted recovery during Monday’s session. However, the situation has changed again today with the majority of stock indices pulling back from yesterday’s close and dropping to new lows as moods worsened following comments from Moderna’s CEO stating that the new variant could be more resistant to currently available vaccines. “While most consider widespread total lockdown an unlikely scenario, any major disruption to the post pandemic recovery caused by restrictions or supply chain issues could have disastrous consequences on markets and could potentially lead to central bank interventions once again.” Just in: India’s economy grew 8.4% year-on-year in the last quarter, as it recovered from the devastating second wave of COVID-19 cases earlier this year. That’s India’s fourth quarterly expansion in a row, after record annual growth of 20.1% in April-June. India’s Business Today reports that robust manufacturing and services sector demand and record vaccination coverage helped the economy keep growing (India administered its billionth Covid jab in October). The University of Oxford has said there was no evidence that vaccines would not prevent severe disease from Omicron, but that it was ready to rapidly develop an updated version of its vaccine developed with AstraZeneca if necessary. The University of Oxford said that there was limited data on Omicron so far, and that it would carefully evaluate the impact of the variant on its shot, echoing an AstraZeneca statement last week. It said in a statement, via Reuters, that: “Despite the appearance of new variants over the past year, vaccines have continued to provide very high levels of protection against severe disease and there is no evidence so far that Omicron is any different. “However, we have the necessary tools and processes in place for rapid development of an updated COVID-19 vaccine if it should be necessary.” UK hospitality companies are worried that omicron could mean a repeat of last winter, when soaring Covid-19 cases and newly identified variant led to a lost Christmas. The Parkers Arms in rural Lancashire is freezing cold and cannot take bookings over the phone, at least for now. Four days ago, Storm Arwen took out the power lines and telephone wires linking this rural Lancashire gastropub to the outside world. Its ever-optimistic proprietor, Stosie Madi, expects normal service to resume by the weekend at the pub in Newton-in-Bowland. But now – like the rest of the hospitality sector – she has a new worry on her mind: the Omicron variant of Covid-19. “We’re fully booked for the Christmas season and we’re quite pleased with that but we’ve had some cancellations come through,” she says, adding that the bulk came on Sunday after Boris Johnson announced tighter rules in response to the variant. She worries fresh Covid-19 pessimism risks dampening trade, which had been booming since restrictions were lifted in the summer. “People have been making up for lost time but the worst thing that could happen is if we’re stopped from trading,” Madi says. “This year they’ve said they won’t lock us down again but you know what he [Johnson] is like. You never know how quickly he changes his mood. If we had to close down completely, that would be a disaster. I don’t know if I could pull the strength out for that.” More here: The chief executive of the US drugmaker Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be less effective against Omicron than they have been against the Delta version, sending global stock markets sharply lower. Stéphane Bancel said while it would take two weeks to get data on how the existing vaccines perform against the new Covid variant – and whether it causes severe disease – it would take several months to tweak the current vaccines to tackle Omicron. Bancel told the Financial Times. “There is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness] is the same level … we had with Delta.” He suggested that pharma companies would struggle between targeting Omicron and the existing Covid variants, warning it would be risky to shift Moderna’s entire production capacity to an Omicron-specific jab. In the meantime, Bancel suggested there might be a case for giving more potent boosters to the elderly or people with compromised immune systems. Pfizer and its German partner BioNTech said on Friday that they could produce and ship an updated version of their vaccine within 100 days if the new Covid variant detected in southern Africa was found to evade existing immunity. Bancel said the high number of Omicron mutations on the spike protein, which the virus uses to infect human cells, and the rapid spread of the variant in South Africa suggested existing vaccines would not be very effective, predicting a “material drop” in the effectiveness. Here’s the full story: Wall Street is expected to open sharply lower, with the Dow Jones industrial average down over 400 points, or 1.2%, in pre-market trading. New York traders, like those in Europe and Asia-Pacific markets, will be concerned by the Moderna CEO’s prediction that existing vaccines will struggle with Omicron. The Dow tumbled 900+ points on Friday, when omicron fears first hit the markets, before a modest (236-point) recovery yesterday. Marios Hadjikyriacos, senior investment analyst at XM, says virus worries are keeping markets on edge: The chief executive ofModerna struck fear into financial markets on Tuesday after he warned that existing vaccines probably won’t be very effective against the new Omicron variant. His comments shouldn’t have been very surprising considering that the entire scientific community has been saying this for days now, but nervous traders still took the opportunity to liquidate riskier bets. Markets seem to be grappling with the risk that new restrictions will be on the table for years to come despite the vaccines, as mutations are inevitable. The twist is that central banks can’t ride to the rescue this time because inflation is sizzling hot, and there isn’t much political appetite left for gargantuan spending packages. Facebook-owner Meta says it disagrees with the British competition regulator’s ruling that it must sell animated images platform Giphy (see previous post). “We disagree with this decision,” a Meta spokesperson said (via Reuters). “We are reviewing the decision and considering all options, including appeal.” Britain’s competition watchdog has ordered Facebook to sell Giphy, after finding that the deal could harm social media users and UK advertisers. The Competition and Markets Authority has concluded that Facebook’s acquisition of Giphy would reduce competition between social media platforms, and that the deal has already removed Giphy as a potential challenger in the display advertising market. This follows an investigation into the $400m purchase of the online gif platform in 2020 by Facebook (now Meta). The CMA says owning Giphy will allow the social media giant to increase its already significant market power in relation to other social media platforms, in two ways: denying or limiting other platforms’ access to Giphy GIFs, driving more traffic to Facebook-owned sites – Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram – which already account for 73% of user time spent on social media in the UK, changing the terms of access by, for example, requiring TikTok, Twitter and Snapchat to provide more user data in order to access Giphy GIFs. So, the CMA says Facebook must now sell Giphy, which is the biggest provider of short animated images popular on social networks and group chats. Stuart McIntosh, chair of the independent inquiry group carrying out the phase 2 investigation, said: The tie-up between Facebook and Giphy has already removed a potential challenger in the display advertising market. Without action, it will also allow Facebook to increase its significant market power in social media even further, through controlling competitors’ access to Giphy GIFs. By requiring Facebook to sell Giphy, we are protecting millions of social media users and promoting competition and innovation in digital advertising. Rupert Thompson, chief investment officer at Kingswood, predicts inflation in the euro area will remain over target for much of 2022, following this month’s jump. “Inflation in the Eurozone surged more than expected in November to a record 4.9% from 4.1% the previous month. Core inflation also exceeded expectations, rising to 2.6%. These numbers follow yesterday’s news of German inflation hitting 6%, its highest level since 1992. Eurozone inflation now looks set to remain well above the ECB’s 2% target for much of next year and these numbers will make it all the harder for the central bank to justify continuing its QE program and holding off on any rate rise before 2023.” Here’s some reaction to the jump in eurozone inflation, from Bert Colijn of ING: And here’s Allianz’s Mohamed El-Erian: This tweet from Marc Brütsch, chief economist at Swiss Life, shows how euro area price pressures intensified in recent months: Eurozone inflation soared to a record rate this month, driven by surging energy costs. Consumer prices in the single currency bloc accelerated to 4.9% in November, new estimates from Eurostat show, the highest since the eurozone was created in 1999. That’s a sharp jump on October’s inflation reading of 4.1%, and ahead of expectations for 4.5%. It’s also significantly above the European Central Bank’s target of 2%. Energy prices played the biggest role, surging by 27.4% year-on-year, but other costs also rose, in a sign that underlying inflationary pressures built up. Services prices rose by 2.7%, goods by 2.4%, and food, alcohol &amp; tobacco by 2.2%. Data yesterday showed that inflation in both Germany and Spain is running at the highest in 30 years. Core inflation (stripping out volatile measure) also hit a record high. In better economic news, unemployment in Germany has dropped despite concerns about the rise in Covid-19 cases. Unemployment in Europe’s largest economy fell by 34,000, beating economists’ forecast for a drop of 25,000, which pulled the jobless rate to 5.3%. German firms have stepped up hiring as they try to work through a backlog of orders, not helped by supply chain problems. The selloff is picking up pace - with the FTSE 100 index dropping by 115 points, or 1.6%, to 6994 points. That took it below the 7,000-point mark for the first time since 7th October. British Airways parent company IAG is now in the fallers, down 2.9%, with other pandemic-sensitive stocks such as jet engine maker Rolls-Royce (-3%), and commercial property companies British Land (-2.6%) and Land Securities (-2.7%). Hotel chains InterContinental (-3.4%) and Whitbread (-2.7%) are also lower, along with engineering group Melrose (-3.5%) whose aerospace division has suffered from previous travel curbs. Oil companies are also weaker, with Royal Dutch Shell dropping by almost 3%. Pierre Veyret, technical analyst at ActivTrades, says: Investors remained concerned about both the efficiency of existing vaccines against the new Omicron strain as well as about the significant economic risk it poses. This new variant is putting central banks in a difficult situation as they will now be torn between taking hawkish measures to tackle rising inflation, and keeping the extremely dovish policies in place in order to sustain growth with the economic recovery now threatened by this strain. This uncertainty is being reflected on most indices after investors decided to significantly reduce their exposure to risk assets, which wiped trillions of dollars off stock markets in just a few days. Of course, the prospect of new restrictions before Christmas puts a lot of pressure on energy and travel &amp; leisure stocks, who are among today’s worst performers. Over in France, inflation has risen to its highest level in 13 years as the cost of living squeeze hits households. Consumer prices jumped 0.4% in November, lifting the annual inflation rate of 3.4%, the highest since September 2008, INSEE said, driven by the jump in energy costs, and pricier manufactured goods. The Hong Kong stock index has closed at its lowest level in over a year. The benchmark Hang Seng fell 1.6%, after US drugmaker Moderna set off fresh alarm bells about the Omicron variant. A gauge of some of the biggest Hong Kong-listed Chinese stocks tumbled to a five-year low on Tuesday, hurt by fresh concerns over Omicron and Beijing’s continued crackdown on private enterprises, which is hitting tech stocks. Budget airline easyJet has said near-term bookings had weakened since the new Omicron variant was identified amid concerns over travel restrictions. However, easyJet still expects passenger numbers to return to close to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the summer. The airline reported a loss before tax of £1.1bn for the year to 30 September, wider than the £835m loss made in 2020, but the figure was better than analysts had expected. Johan Lundgren, the chief executive, said that while “many uncertainties remain as we navigate the winter”, the airline expects to benefit from a bounce back. “We’re seeing very strong demand into next summer” Lundgren said, “because there is very strong pent-up demand. We have more revenue for next summer than we had at this point in time for the summer of 2019.” Commenting on demand since the new variant emerged, easyJet said: “It’s too soon to say what impact Omicron may have on European travel and any further short-term restrictions that may result. “However, we have prepared ourselves for periods of uncertainty such as this. While we’ve seen an increase in transfers with some softening of trading for the first quarter [October to December] it is really encouraging to see that we are still seeing good levels of new bookings for the second half.” Here’s the full story: EasyJet shares had gained 2%, as Victoria Scholar of interactive investor flags, but have now dipped 1.7% as the markets slide. The FTSE 100 is on track for its worst month in more than a year. with today’s losses adding to Friday’s tumble. The index is down around 3% this month, the biggest drop since October 2020 (when it lost nearly 5%, just before successful vaccine trials sparked a global rally in November 2020). European stock markets have also been hit, with Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC both dropping 1%. Elsa Lignos of RBC Capital Markets says investors are jumpy about risks from the Omicron variant. What started as a quiet night, turned around sharply on remarks from Moderna’s CEO in an interview with the FT. The headline was *MODERNA CEO PREDICTS VACCINES TO STRUGGLE WITH OMICRON. The interview itself is more balanced. Bancel notes “we need to wait for the data” though scientists he’s talked to say “this is not going to be good”. Nothing in his comments contradicts the weekend remarks from South Africa’s Medical Association Chair that Omicron appears to cause mild symptoms – one is talking about whether vaccines will catch the new variant given a large number of mutations on the spike protein, the other is talking about the effects of the virus itself. But it’s a sign of market jumpiness, and why most are looking to keep positions light or opt for risk-neutral trades. The Moderna CEO Stéphane Bancel’s interview in the FT is “concerning”, says Mohit Kumar of investment bank Jefferies. Bancel stated that the existing vaccines are likely to be less effective at tackling Omicron though we should get more clarity in the couple of weeks. He also argues that it would take several months to produce an Omicron specific vaccine at scale and pharma companies would struggle between targeting Omicron and the existing variants. The comments probably reflect the reality of the current situation and the uncertainty surrounding the Omicron impact. We should get more clarity in a couple of weeks, but the market would remain subject to headline risk till then. Airline group IAG is bucking the selloff, though, up 0.3% in early trading. The UK’s blue-chip stock index has dropped 1% at the start of trading. The FTSE 100 has lost 75 points, or 1%, at the open to around 7,035 points, its lowest since 7th October, as renewed Omicron worries hit shares. That knocks out yesterday’s recovery, but it’s nowhere near as severe as Friday’s 266-point plunge. Most stocks have dropped. Retail group JD Sports are the top faller, down 4.5%, while pharmaceuticals group AstraZeneca is off 2%. Sports betting and gambling group Entain are down 2.3%, with equipment rental business Ashtead (-2.1%) and hotel chain InterContinental (-2.4%) also lower. The oil price has dropped to its lowest level since mid-September, on renewed worries that Omicron could slow the global recovery. Brent crude is down 2.8% at $71.40 per barrel, an 11-week low. It plunged over 10% on Friday, when concerns about the variant first hit markets, before stabilising yesterday. Moderna CEO Stephane Bancel’s comments have dampened the mood in the markets, says Michael Hewson of CMC Markets: Cautious positivity soon gave way to pessimism in late Asia trading on comments from the Moderna CEO Stephane Bancel to the FT, who predicted existing vaccines would struggle with the Omicron variant and who warned it would take months for pharmaceutical companies to manufacture enough jabs at a sufficient scale to make a difference. His tone contrasts with the likes of Pfizer and BioNTech was suggested any new vaccine would be able to modified fairly quickly. His rather candid comments have also seen oil prices slide back sharply, as an increasingly jittery market react with concern to the prospects of further restrictions and lower demand. Risk sentiment has soured this morning, on the back of the Moderna CEO’s comments: Moderna’s Stéphane Bancel also said that efficacy data indicating how the existing vaccines perform against the Omicron variant should become available within two weeks. But he told the Financial Times it would take several months before an Omicron-specific vaccine could be produced at scale, and suggested there might be a case for giving more potent boosters to the elderly or people with compromised immune systems in the meantime. The FT explains: “[Moderna] and Pfizer cannot get a billion doses next week. The maths doesn’t work. But could we get the billion doses out by the summer? Sure,” said Bancel, who predicted Moderna could make a total of 2bn-3bn doses in 2022. But he said it would be risky to shift Moderna’s entire production capacity to an Omicron-targeted jab at a time when other variants are still in circulation. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Anxiety over the Omicron variant is rippling through the financial markets again this morning, after the chief executive of drugmaker Moderna warned that existing Covid-19 vaccines are unlikely to be as effective against the Omicron variant as they have been against Delta. Stéphane Bancel’s comments, to the Financial Times, have hit Asia-Pacific stocks, and the oil price, just a day after markets had stabilised after Friday’s tumble. The FT says: The chief executive of Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be much less effective at tackling Omicron than earlier strains of Covid-19 and warned it would take months before pharmaceutical companies can manufacture new variant-specific jabs at scale. Stéphane Bancel said the high number of Omicron mutations on the spike protein, which the virus uses to infect human cells, and the rapid spread of the variant in South Africa, suggested the current crop of vaccines may need to be modified next year. “There is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness] is the same level . . . we had with Delta,” Bancel told the Financial Times in an interview at the company’s headquarters in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He added: “I think it’s going to be a material drop. I just don’t know how much because we need to wait for the data. But all the scientists I’ve talked to . . . are like ‘this is not going to be good’.” The Moderna chief executive’s comments come as other public health experts and politicians have tried to strike a more upbeat tone about the ability of existing vaccines to confer protection against Omicron. Here’s the full story: Moderna chief predicts existing vaccines will struggle with Omicron. The news has knocked risk-sensitive currencies, with the Australian dollar dropping to a one-year low. Japan’s Nikkei stock market index sank by 1.6%, as Bancel’s comments worried investors. European markets are heading for a lower open, with the FTSE 100 seen falling around 1%. Yesterday, the World Health Organization said Omicron poses a “very high” global risk, and is likely to spread internationally. Overnight, Hong Kong has widened a ban on entry for non-residents from several countries. Non-residents from Angola, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Zambia would not be allowed to enter as of November 30. Non-residents who have been to Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Israel and Italy in the past 21 days would not be allowed to enter the city from December 2nd. England’s mask mandate returns today, meaning people will be required by law to wear a face covering in certain places. America’s top central banker, Jerome Powell, will testify to the Senate later today, where he’ll explain how the Omicron variant poses a downside risk to the US economy, and complicates the inflation picture. The agenda 8.55am GMT: German unemployment report for November 10am GMT: Flash estimate of Eurozone inflation in November Noon GMT: India’s third-quarter GDP report 1.30pm GMT: Canada’s third-quarter GDP report 3pm GMT: US house price index for September 3pm GMT: US Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell testifies to the Senate Banking committeeMy father, Michael Georgeson, who has died aged 88, was for many years a lively and charismatic head of art at St Wilfrid’s school in Crawley, West Sussex. His art room was not just home to budding artists but a haven for any student. He was kind, interested in everyone and very funny. Born in Liverpool, Michael was the son of Josephine (nee Parker) and Herbert Georgeson, a sales manager at the TJ Hughes department store. An early memory was of his terrified mother clutching a baby while they sat in an air raid shelter. Aside from the blitz, he enjoyed a happy home life. He attended Upholland Catholic seminary as a boarder, developing a lifelong enthusiasm for philosophy and ethics that, along with his natural compassion and humour, permeated everything he said and did. After a false start at Liverpool medical school he headed to Canterbury School of Art (now Kent Institute of Art and Design), and then to St Mary’s, Twickenham, to train as a teacher. While there, he met Margaret Salter, a student nurse, at a dance. They married in 1960, the year of his graduation. He taught at schools in South Ockendon, Essex, Stevenage, Hertfordshire and at Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex, until 1971, when he arrived at St Wilfrid’s in Crawley. He soon became a popular member of the staff and was promoted to be head of art. As a teenager at the same school, I sometimes found his stand-out warmth and often hilarious presence slightly embarrassing. Later on, I realised the enormous impact he had had on many students thanks to his kindness and approachability. He retired in 1997. In his honour the Michael Georgeson memorial award for creativity in art and design is being set up at the school. Since he was a keen sportsman and passionate fan of Liverpool FC, our pets were called Shankly, Anfield and St John. There was a 6ft square montage of the Kop in one of the bedrooms at home. He was also a music lover, especially of jazz and folk. When we were little, he sang his children to sleep – his often unconventional bedtime repertoire included Cocaine Blues and Woody Guthrie’s Worried Man Blues. After retiring, he continued to live in Mannings Heath, near Horsham. He enjoyed painting, reading, writing, poetry, golf and travel. As a member of the Society of St Vincent de Paul, he often visited people in hospital. He is survived by Margaret and their three children, Lise, Mikey and me, and by five grandchildren.Two energy companies will pay a record £158m fine after delays to a major subsea power cable bringing renewable energy from Scotland to England and Wales caused home energy bills to rise. National Grid and Scottish Power agreed to pay the penalty after an investigation by the industry regulator found many of Scotland’s windfarms were paid to turn off on windy days because there was no way to transmit the clean electricity to areas of high energy demand in the south of the UK. The £1.2bn power cable known as Western Link was expected to carry enough electricity to power 2m homes over 260 miles, mostly under water, from Scotland to England from late 2015, well ahead of its late 2017 deadline from the regulator. But the project was dogged by delays and was only ready more than three years later, in the summer of 2019, to help the UK make better use of its renewable energy generation. During the delay the cost of turning off windfarms, and running alternative power sources such as gas and coal plants, was ultimately shouldered by households through their energy bills. Cathryn Scott, a director at Ofgem, the energy regulator, said projects such as the Western Link cable were “vital in moving clean energy from where it’s produced to where it’s needed”. “However, they must be delivered on time and to the standards agreed. Where they are not, as the energy regulator, we will hold the licensees accountable,” she said. Ofgem said £15m of the total “redress” payment will be paid into the regulator’s redress fund, which is used by the Energy Saving Trust to distribute cash to charities and other organisations which help energy consumers. The remainder of the £158m payment will be used to lower the cost of running the energy system, which is paid for through energy bills. A spokesperson for the joint venture between National Grid and Scottish Power said it had “worked hard to protect consumers against delay” but “recognises it is ultimately accountable for the delay and has therefore agreed to the redress package”.Strictly Come Dancing attracted substantially more viewers than Squid Game on British television screens in October, according to the television ratings agency Barb. The BBC’s celebrity dancing show attracted 10.4 million viewers for its most popular episode that month, against the 5.8 million who watched the brutal final episode of Netflix’s South Korean drama. The figures, which have multiple caveats, come from the first attempt by the UK’s main television ratings business to estimate viewing figures for shows on streaming services. The new data found that programmes produced by traditional British television channels – such as The Great British Bake Off, Silent Witness and Blankety Blank – remain more popular among Britons watching on a television set than any shows on a streaming service. Until now the likes of Netflix have largely avoided scrutiny of how their audiences compare with traditional live television broadcasts, resisting full transparency on viewing figures and choosing to release data selectively. This has led to persistent criticism that the popularity and cultural influence of Netflix shows may have been overstated. Aside from Squid Game, there were only four other programmes produced by a streaming service that cracked the top 100 most watched programmes on British television sets in October. They were Black Widow on Disney+, along with You, the Guilty and Maid on Netflix. Not a single programme from Amazon Prime Video made the list of most watched shows, despite the company’s enormous investment in content for the service. Overall, the new data shows how traditional British free-to-air television channels can still consistently deliver larger audiences than paid-for streaming services. The first episode of the much-hyped Netflix drama Maid attracted 2.5 million viewers on television sets in the UK during October. This is fewer people than watched ITV gameshow Celebrity Catchphrase, Channel 5’s Our Yorkshire Farm about the life of shepherd Amanda Owen, and an ITV behind-the-scenes documentary about Heathrow. However, the Barb viewing figures for streaming services remain flawed. Restrictions on the technology used to collect the data mean it only counts people watching specific streaming shows on television sets. This excludes the growing number of people who watch programmes on laptops, tablets and smartphones – potentially understating the popularity of shows that are more popular with younger audiences. In addition, streaming services encourage viewers to watch shows in their own time, making it harder to conduct like-with-like comparisons with television broadcasts where most viewers watch live. Although Squid Game was a sleeper hit, it was released in mid-September and many viewers will have raced to the end of the programme and therefore will not be included in the figures for October. Sophia Vahdati of the analytics firm Digital i, which has created its own rival approach to measuring Netflix viewing figures, said a large number of Britons may have been missed from the figures: “We estimate that around 30% of Squid Game viewing time took place on smartphones, tablets or computers.” Working out what Britons are actually watching is becoming increasingly difficult as audiences fragment. Barb found the average Briton watched an average of 231 minutes per day of video in October, of which 156 minutes were spent with traditional British broadcasters, 35 minutes with streaming companies such as Netflix, and 40 minutes on video-sharing sites such as YouTube and TikTok. Following prolonged criticism Netflix announced last month it would start regularly releasing viewing data, although only for its most popular shows. Rather than use a traditional metric – such as the number of users who have watched to the end of a programme – the streaming company announced it would reveal the global “total minutes watched” for each show.Two supervised injection sites could be open as soon as Tuesday in Manhattan to combat a sharp increase in overdose deaths in New York City. The two safe injection sites, one opening in East Harlem and the other in Washington Heights, will offer clean needles to drug users, administer naloxone, the opioid reversal medication, and medical assistance, and offer treatment options for drug dependency, according to city officials. New York will be the first city in the US open an authorized injection site. Other cities such as Philadelphia, Boston and Seattle have taken initial steps to open their own injection sites, but have not managed to open the locations and they face continuing debate and scrutiny. More than 93,000 people died from drug overdoses in the US last year, a record number and a 30% rise from 2019, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The New York safe injection locations were previously being used as needle exchange providers, a service that provides sterile needles to drug users, though some residents have taken issue with opening the sites in less affluent parts of the borough, according to the New York Times. “2020, unfortunately, was the deadliest year on record for overdoses both here in New York City as well as nationally. Every four hours, someone dies of a drug overdose in New York City,” said Dr Dave A Chokshi, the city’s health commissioner. “We feel a deep conviction and also sense of urgency in opening overdose prevention centers.” Mayor Bill de Blasio is in favor of the two sites. He has been a public supporter of safe injection sites since 2018, often citing the success of such harm reduction measures in European and Canadian cities. In a statement on the injection sites, De Blasio said the initiative shows other cities “after decades of failure, a smarter approach is possible”. The mayor has also promised “not to take enforcement action” against the injection sites, with four out of the five city’s district attorneys in support of the measure. However, local attempts to implement injection sites have historically been met with pushback at the federal level. A federal mandate known as the “crack house statute” prohibits operating, owning, or renting a location for the purpose of using illegal substances. Previously, an attempt to open a safe injection site in Philadelphia was blocked by the justice department during the Trump administration. The Biden administration has spoken positively about harm reduction methods but has not publicly endorsed safe injection sites. Chokshi said that the city has had “productive conversations” with state and federal officials in regards to the safe injection sites.A Fox News commentator stoked outrage by comparing Dr Anthony Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, to Josef Mengele, the Nazi “Angel of Death”. Lara Logan, a host on the Fox Nation streaming service, was discussing Omicron on Fox News Prime Time on Monday night, amid fears that the new variant will trigger a new wave of Covid cases and further deepen political divisions over how to respond. Fox News has consistently broadcast misinformation about Covid and measures to contain it. Bill Grueskin, a professor at Columbia Journalism School, responded: “The real issue isn’t [Lara] Logan’s insanity. It’s the complicity of Pete Hegseth, the Fox News host. He never interrupts or pushes back. It’s just another day at the office.” Fauci, 80, has served seven presidents as head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases since 1984. Last weekend, he told CBS he dealt with attacks including death threats “by focusing on what my job is from the time that I went into medicine to right now. “Where I am at my age, my job has been totally focused on doing what I can with the talents and the influence I had to make scientific advances to protect the health of the American public.” More than 778,000 people have died in the US from Covid-19, many from the Delta virus variant. Omicron was discovered in South Africa and has not been detected in the US but Fauci and other officials have said it is probably present. The danger from Omicron is not clear but the World Health Organization has issued warnings about transmissibility and potential reaction to vaccines. On Monday, Biden said Americans should be concerned but should not panic. Hegseth asked Logan: “What’s your take on where we are, where we’re going?” “Well, it’s very simple, Pete,” said Logan. “You just have to look at Africa. They didn’t have the death rates from Covid that were predicted. And what is happening over time, is that the entire response to Covid and everything that we were told about it from the beginning, is being exposed and it’s falling apart, the lies are coming apart. “And really now there’s no justification for putting people out of their jobs or forcing vaccine mandates for a disease that ultimately is very treatable … and has death rates that compare very much to seasonal flu. “And so in that moment, what you see on Dr Fauci, this is what people say to me, that he doesn’t represent science to them. He represents Josef Mengele, Dr Josef Mengele, the Nazi doctor who did experiments on Jews during the second world war and in the concentration camps, and I am talking about people all across the world are saying this.” Mengele escaped justice after the second world war, dying under an assumed identity in Brazil in 1979. Hegseth and another guest, the Fox News host Will Cain, did not respond to Logan’s remark about Mengele. Fox News did not respond to a request for comment. In a tweet on Tuesday, the American Jewish Committee said of Logan’s remarks: “Utterly shameful. Josef Mengele earned his nickname by performing deadly and inhumane medical experiments on prisoners of the Holocaust, including children. “There is no comparing the hell these victims went through to public health measures. An apology is needed.” In a statement to the Washington Post, the Anti-Defamation League chief executive, Jonathan Greenblatt, said: “There’s absolutely no comparison between mask mandates, vaccine requirements and other Covid-19 mitigation efforts to what happened to Jews during the Holocaust.” Logan also claimed responses to Covid had affected “civil liberties, the suicide rates, the poverty, it has obliterated economies”, and said: “People see that there’s no justification for what has been done. “So as [scientists like Fauci are] being exposed and the control is slipping away, lo and behold, another variant surfaces, and nobody should be surprised by that because there will be more variants until the end of time. We’ll never be free of them.” The baseless claim that the Omicron variant is made-up echoed a rightwing talking point voiced, in varying forms, by figures including the former White House doctor turned Texas congressman Ronny Jackson. Logan rose to fame with CBS as a hard-hitting reporter during the Iraq war and the Arab spring of 2011. In Egypt that year she was assaulted while reporting from Tahrir Square. After leaving CBS in 2013, over errors in a report about the deadly attack on a US compound in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012, she moved into rightwing media. Her show on Fox Nation is called Lara Logan Has No Agenda.Every eligible adult in the UK should be offered a Covid booster by the end of January as ministers race to increase protection against the Omicron variant, Boris Johnson has announced. Johnson has said he does not want people to cancel Christmas parties or school nativity plays because of concerns about Omicron. When asked about people cancelling these at this press conference, he replied: We don’t want people to cancel such events. We think that overwhelmingly the best thing for kids is to be in school, as I’ve said many times throughout this pandemic. What we are doing is trying to take a balanced and proportionate approach to the particular risk that seems to be posed by Omicron, or certainly is posed by Omicron, focused in particular on measures at the borders. Earlier Johnson made it clear that he disagreed with Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, who used an interview on the Today programme to say that people should avoid unnecessary socialising before Christmas. (See 1.02pm.) MPs have approved tougher Covid rules that came into force overnight making masks mandatory in more places in England and changing isolation requirements due to concern over the Omicron variant. Eight more cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in England, the UK Health Security Agency said. All nine cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland trace back to a “single private event” held on 20 November, Nicola Sturgeon has told the Holyrood parliament in her weekly Covid update. The energy regulator has promised to enact tougher stress tests for energy suppliers to prove they have the financial strength to weather a surge in energy market prices – with consequences for suppliers which fail. The Northern Ireland Brexit protocol has not “shattered” the constitutional status of Northern Ireland within the UK, as some unionists have argued, a government lawyer has told a court in Belfast. In the Commons the first Conservative backbencher to speak in defence of Boris Johnson in the debate on the SNP motion censuring Boris Johnson (see 5.27pm) was Matt Hancock, who was forced to resign as health secretary earlier this year for ignoring lockdown rules. Like Michael Ellis, he did not engage in the arguments about Johnson’s honesty but instead devoted his speech to attacking the SNP. In the Commons MPs are now debating a censure motion against Boris Johnson tabled by the SNP. This is what it says. That this house censures the prime minister, the right honourable member for Uxbridge and South Ruislip, for frequently violating the sixth principle of public life, for seeking to undermine the recommendations of the standards committee on Owen Paterson, for regularly ignoring independent advice on matters such as international treaties and breaches of the ministerial code by his ministers, for putting forward proposals to diminish the powers of the Electoral Commission, for ignoring independent advice concerning the granting of peerages to Conservative party donors and nominations to public bodies such as Ofcom; and further calls for his ministerial salary to be reduced by £41,567 per year. The sixth principle of public life is honesty. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, opened the debate. He said Johnson needed to be censured because otherwise he would think he could get away with breaking the rules. He said: Month after month, scandal after scandal – the charge sheet gets longer and longer but not one single person is ever held to account. If the public is to have any confidence in this place then that needs to change today. Because unless the prime minister faces consequences - unless he is censured - he won’t just think he’s gotten away with the mess he has made of the last few months, he will think he can do it all over again. And let’s be very clear – if the prime minister isn’t properly censured today, it will also be final proof that the Tories really do believe that it’s one rule for them and one rule for everybody else. They might want to forget, but the public definitely haven’t. The Tories marched through the lobbies to undermine our parliamentary standards process, to tear up the rule books – all in order to protect a friend of the Prime Minister who was found to have broken the rules. Blackford also said Johnson had shown himself to be a liar. On 4 March 2020, the prime minister said, ‘We have restored the nurses’ bursary’ - completely and factually untrue. On 17 June 2020, the prime minister said there were 400,000 ‘fewer families living in poverty now than there were in 2010’ - both Office for National Statistics and the Children’s Commissioner have confirmed that is false. On 7 November 2019, the prime minister told Northern Ireland businesses – in person – that the protocol would mean ‘No forms, no checks, no barriers of any kind’ – once again, clearly not true. It is right to be careful in terms of the language we use in this house, but when it comes to language it is also right to be accurate and honest. And on the basis of all the evidence, I can only conclude that the prime minister has repeatedly broken the sixth principle of public life. I can only conclude that the prime minister has demonstrated himself to be a liar. MPs are normally not allowed to call each other liars in the chamber. But Blackford was allowed to use it on this occasion because Johnson’s honesty was the topic for debate, although Dame Eleanor Laing, the deputy Speaker, urged Blackford and other MPs to avoid “intemperate abuse”. Michael Ellis, paymaster general in the Cabinet Office, responded for the government. He ignored the terms of the motion almost completely and instead just spoke about the PM’s “large litany of achievement”, such as Brexit, while also defending the union. Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party chair, is speaking now, but, as is common when the opposition day debate is allocated to the SNP, the Labour benches are virtually empty because their MPs are staying away. In his opening comments at the press conference Boris Johnson said that the government wanted all adults to be offered a booster vaccine by the end of January. The target that we’ve set ourselves is to offer a booster to everyone eligible by the end of January. As with the first jabs, we will be working through people by age group going down in five-year bands, because it is vital that the older and the more clinically vulnerable get that added protection first. So, even if you have had your second jab over three months ago and you are now eligible, please don’t try and book until the NHS says it is your turn. At one point in an earlier post I said he implied people would all get them by the end of January, but he just talked about people being offered one by then. Here is my colleague Heather Stewart’s story about the offer. While the press conference was going on MPs voted for the second set of new Covid rules for England, requiring close contacts of people who are confirmed or suspected to have had the Omicron variant, to isolate for up to 10 days, by 431 votes to 36 – a majority of 395. According to the parliamentary website, 32 Conservative MPs and three DUP MPs voted against. They are listed here. Again, the numbers don’t quite tally, for reasons that are not clear. Johnson ends by talking about Storm Arwen. He says no one asked about it. But he says he wants to reassure people who have lost power that everything possible is being done to get the power back up. He says he recognises how tough it will have been for people. Q: Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are all advising people to work from home. Why are you taking a different view? Johnson says the government does not think that is necessary. A package of measures is in place to deal with Delta. They are rolling out the vaccine, and it is working. There is a particular issue with Omicron, and they are focusing on tough measures at the border. They are also introducing face coverings in some settings. He says they want to take a balanced and proportionate approach to Omicron. They are waiting for evidence about how effective the vaccines and the boosters are against it. There are good grounds for thinking the boosters will give the protection people need. Johnson says at the moment they see no need to move to plan B. But that has not been ruled out. Q: Is there a risk of another “pingdemic”? Johnson says he does not think that is likely. Currently the Omicron case numbers are small, he says. Q: People are cancelling nativity plays and Christmas parties. Are they over-reacting? Johnson says they do not want people to cancel events like Christmas parties and nativity plays. Pritchard urges people to think about volunteering for the vaccine programme. The volunteer staff have been critical, she says. Q: Is there community transmission of Omicron? Javid says the cases revealed at the weekend were linked to South Africa. He says they do not know if that is the case for the cases announced today. But he says they have to be realistic about the likelihood that community transmission is taking place. Q: Do you have enough vaccine in stock for the booster programme? Pritchard says she is absolutely reassured that they have the vaccine stock they need. Q: Would you advise people to use medical-grade masks? Javid says they see no need to change the current advice on masks. Q: Can you give people some hope that this will not go on? Johnson says the measures put in place will not last a minute longer than is needed. Pritchard says everyone should be able to book a booster vaccine by the end of January. Pritchard says this will be the most complex part of the vaccine rollout so far. NHS staff have responded magnificently, he says. She is confident they will again. At the press conference the first media question is about Jenny Harries. Q: Was Jenny Harries right to say what she said about limiting socialisting at Christmas? The answer is no, says Johnson. He says they are trying to take a balanced and proportionate approach. He sums up the measures announced at the weekend. Here is the list of 19 Tory MPs and three DUP MPs who voted against the new face covering rules for England. When the result was read out, there were 23 votes against, but the Commons website only lists 22 of those. It is not clear why. Amanda Pritchard says she is writing to the NHS saying what needs to be done to operationalise the new guidance. She says people do not need to contact the NHS about boosters; the NHS will contact them when it’s time for their jab, she says. Sajid Javid says the UK was the first country in the western world to authorise a vaccine for Covid. And the UK has delivered more booster jabs than any country apart from the US and China. He thanks all health staff who have made this a success. They have weakened the link between cases and hospitalisations and deaths, he says. He says the booster dose provides a much higher response than the primary course. Omicron poses a very high global risk, the WHO has said. He says there have now been 13 confirmed cases in England and nine in Scotland. The strategy to “buy the time we need to assess this new variant”. He says the latest developments have been worrying for some people. They have brought back memories of the strain of last winter. But we have one huge advantage we did not have then - the vaccination programme. This is a national mission, he says. If we want to have the best chance of a Christmas with our loved ones, we should get protected, he says. Johnson says people should avoid trying to book a booster until their age group gets its turn. He says he will be getting his own booster on Thursday. Boris Johnson is speaking now at his press conference. He starts by saying all adults will be offered a booster vaccine by the end of January. The government has won the vote on passing the new regulations on face coverings by 434 votes to 23 - a majority of 411. The Boris Johnson press conference is about to start. He will be appearing with Sajid Javid, the health secretary, and Amanda Pritchard, chief executive officer for NHS England. Eight more cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in England, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has said. There are in addition to the previous five confirmed cases of the Sars-CoV-2 variant known as B.1.1.529. The total number of confirmed cases in England is now 13. The new cases include two in Barnet, one in Haringey, one in Liverpool, one in Norfolk, one in Sutton, one in Camden, and one in Westminster. The individuals that have tested positive and their contacts are all isolating, health officials said. Work is under way to identify any links to travel to Southern Africa. The UKHSA has now identified cases in the East Midlands, East of England, London and North West. UKHSA is carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to be infectious. Nine cases have also been identified in Scotland, with five cases in the Lanarkshire area and four in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde area, bringing the UK total to 22. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of UKHSA, said: “It is very likely that we will find more cases over the coming days as we are seeing in other countries globally and as we increase case detection through focused contact tracing. That’s why it’s critical that anyone with Covid-19 symptoms isolates and gets a PCR test immediately.” In the Commons Maggie Throup, the health minister, has just wound up the debate. She ended with a slightly firmer rebuke to Dr Jenny Harries than she managed at the start of the debate. (See 1.11pm.) She said it was “government that sets policy and guidance” and that that was what the public should follow. MPs are now voting on the first set of regulations, relating to face coverings. There was very loud cheering “no” cheering from Tory MPs opposed to the measure when Dame Eleanor Laing, the deputy Speaker, called the division. Yesterday Edward Argar, the health minister, said he did not expect Covid regulations to tighten again before Christmas. And today Boris Johnson said there was no need for rules to change. (See 1.02pm.) But, according to a YouGov poll, two thirds of people do think further restrictions will need to be introduced within the next four weeks. Bob Seely (Con) has just finished his speech in the Commons. Most of it was devoted to claims that Prof Neil Ferguson, the Imperial College epidemiologist whose modelling was influential in persuading Boris Johnson to order the first lockdown, was unreliable. Baker says MPs face “a fundamental choice between heading towards heaven and heading towards hell”. The government is taking “the path to hell”, he claims. He says he is going to vote against all the measures, because he want to take the path towards heaven. He says he hopes MPs will follow him. Back in the Commons Steve Baker (Con), deputy chair of the Covid Recovery Group, is speaking now. He says the government seems to be working on the principle that you cannot be too careful. But you can be too careful, he says. He says if the government continues to over-react when there is a threat, whole sectors, like air travel and hospitality and tourism, will become uninvestable, he says. These are from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg. In the Commons Mark Harper, chair of the lockdown-sceptic Tory Covid Recovery Group, is speaking. Echoing what Steve Brine said earlier, he says the regulations are not clear enough about what counts as a suspected case of Omicron. Close contacts of suspected cases will have to isolate for up to 10 days. Harper is the fourth Conservative backbencher in a row to speak. That probably means there are no more opposition MPs who want to speak. Government supporters are notably absent from this debate too, and so the debate has been dominated by Tories critical of the government. Craig Mackinlay spoke before Harper. He said he did not understand why the rules required someone to put on a mask to go into a shop - perhaps for a very brief period of time - to buy a bottle of alcohol, when they could subsequently go to a party with a large number of people where masks would not be required. And, before Mackinlay, Huw Merriman told MPs that he was not against what the regulations were trying to achieve in principle. But they were badly drafted, he said. All nine cases of the Omicron variant in Scotland link to a “single private event” on 20 November, Nicola Sturgeon has told the Holyrood parliament in her weekly Covid update. Five cases on the new variant in Lanarkshire and four in Greater Glasgow and Clyde health boards have so far been identified. She added that none of the people who have tested positive have so far required hospital care and that none has recent travel history to, or known links with, others who have travelled to the countries in Southern Africa where the variant was originally detected. Sturgeon told MSPs that all nine were tested on and around 23 November. A surveillance look back exercise had identified that the PCR test results in these cases showed what is called the S-gene dropout - this is not conclusive evidence of the Omicron variant, but indicative of it. However, whole genome sequencing of these positive samples has now identified that they are indeed the Omicron variant. Sturgeon also told MSPs that her government did not plan to introduce new restrictions at this stage, pointing out that “some protections that the UK government has announced in recent days in relation to England - for example a requirement to wear face coverings in some settings – are already in place, and in fact more extensive, here in Scotland”. She said that instead the Scottish government was “asking people to significantly step up and increase compliance with existing protections – such as face coverings, hygiene, home working, ventilation, vaccination and regular testing”. She added that her government’s view remained that travel rules should be tightened further on a four-nations basis. Yesterday the first minister of Wales and I suggested to the prime minister that, until we know more about Omicron, people arriving in the UK from overseas should be asked to self-isolate for eight days and take a PCR test on day eight after their arrival, as well as on day two. At her news conference in Cardiff, Eluned Morgan, the Welsh government’s health minister, said people should “take seriously” the threat of mixing at Christmas. Aligning firmly with Jenny Harries (see 9.31am) rather than Boris Johnson (see 1.02pm), Morgan said: It’s too early to say yet what the situation is likely to be as we enter the Christmas period, but I would urge people to act with caution over the Christmas period. And to take seriously the situation, and the threat, of mixing with other people indoors during this time. She also said she expected Omicron to turn up in Wales. “Omicron has not yet arrived in Wales, but it’s simply a question of time before it does,” she said. Asked if the government would consider a type of lockdown or firebreak should Omicron begin to spread rapidly, Morgan said it was “too early to say”. But she said the government had a responsibility to keep the country open. In the Commons Christopher Chope (Con) said he thought the new Covid rules were part of a “scaremongering propaganda campaign” designed to suppress freedom. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, told MPs this morning that parliament may still have the power to jail witnesses who refuse to appear before a select committee. He was giving evidence to the Commons privileges committee, which is considering whether the rules should be clarified so that people who do refuse to appear before an inquiry can be fined. In the pre-democratic era the Commons could fine or imprison people for contempt of parliament, which might include ignoring a summons to attend. Most experts now believe that these powers have lapsed, which is why the committee is looking at whether legislation is need to ensure that people can be fined for boycotting a committee. But Rees-Mogg said he thought parliament may still have these powers. He said: Parliament has never formally given up its ability to imprison during the session of parliament ... I think the reality of our powers is that we don’t know whether they are there or not until they are used and then you might find that they are upheld by the courts or you might find that they are not and this is an argument where learned lawyers disagree. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the committee, said he was in “a bit of shock” to hear that Rees-Mogg thought parliament could still jail people. Bryant said he thought the Human Rights Act definitely made that impossible, and arguable the European Convention on Human Rights did too. Rees-Mogg also said he thought it was “not unreasonable for the house to fine people for failing to attend [a committee hearing]”. As PA Media reports, the last time someone was fined by parliament was in 1666 when Thomas White was told to pay 1,000, roughly 200,000 today, after he absconded. White had been ordered into the custody of parliament’s Serjeant at Arms for causing MP for Horsham Henry Chowne to be arrested and prevented from attending parliament. The power to imprison was last used in 1880 with the committal of a member, Charles Bradlaugh, and the imprisonment of a non-member Charles Grissell in the same year. In the Commons Steve Brine (Con) quotes what Jenny Harries said on the Today programme this morning. (See 9.31am.) Brine, a former health minister, says Harries is a careful and professional civil servant. She does not say things off the cuff, he says. He says if Harries was not presenting the government’s position in that interview, the minister, Maggie Throup, should have said so from the despatch box. Brine also says he is concerned that the regulation saying close contacts of people testing positive with Omicron should have to isolate could mean that, if one pupil at school tests positive, the other 29 pupils in the class could be spent home. Mark Jenkinson (Con) intervenes, saying this could lead to “lockdown by default” as a result of the work of “activist directors of public health”. Brine welcomes the point. He says, before he votes for these measures, he wants to hear clarification of what “suspected case” means in the isolation regulations. He says there is “an element of the Salem witch trials about this”, because they could lead to people being told to isolate for no good reason. He also says that the regulations could have negative impact on confidence. He says the government is not telling people to cancel Christmas parties, but that is happening anyway. He says he knows of events being cancelled in his constituency. That is due to “the chilling effect of these regulations”, he says. Back in the Commons Sir Graham Brady, chair of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee, says the government should have let MPs debate these regulations before they came into force. He echoes the concern expressed earlier (see 1.16pm) about the lack of an expiry date in the isolation regulations. And he says there are “very serious concerns about the efficacy of what is being proposed”. Dr Andrew Murrison (Con) says, although the government says it wants to avoid the risk of the NHS being overwhelmed, there is “no conceivable way” that could happen because 90% of the population have antibodies. Brady agrees, pointing out that Murrison is medically qualified. Sir Desmond Swayne (Con) intervenes to say the danger with the current plans is that they could trigger another “pingdemic”. Schools in England have seen a significant jump in Covid-related absence, according to the government’s attendance data. As concerns about the new Omicron mutation grows, Department for Education statistics show that attendance in state schools has fallen from 91.5% to 89.3% over the space of a fortnight. Around 208,000 pupils (2.6%) were off for Covid-related reasons on 25 November, up sharply from 130,000 (1.6%) two weeks earlier on 11 November. These included 79,000 suspected cases of coronavirus, up from 50,000, and 106,000 with a confirmed case of Covid, up from 67,000 two weeks earlier. Covid-related absence in schools dropped following the half-term break last month, but the reprieve was short-lived, said Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the NAHT school leaders’ union. He said: In addition to the existing disruption, there is now also significant concern about the impact the new variant of Covid could have on schools. School leaders can’t help but remember winter term 2020 and just how bad things got. The government was too slow to act last year – it cannot repeat those same mistakes this year. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, expressed concern about increased rates of absence among staff, with around 2% of teachers and school leaders absent due to Covid-related reasons last Thursday, up from 1.4% a fortnight earlier. He said: We have repeatedly called for more government support for schools and colleges in addressing these extreme pressures. The government must do much more to publicly promote the importance of twice-weekly lateral flow home testing among eligible pupils, fully fund air cleaning units for schools and colleges, and properly resource the on-site testing it has asked secondary schools to provide at the start of the spring term. Downing Street has said that today’s press conference with Boris Johnson will take place at 4pm. Alex Norris, a shadow health minister, is responding for Labour. He says Labour supports the two regulations being passed (covering the rules on face coverings, and the rules on isolating for close contacts of Omicron cases). He says in the past Labour criticised the government for acting slowly, and so he is glad that is not happening now. Mark Harper (Con) intervenes, and points out that yesterday he asked for an assurance from the government (which he did not get) that if the measures need to be extended over Christmas, parliament will be recalled from recess so MPs can get a vote. Would Labour back a recall in those circumstances? Norris says he will not comment on a hypothetical question, but he says he favours regulations getting proper scrutiny. In the Commons Mark Harper makes another intervention. He says the regulations being passed today on face masks expire on 20 December, but that regulation requiring close contacts of people who have tested positive for Omicron do not have a specific expiry date, which means they will run until the main statutory instrument relating to isolation expires in March 2022. Throup tells Harper he is making a very good point. Ministers will keep the house informed, she says. She says the regulations will not be kept in place any longer than necessary. In the Commons Maggie Throup, a health minister, is opening the debate on the new Covid restrictions. And she is already running into trouble over Jenny Harries. Three of the most lockdown-sceptic Tory MPs - Sir Desmond Swayne, Mark Harper and Steve Baker - have challenged her over what Harries said this morning. They wanted her to explicitly reject what Harries said. Throup defended the government’s measures, but she would not explicitly reject Harries’ call for people to avoid unnecessary socialising - even when it was put to her that Boris Johnson himself said it was not the government’s position. It sounded as if Throup was not aware of the latest comments coming from No 10 (see 12.23pm) and from the PM (see 1.02pm). Labour’s Rachael Maskell said that the government should be listening to Harries’s advice because she is a “public health professional and therefore really does understand what public health measures need to be taken to secure our well being against this pandemic”. UPDATE: This is from my colleague Aubrey Allegretti. Here is the full quote from Baker. He said: Is she seriously saying that it is not for ministers to have any particular view on officials employed within the department going out and taking a position which is at odds with the government’s public policy decision? Because if that really is now the policy we have got, that even employees of departments can take their own personal positions, we really are facing chaos and the overturning of longstanding government principles. Throup replied: I would like to reiterate that I do not speak for other people but what I am doing today is putting out the measures that we have implemented as of this morning in a timely fashion and it is the measures that we are considering today and from the government’s point of view this is the legislation we are implementing. Boris Johnson has said that there is no need for people to change their plans for meeting up with people, or for travel, in the run-up to Christmas. In an interview with Sky’s Sam Coates, Johnson was asked if people should modify their behaviour - for example, by avoiding school nativity plays, or cancelling foreign holidays - over the next few weeks. Johnson replied: On all that, we’re not changing the guidance on how you should basically be living your life, except in a couple of ways. That’s do with putting a mask on in some contexts, such as retail, and public transport, to stop transmission. And also making sure that we check people when they arrive in the country ... But we don’t see any need, at present certainly, to change the overall guidance about how people should be living their lives. When asked why, if that was the case, Dr Jenny Harries said this morning that people should avoid unnecessary socialising (see 9.31am), Johnson implied that she was just urging people to be sensible. He said: It’s always sensible to be careful, and I think what Jenny is saying there is right. Actually, what Harries was saying went a bit beyond that. Johnson went on: But we’re not going to change the overall guidance. We don’t think that necessary. We don’t see anything to suggest that we need to go, for instance, to plan B. Ministers have failed to provide proper evidence to justify their decision to require all frontline NHS staff to get vaccinated, a Lords committee says today. In a report (pdf), the Lords secondary legislation scrutiny committee says that the Department of Health and Social Care’s own figures suggest the benefits will not justify the cost. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, announced earlier this month that all frontline NHS staff will need to be fully vaccinated from 1 April next year. But the committee says: DHSC’s figures anticipate that, of the 208,000 currently unvaccinated workers in the sector, this legislation will result in 54,000 (26%) additional staff being vaccinated and 126,000 (61%) losing their jobs as a result of not complying with the requirement of being vaccinated: this seems a disproportionately small gain for legislation that is anticipated to cause £270m in additional costs and major disruption to the health and care provision at the end of the grace period. The house may expect to be provided with some very strong evidence to support this policy choice, and DHSC has signally failed to do so. Lord Hodgson, the Conservative peer who chairs the committee, said: We fully support high levels of vaccination, but DHSC is accountable to parliament for its decisions and needs to give us a clear statement of the effect of these regulations, the effect of doing nothing and any other solutions considered, so parliament fully understands all the consequences of what it is being asked to agree to. This is particularly important when the NHS is already under such pressure. DHSC has provided no single coherent statement to explain and justify its intended policy, and this undermines the ability of the house to undertake effective scrutiny of the proposed legislation. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and No 10 has delivered an unusually firm rebuke to Dr Jenny Harries, head of the UK Health Security Agency, on the subject of socialising at Christmas. (See 9.31am.) It seems that Boris Johnson is in favour of “socialising when we don’t particularly need to” (Harries’s phrase). The Sun’s Harry Cole has the key quotes. The PM’s spokesman also revealed that Harries attended cabinet this morning to give an update on Covid. The British Retail Consortium has said that people working in shops should not be expected to enforce the new law forcing customers to wear masks in retail premises. Helen Dickinson, the BRC chief executive, said: Retailers will be communicating the new rules on face coverings in England through in-store signage and other channels. However, it is vital that we do not place hardworking retail staff in harm’s way, and enforcement of face coverings must remain the duty of the authorities. And Richard Walker, managing director of Iceland, told the Today programme this morning that he would not be asking staff in his stores to enforce mask wearing by customers. He said: The question isn’t whether or not we should mandate face masks, but whether we can mandate them. What I won’t be doing is asking my store colleagues to police those who refuse to adhere to the rules. They are already working under significant pressure, particularly as we hit the busiest trading month of the year. The University of Oxford has said that it can “rapidly” update its Covid-19 vaccine “if it should be necessary” amid rising concerns about the Omicron variant. A university spokesperson said today: Due to the very recent discovery of the new B.1.1.529 [Omicron] strain of coronavirus, there are limited data available at this time. As with any new variant, we will carefully evaluate the implications of the emergence of B.1.1.529 for vaccine immunity. Despite the appearance of new variants over the past year, vaccines have continued to provide very high levels of protection against severe disease and there is no evidence so far that Omicron is any different. However, we have the necessary tools and processes in place for rapid development of an updated Covid-19 vaccine if it should be necessary. Labour is not moving right of the political spectrum but instead moving north, Lisa Nandy has claimed. Commenting on yesterday’s reshuffle, Nandy, who yesterday was moved from shadow foreign secretary to shadow levelling up secretary, told Sky News: We’re moving north; left or right, you can keep that debate. We’re going out into the country and we’re going to start delivering for people in towns, villages and cities that have been completely and utterly abandoned by the political system. You go to Grimsby, you go to Barnsley, you go to Aberdeen, you will find proud communities that have a contribution to make. But so often they are held back, not by the skills of their young people, not by the abilities in those communities, not by their own ambition, but by a national government that isn’t investing in the infrastructure that would bring good jobs. Scotland’s health minister, Humza Yousaf, has confirmed three more cases of the Omicron variant, raising the tally to five in Lanarkshire and four in Greater Glasgow and Clyde health boards, as questions continue about how the variant ended up there. He told BBC Scotland’s Good Morning Scotland programme that “nothing that links these cases back to Cop26 or the [South Africa-Scotland] rugby match. Of the current cases that we have found that timing would be off to link them”. Yousaf said that more than 200 positive cases from Cop26 had been re-examined in the light of the new variant. The six cases confirmed on Monday were not linked to travel, according to the Scottish government, and suggested a degree of community transmission. At yesterday’s Covid briefing, Scotland’s chief medical officer, Gregor Smith said that the first Omicron case in Scotland was tested six days ago. “The earliest indication we have at this moment in time - and I stress at this moment in time - is that the first positive PCR test in relation to this, a confirmed case, is the 23rd of November,” he said. But he also explained that health officials were conducting a “loop back exercise” of going through previous PCR tests back to 16 November now that they know what to look for as an indication of the Omicron variant. He said that one of the “quirks” of the new variant was the presence of an “S-gene dropout or negative on PCR testing”. This allowed specialises to identify a potential Omicron case before genomic sequencing and allowed them to make immediate contact with individuals to undertake advanced contact tracing. Nicola Sturgeon confirmed that the “loop back exercise” had led to the identification of all six cases in Scotland yesterday. Richard Moore, the head of MI6, has warned about China’s use of financial and data power to wield influence as he set out the need for Britain’s spies to work with the global tech sector to maintain cutting-edge capabilities, PA Media reports. PA says: Moore said Beijing used “debt traps and data traps” to get countries and individuals “on the hook”. The increasing complexity of the technology being used around the world meant MI6’s “boffins” were unable to meet the challenges alone and outside help was needed, he added. Moore used rare public appearances on Tuesday to set out the need for a “sea change” in the culture of the Secret Intelligence Service. The changing nature of the work meant that a James Bond-style Q figure is no longer able to provide all the technological capabilities required by MI6, he said. “Given the challenges to the way in which we go about recruiting and running secret agents, if you look at some of the technology that is available to authoritarian regimes around so-called smart cities, technologies, surveillance etc then clearly, in order to stay ahead of that, we can’t do all of this in-house,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today. “As you say, we can’t do it in our Q labs, the boffins behind the wire-type model doesn’t work for us any more.” In his statement to MPs yesterday Sajid Javid, the health secretary, suggested that if it turns out that the Omicron variant is no more dangerous than Delta, then the new measures coming into force today will be lifted. The government expects to have a much better idea of the threat posed by Omicron within three weeks and Javid seemed to be dangling before MPs the possibility of the latest restrictions could be gone before Christmas. That is what the more lockdown-sceptic Conservatives (a significant chunk of the parliamentary party) want to hear. But is it remotely probable? In her Today interview, Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), was repeatedly asked if she could imagine saying to ministers in two or three weeks’ time that the latest measures could be lifted. Harries rather skilfully avoided answering the question directly, although astute listeners may have concluded that, if forced to give an answer, it would have been “probably not”. Here are the key points. Harries played down the prospect of the latest Covid restrictions being lifted before Christmas. She would not answer when she was asked if she could imagine this happening, but she stressed the possible threat posed by Omicron and said that it was important to be “very careful”. She said the new measures were designed to give the authorities time to study the threat posed by the new variant. She also said that escalating the booster programme would give Britain better protection. She said it was “highly likely” that the vaccines would offer some protection against Omicron. But she said it was also “likely” that that effectiveness would be reduced. She said, even if vaccines offer some protection against Omicron, the new variant could still lead to hospitals coming under significantly more pressure. Asked about the prospect of the latest measures being lifted before Christmas, she said: I think we do need to be very careful ... In the winter we know there’s a strong demand on our hospital system for other reasons, not just from Covid, and I think a critical point here is, even if the vaccines appear to be effective but we find that the variant is more highly transmissible, having lowish grade infection but in very large numbers of the population could still [have] a significant impact on our hospitals. She encouraged people to cut back on unnecessary socialising over winter while the threat posed by Omicron remains unclear. (See 9.31am.) She said there has been no significant rise in the presence of S-gene target failure in the positive Covid cases being examined in the UK. S-gene target failure is not proof of Omicron (other variants feature it), but given that it is now very rare, and that Omicron does feature it (or S-gene dropout, as it is sometimes called), it is a good indicator for Omicron. “We have seen no rise, no significant rise, from the normal 1 in 1,000 cases that we would normally have,” she said. She said early reports about Omicron having only a mild impact in South Africa should be treated with caution because its population was so different. She said the average age of the population in South Africa is 27. In the UK it is 41. And she said Omicron, like other coronavirus variants, is thought to be much worse for older people not younger younger. Good morning. We’ve got another day where politics will be largely dominated by news and debate about the measures being taken in response to the emergence of the Omicron variant. There will be a debate and vote in the Commons, statements from the Scottish and Welsh governments, and a press conference from Boris Johnson this afternoon, focusing on booster vaccines. And this morning Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), has been on the Today programme. The new Covid restrictions for England announced by the government were relatively minimal compared with what they might have been - many countries have significantly tougher rules for Delta - but Harries gave a hint of of how scientists’ preferences are some way ahead of what politicians are willing to legislate for when she said it would better if avoided unnecessary socialising. Harries stressed that we still don’t know how serious is the threat posed by Omicron. Asked if she wanted to see more people working from home (a measure in the UK government’s plan B, but not one that it has yet implemented), Harries told the programme: What we’ve seen is, in fact, that not everybody has gone back to work. I’d like to think of it more in a general way, which is if we all decrease our social contacts a little bit, actually that helps to keep the variant at bay. So I think being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to and particularly going and getting those booster jabs. I will post more from her interview shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. Morning: Keir Starmer chairs a meeting of his new shadow cabinet. 9.30am: Jonathan Brearley, chief executive of energy regulator Ofgem, gives evidence to the Lords industry and regulators committee about energy prices. 10.15am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, gives evidence to the Commons privileges committee about the powers committees should have to summon witnesses. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 11.30am: Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, takes questions in the Commons. David Lammy will respond for Labour as the new shadow foreign secretary. 12.15pm: Eluned Morgan, the Welsh government’s health minister, holds a Covid briefing. After 12.45pm: MPs begin a three-hour debate on the new Covid restrictions for England announced at the weekend. After 2pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, gives a statement to the Scottish parliament on Covid. Around 4pm: MPs begin a debate on an SNP motion censuring Boris Johnson for dishonesty and other breaches of standards. Afternoon: Boris Johnson holds a press conference. I will be covering UK Covid developments here, as well as non-Covid politics, but for global Covid developments, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comKick It Out has accused beIN Sports of amplifying homophobia and questioned whether members of the LGBTQ+ community will be safe in Qatar for the World Cup after a former Egypt footballer said homosexuality was “against human nature” during a punditry appearance for the Qatari broadcaster. Mohamed Aboutrika, one of the station’s best-known pundits, sparked fury after urging Muslim players to boycott the Premier League’s Rainbow Laces campaign, which is designed to support the LGBTQ+ community, and saying that homosexuality is not “compatible” with Islam. The 43-year-old added that Muslim people “have a role to play” in eliminating homosexuality and described it as a “dangerous ideology that is becoming nasty”. Aboutrika’s comments were made live on beIN, which broadcasts live Premier League football in the Middle East and north Africa, less than a year before Qatar is due to host the World Cup. The country has been criticised by human rights groups for its treatment of the LGBTQ+ community. Kick It Out, football’s anti-discrimination charity, criticised Aboutrika and hit out at beIN for allowing hate speech on its network. “Kick It Out condemns the incredibly homophobic comments of Mohamed Aboutrika, and our support and solidarity goes out to any members of the LGBTQ+ community that have been affected by them,” Chris Paouros, a Kick It Out trustee, told the Guardian. “We are extremely disappointed and very concerned that beIN Sports decided it was appropriate to broadcast such hate speech in full on their network, and urge them to issue an apology to the LGBTQ+ community for doing so. As a Qatari broadcaster, beIN’s willingness to amplify homophobia in this way brings further into focus the safety of LGBTQ+ fans and players who may travel to Qatar for the World Cup, not to mention the freedoms of LGBTQ+ Qataris. “These are focuses of Kick It Out’s newly formed Qatar 2022 Working Group, which alongside the likes of Stonewall, Football V Homophobia and Inside Inclusion will hope to drive inclusion and security for fans at next year’s tournament, as well as creating a lasting impact for the rights LGBTQ+ people in Qatar, and on the decision-making process for future tournaments.” Fare, an anti-discrimination network in football, questioned why Aboutrika’s comments were not challenged during the programme. “So disappointing to see Egyptian legend Mohamed Aboutrika dismissing the Premier League’s Rainbow Laces campaign and using theological positions to do so,” the organisation tweeted. “No challenge from beIN Sports. He was given space to deny the rights and existence of a community.” It is understood beIn has reprimanded and sanctioned Abourtika for expressing views that it feels run contrary to its standpoint but has no plans to sack him. The broadcaster showed the Rainbow Laces campaign across the Arab world last weekend and will continue to do so across all its markets. A spokesperson said: “As a global media group we represent, champion and support people, causes and interests of every single background, language and cultural heritage across 43 hugely diverse countries, as we show every day.” The Rainbow Laces campaign is designed to promote “equality and diversity” by “showing support for all LGBT+ people in football and beyond”, according to the league’s website. Players back the initiative by wearing rainbow-coloured laces. The Premier League has contacted beIN about Aboutrika’s comments. A spokesperson for the league said: “We wholeheartedly disagree with the pundit’s views. The Premier League and its clubs are committed to supporting LGBTQ+ inclusion and making clear football is for everyone.” The chief executive of Qatar 2022 said on Tuesday that members of the LGBTQ+ community would be welcome at the World Cup. “Everyone is welcome,” Nasser al-Khater told CNN. “Listen, public display of affection is frowned upon, and that goes across the board – across the board. Qatar is a modest country. That’s all that needs to be respected. Other than that, everyone is free to live their life.”Ministers are risking a fresh backlash over social care by unveiling long awaited proposals that will offer no new funding to help crisis-hit care providers through winter, the Guardian understands. The care minister, Gillian Keegan, is expected to unveil the white paper to parliament on Wednesday in what has been billed as a key part of delivering on Boris Johnson’s 2019 promise to “fix the crisis in social care once and for all”. The package is understood to include proposals to invest some of the £5.4bn that will be raised by the new health and social care tax. This will include several hundred million pounds to boost the development of “extra care” facilities, also known as “assisted living”, which allow elderly people to straddle independent living and nursing care. It is also expected to invest more than £100m in improving the technology used in care settings, ranging from digitising resident records to devices that track falls and enable greater independence. Both initiatives are likely to be welcomed as important developments in making social care fit for purpose, potentially boosting the independence of people who rely on care and helping them stay at home for longer. But sources familiar with the policy said there appeared to be nothing to boost care worker pay in the short term amid existing crippling staff shortages exacerbated by the pandemic. The strategy paper comes amid rising fears among care bosses about how they will cope if the Omicron variant increases the strain on services. The sources said there was expected to be no announcement of funds to deal with a waiting list for care assessments and packages which council chiefs warned this week has risen to 400,000 people in England. On Monday, Stephen Chandler, the president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, warned that social care services across England were “rapidly deteriorating” and “red lights are flashing right across our dashboard”. The government white paper is expected to focus on how to spend £1.7bn that will be left over after a new £86,000 cap on care costs is paid for – a policy that was watered down this month, triggering a row. Some £500m from the £1.7bn pot, available in April 2022 for three years, has already been allocated to staff training and career development. As well as several hundred million pounds to be invested into new types of care homes and digital technology, there will be funding to boost respite care for families and for councils to help them administrate the cap on care costs. But one person who has seen the long-awaited policy said it lacked ambition and moved at too slow a pace to be considered a “fix” for social care. Another said there was nothing on boosting pay in the short term for care staff, whose average wage is £9.01 an hour in the independent sector. A government source insisted ministers have already pledged £162m for councils to distribute to care providers to help retain staff this winter alongside a TV ad campaign called “Made With Love” to find new recruits. They stressed that more help may yet be available to help the sector through winter. Care providers pleaded on Tuesday for more urgent help, with many having to refuse to deliver new care packages because of staff shortages, causing problems for NHS managers left unable to discharge patients. Mike Padgham, the chair of the Independent Care Group, an industry organisation, said: “We were already in the eye of a perfect storm, with exhausted and burnt-out carers battling to provide the best care they can as winter sets in, the impact of ‘no jab, no job’ [which requires care workers to be double vaccinated] and an inability to recruit from overseas because of Brexit. “Now we have the new Omicron variant on top, which means we have to be ever more vigilant. We must have some support if we are going to get through the next few months.” Last week, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, told council leaders that reforming social care boiled down to three questions: “How we pay for it, how do we staff it, how do we support an ageing population?” “One of the most challenging questions of our time,” he said. “So challenging that successive governments have ducked it. But this government is determined to rise to it.” A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We have already confirmed further support including the extension of free PPE, £388m more to support infection prevention control, testing and vaccination uptake in adult social care settings. This takes total funding for adult social care to £2.5bn over the pandemic.”Concerns are growing for the wellbeing of Cardiff players and officials stuck in South Africa amid reports some squad members are experiencing panic attacks as they wait to discover when they can fly home and commence their mandatory 10-day isolation before next week’s scheduled opening European home game against Toulouse. Two members of the Cardiff party have already tested positive for Covid, with one case suspected to be the Omicron variant, and plans to fly the rest of the squad home are still dependent on the latest round of testing results. Cardiff were due to depart Cape Town on Sunday but are now under strict lockdown and unable to leave their hotel rooms. The Welsh government has also not approved a request to allow the players to quarantine in a hotel in Wales which had agreed to accommodate the Scarlets, currently holed up in Belfast having flown back from South Africa, and Cardiff simultaneously. “Those laws are things that everybody needs to abide by and there will be no exceptions to that,” said Eluned Morgan, Wales’s minister for Health and Social Services. “Obviously we are interested in bringing our boys home. But they will have to come home in the same way that everybody else in this country would be expected to come home.” Munster have also announced that their latest round of PCR testing identified nine positive results with only those who have returned negative results able to fly home from South Africa. They are due to face Wasps in Coventry on 12 December in the Champions Cup, with European officials having already made clear that clubs unable to raise a team will be forced to forfeit their games. World Rugby, meanwhile, has approved a far-reaching overhaul of the laws governing the grassroots game with unions being given the flexibility to vary everything from the number of players per side and the duration of the game to the size of the pitch and the laws governing scrums, line-outs and kicking. A total of 10 new optional variations, with the aim of boosting participation and player welfare, also includes the possible introduction of weight-banding for youth and students as well as lower tackle heights. The duration of games can be as little as 40 minutes, scrums can be reduced to a minimum of five players for 10-a-side games, teams can agree not to contest or lift in lineouts and, if desired, another variation allows for penalties and free-kicks to be kicked to touch only from inside a team’s own half.Armed French police have broken up a makeshift migrant camp outside Dunkirk where the 27 people who died at sea last week stayed before they drowned in the Channel. The basic site, by a canal outside the Grand-Smythe suburb, had no toilets or running water, but was nevertheless used by several hundred people, mostly Kurds from Iraq or Iran, hoping to travel illegally to the UK. Photographs showed police in hazmat suits dismantling the site on Tuesday, a collection of tents and tarpaulins strapped between poles, with armed officers standing guard. Tents and unclaimed belongings were being picked up and thrown away in lorries. The occupants, mostly men but also some families with children, will be dispersed to processing centres around the country in an attempt to remove them from northern France. However, many are likely to come back within days to try to cross the Channel again because they do not want to stay in the country. Last week the Guardian spoke to several English-speaking migrants who said they had returned as soon as they could. Karwan Tahir, an Iraqi Kurd from Sulaymaniyah, who had lived in Britain prior to 2006, said he had been sent to a hotel near Bordeaux but “came back on the train straight away; I got a friend to send me money for the ticket. I don’t want to be down there, I want to come to the UK.” Many of the Iraqi Kurds trying to make the dangerous crossing have friends or family in Britain who will help with the £2,000 to £3,000 fee paid to people smugglers. People had only been camping in the canal-side area for a couple of weeks, after a larger and better-equipped location closer to Grand-Smythe and its out-of-town hypermarket was demolished on the orders of the French interior minister, Gerald Darmanin. Heating at the new site was provided only by open fires on nights where the temperature regularly dropped below zero degrees. Several people at the camp knew some of the 27 who drowned last Wednesday, after their dinghy deflated while they were attempting to cross the Channel. Darmanin said on Tuesday that France would “take care of the burial” of the victims. Migrants numbers near Dunkirk had more than doubled from an estimated 400 to more than 1,000 – the total swelled by Belarus’s decision to open its borders to migrants from Iraq. Belarus security forces often helped people make it over to Poland, from where it was possible to travel by car, train and on foot to Dunkirk. No refugee centre has existed in northern France since the UK and France reached an agreement that involved the closure of Sangatte camp in 2002. An informal camp, known as the Jungle, sprung up subsequently but it was demolished and shut down by the French authorities in 2016. Since then, migrants have lived in a handful of smaller camps around Calais and Dunkirk, often dominated by particular nationalities. Charity workers say they are subject to regular raids by French police, with tents slashed or taken away, as well as being closed down when they are deemed to have become too large. The number of migrants crossing the Channel has risen to 25,776 in 2021, up from 8,461 in 2020 and 1,835 in 2019, according to figures compiled by the BBC using Home Office data.Josephine Baker, the French-American civil rights activist, music hall superstar and second world war resistance hero, has become the first Black woman to enter France’s Panthéon mausoleum of revered historical figures – taking the nation’s highest honour at a moment when tensions over national identity and immigration are dominating the run-up to next year’s presidential race. The elaborate ceremony on Tuesday – presided over by the French president, Emmanuel Macron – focused on Baker’s legacy as a resistance fighter, activist and anti-fascist who fled the racial segregation of the 1920s US for the Paris cabaret stage, and who fought for inclusion and against hatred. Members of the French air force carried a coffin containing handfuls of soil from four places where Baker lived: the US city of St Louis where she was born; Paris, where her music hall performances subverted racial and sexual stereotypes and made her the highest-paid performer of her time; the Château des Milandes, where she lived, in south-west France; and Monaco, her final home. The coffin was placed in a tomb reserved for her in the Panthéon’s crypt. Her family has requested that her body remain buried in Monaco, where she died aged 68 in 1975. Projections outside the hallowed Parisian monument recalled scenes from Baker’s life, which the Élysée Palace called “incredible”, describing her as an exceptional figure who embodied the French spirit. Macron’s office said this was recognition that Baker’s “whole life was dedicated to the twin quest for liberty and justice”. In a speech, Macron said: “She was on the right side of history every time – she made the right choices, always distinguishing light from obscurity.” He detailed the racist violence of her childhood in Missouri, when as a young child she had to serve rich white families, and was brutally mistreated, in order to provide food for her brothers and sisters. He hailed the comic genius of her Paris cabaret performances that “ridiculed colonial prejudices”. He said during the second world war she had served France “without seeking glory” and that as a civil rights activist “she defended equality for all above individual identity”. Though born American, Macron said, “no one was more French” than Josephine Baker. Baker was born in Missouri in 1906, left school at 13 and as a child had witnessed terrifying riots and violence against Black people that resulted in thousands being displaced. She later said her birth city “had a terrible effect on me”. Like other Black American artists arriving in Paris at the time, she moved from the US to escape racial segregation. “I just couldn’t stand America, and I was one of the first coloured Americans to move to Paris,” she told the Guardian in 1974. “The simple fact to have a Black woman entering the Panthéon is historic,” the Black French scholar Pap Ndiaye, an expert on US minority rights movements, told the Associated Press. “When she arrived, she was first surprised like so many African Americans who settled in Paris at the same time ... at the absence of institutional racism. There was no segregation ... no lynching. [There was] the possibility to sit at a cafe and be served by a white waiter, the possibility to talk to white people, to [have a] romance with white people,” Ndiaye said. “It does not mean that racism did not exist in France, but French racism has often been more subtle, not as brutal as the American forms of racism,” he added. Baker was 19 when she arrived in Paris and became famous for her music hall appearances including dancing the Charleston at the Folies-Bergère cabaret hall wearing a skirt made of fake bananas. France was a colonial power and Baker’s routines are hailed now for the way she subverted colonial fantasies about Black women and the stereotypes they had to face. With the rise of Nazism and the outbreak of the second world war, Baker was quick to join the anti-fascist fight. In 1938 she had already joined the group known today as Licra, a prominent antiracist league. From 1939, she worked for France’s counter-intelligence services against the Nazis, joining the resistance and notably collecting information from German officials she met at parties. As a spy for France’s wartime leader-in-exile, Gen Charles de Gaulle, she obtained information on the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini and sent reports to London written in her music sheets in invisible ink. She had a pilot’s licence at a time when this was exceptional for women, and became a lieutenant in the French air force’s female auxiliary corps, gaining military decorations. “France made me who I am,” she later said. “Parisians gave me everything ... I am prepared to give them my life.” Later, as a civil rights activist, she was the only woman to speak at the 1963 March on Washington before Martin Luther King’s “I have a dream” speech. She was wearing her French military uniform. In France, she also waged a fight against discrimination, adopting 12 children from different ethnic backgrounds and countries across the world to form what she called a “rainbow” family, who she raised at her chateau in the Dordogne region. She said she hoped their lives would show that “racial hatred is not natural. It’s an invention of man.” Baker will be just the sixth woman to be honoured in the secular temple to the “great men” of the French Republic. She is also the sixth person of colour to be commemorated in the Panthéon, after five men. Félix Éboué, the governor general of French Equatorial Africa, entered in 1949; the author Alexandre Dumas, entered in 2002; and the poet and politician Aimé Césaire was celebrated there in 2011. Also commemorated in the Panthéon are: Toussaint Louverture, the 18th century military leader, who led a successful slave revolt and transformed the French colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, and Louis Delgrès, the leader of the movement in Guadeloupe to resist Napoleon’s reinstitution of slavery. The ceremony was held on 30 November because that was the date Baker chose to take French nationality through marriage, on the day of her wedding. The process to gain French nationality has been made more difficult since then. The ceremony – led by Macron, who chose to give Baker France’s highest honours after her supporters and families had petitioned for years – is seen as a move of political symbolism regarding France’s role as an inclusive society. The debate ahead of next spring’s presidential election has been dominated by hard-right rhetoric over national identity and immigration. The far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour, who holds convictions for inciting racial hatred, has declared he will run for president to “save” France from being destroyed by immigration. Macron’s office said it was a sign of the universal affection for Baker in France that there was complete political consensus around her honours. Baker died from a brain haemorrhage days after a final smash-hit cabaret show in Paris celebrating her half-century on the stage. She had told a French TV interviewer: “I don’t like the word hatred … We weren’t put on Earth for that, more to understand and love each other.” • This article was amended on 1 and 3 December 2021 to make clear that Aimé Césaire was not interred in the Panthéon, and to include Toussaint Louverture and Louis Delgrès as two other people of colour to have been commemorated there.Name: Blue Christmas films. Age: New. Appearance: Seasonal and a little saucy. And these are Christmas films? Yes. Christmas films, but raunchy. You mean like Santa Comes Again? No, not actual pornography. Just slightly edgy holiday fare. Like Elf? More like The Bitch Who Stole Christmas, to offer one example. I’ve not see that one. That’s because it premieres this week. It calls itself “the draggiest Christmas movie ever made”. Slowly paced, then, is it? No – it stars RuPaul and 20 other drag queens, who team up to bring mischief and mayhem to the US’s most Christmassy small town. Is it based on a true story? It seems to be a parody of a 2020 film called A Very Charming Christmas Town. I’ve not seen that either. Are these Christmas movies a big thing? They certainly are. Between them, the US cable networks will be showing at least 145 new Yuletide films this year, bearing such titles as Making Spirits Bright, Gingerbread Miracle and The Nine Kittens of Christmas. I’m not sure what you mean by a Yuletide film. What are they like? What do you think of when you think of Christmas and movies? Die Hard. Not this again. That’s just a film that’s shown on TV at Christmas. A true Christmas TV film has a number of key elements. Such as? Snow, shopping, long scarves, a main character in Christmas denial, a bit of redemption, a tame central romance, a few Santa hats and … A certain wearying predictability? Yes, along with dreadful dialogue, a paper-thin plot in which magical thinking is consistently rewarded, and carol singing. And they’re all the same? They were until VH1 launched its “Naughty or Nice” lineup, including The Bitch Who Stole Christmas, to punch holes in the holiday film formula. What else is on its list? Hip Hop Family Christmas and Let’s Get Merried. The latter concerns a “hard-partying, down-on-her-luck holiday-hater” who marries a man she encounters on a Christmas bachelorette weekend. Meet Me in St Louis it ain’t. No, it ain’t. I thought the forces of political correctness were supposed to be cancelling Christmas. Why don’t they get on with it? Sounds like somebody could use a little Christmas magic. No, thank you. What about a little raunchy Christmas magic? If you’re talking about XXXmas Stocking Stuffers 3, I already have the DVD. Suit yourself, Scrooge. Do say: “Have yourself a raunchy little Christmas.” Don’t say: “It’s called Rudolph in Rehab; Joey from Friends is already on board.”More than a million students will be hit by three days of strikes on campuses across England, Scotland and Northern Ireland starting on Wednesday, in the latest round of an increasingly bitter dispute in which university leaders have accused leftwingers within the University and College Union (UCU) of blocking progress over a possible deal. Fifty-eight universities will be affected where staff backed a ballot on strike action called by the UCU, halting lectures and tuition at the country’s largest universities, including the Open University and University College London. In Greater Manchester alone, more than 100,000 postgraduate and undergraduate students will have their studies disrupted, with strikes taking place at the University of Manchester, Manchester Metropolitan and Salford universities, as well as the Royal Northern College of Music. The dispute is in part over the management and financing of the University Superannuation Scheme (USS), which provides pensions to the UK’s older universities as well as research institutes and academic thinktanks. The two sides are also battling over low pay and issues such as insecure fixed-term contracts used to employ an increasing number of teaching staff. In a statement issued on the eve of the strike, Universities UK (UUK) – which represents the employers in the pensions talks – argued that the strike was supported by only a minority of staff, and that the UCU’s leadership was being attacked by leftwingers. UUK, the umbrella body of universities in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, said a potential deal over pensions had been undermined by the union’s own negotiators, whom it described as “members of the influential UCU Left faction”, saying that there was “a pattern of checks on the UCU leadership by UCU Left, who are affiliated with the Socialist Workers party”. “With such divisions in UCU’s decision-making bodies, it is difficult to see how a negotiated settlement over USS could ever be possible,” UUK said in its statement. In response, a UCU spokesperson said: “It is beyond disappointing that just as 50,000 university staff are set to walk out on strike UUK has decided to spend its time targeting individual UCU members. “Instead of engaging in desperate 11th-hour deflection tactics intended to undermine the strikes, UUK should come clean about the true impact of its pension cuts. After witnessing this bizarre intervention from UUK, students and staff will quite rightly ask why vice-chancellors are allowing their representative body to run amok instead of negotiating positively to resolve yet another dispute in the sector.” But vice-chancellors are showing no signs of compromising, with some angry at the union’s actions and the failure of negotiations. “I don’t care if it’s bloody, as long as the blood spills within the union,” said one vice-chancellor. According to UUK, the revisions to pensions on retirement amounted to cuts of 10% and 18% required for the fund to remain financially sound. But the union says its own modelling – prepared by an independent firm – shows a typical lecturer on an annual wage of £39,000 would face a cut to their defined and guaranteed benefits of 35%, while a model published by the USS trustees shows an even deeper 41% cut in future benefits. Jo Grady, the UCU’s general secretary, said: “Not only have UUK been wrongly criticising UCU’s own projections of the scale of their pension cuts, but they have also adopted wild underestimates of their own, which have been repeated by vice-chancellors at universities up and down the UK in communications to their staff. “It is beyond a disgrace that senior managers in our universities have been attempting to persuade staff from acting to stop cuts to their retirement with information that is wrong and which emanated right from the top of UUK.” UCU also said re-balloting on strike action would take place at 42 universities where the ballot failed by only narrow margins, and that strikes would continue into the new year. While most of the universities involved voted to strike on both the pensions and pay ballots, others only meet the conditions on the pay ballot, while a handful including Imperial College London are striking solely over pensions. University leaders and ministers have said the strike will bring further disruption to students who have missed months of in-person teaching and the use of facilities such as libraries because of the closure of campuses during the pandemic. The National Union of Students and a number of campus student unions have supported the strike. A poll of students conducted by the NUS this month found that 73% backed UCU’s action while 9% opposed it.The Omicron variant of Covid-19 was present in Europe at least 10 days ago and already appears to be spreading in the Netherlands and elsewhere. “We have found the Omicron coronavirus variant in two test samples that were taken on November 19 and 23,” the Dutch health ministry said in a statement on Tuesday. “It is not yet clear whether these people had also visited southern Africa,” the ministry added. Evidence that the Omicron variant had arrived in Europe earlier than previously known came as Anthony Fauci, the chief medical adviser to US president Joe Biden, said the tally of Omicron variant cases had reached 226 in 20 countries, although it had not yet been detected in the US. Fauci added that despite the emergence of the new variant, evidence from South Africa, where Omicron was first identified last week, so far did not suggest any unusual symptoms associated with it, although it was not clear if it could lead to more severe disease. Concern over Omicron has prompted 56 countries to issue travel restrictions related to the variant. However, in new advice issued on Tuesday, the World Health Organization cautioned countries against imposing “blanket” travel bans but advised those who are unwell, those who have conditions that might lead to more severe Covid-19, and the over-60s not to travel. Warning that blanket bans would not prevent the spread of the disease and would impact on livelihoods, the UN’s global health body instead advised: “Measures may include screening of passengers prior to travel and/or upon arrival, and use of SARS-COV-2 testing or quarantine of international travellers after thorough risk assessment.” The Dutch announcement further muddies the timeline of when the new variant first emerged in Europe. Previously, the Netherlands had said it found the variant among passengers who came from South Africa on Friday – but the new cases predate that. The Dutch research institute RIVM said it had found Omicron in samples dating from 19 and 23 November. Those findings predate the positive cases involving the variant found in at least 14 passengers returning from South Africa last Friday and tested at Schiphol airport, Amsterdam. In a further indication that the Omicron variant may already be being transmitted within Europe, German authorities said they had found an Omicron infection in a man who had neither been abroad nor had contact with anyone who was. Despite the worries around the globe, doctors in South Africa have reported that patients are suffering mostly mild symptoms so far, but they warn that it is early. Also, most of the new cases are in people in their 20s and 30s who generally do not get as sick from Covid-19 as older patients. As countries disclosed scattered instances of Omicron, from Scotland to Hong Kong, Japan and France, the behaviour of the variant appeared to be following previous patterns of dispersal and identification that have forced health authorities to race to play catch-up, with most cases related to travel to southern Africa. The European Union’s medical agency chief said on Tuesday it was ready to deal with the Omicron variant, and that it would take two weeks to have an indication whether the current Covid-19 vaccines would be able to deal with it. Emer Cooke, the executive director of the European Medicines Agency, said if it did require a new vaccine to counter Omicron, it would take up to four months to have it approved for use in the 27-nation bloc. “We are prepared,” Cooke told EU legislators, adding that cooperation with the medical industry was already taking place to prepare for such an eventuality. “We know that at some stage there will be a mutation that means we have to change the current approach.” The emergence of the variant, which features an unusually large number of mutations on its spike protein, has prompted travel bans and new restrictions in a number of countries, as others – including the UK – moved to accelerate vaccination programmes. While the overwhelming majority of current coronavirus cases behind the winter surge in infections across Europe remain the Delta variant, some experts fear Omicron could escape the protections of vaccines and compete with Delta for dominance. As of Tuesday, 42 cases of the Omicron variant have been identified in 10 European countries, according to the head of the EU’s public health agency. Authorities in the bloc were analysing another six “probable” cases, Andrea Ammon, who chairs the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), told an online conference, adding that the confirmed cases were mild or without symptoms, although in younger age groups. “For the assessment whether [Omicron] escapes immunity, we still have to wait until the investigations in the laboratories with sera from people who have recovered have been carried out. These are expected in a couple of weeks,” she said. The variant has been detected in two Israeli doctors, one of whom returned from a conference in London in the past week. The physician who had returned from Britain had probably infected his colleague, a spokesperson for Sheba Medical Centre near Tel Aviv said, adding that the pair had received three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine and so far had shown mild symptoms. The WHO has warned that the global risk from the Omicron variant is “very high” based on early evidence, saying it could lead to surges with “severe consequences”. The new variant was first identified last week by researchers in South Africa amid signs that growing number of cases attributed to Omicron in Botswana and South Africa may be showing the first signs of a “a steep rise”. “There is a possibility that really we’re going to be seeing a serious doubling or tripling of the cases as we move along or as the week unfolds,” Dr Nicksy Gumede-Moeletsi, a regional virologist for the WHO, told the Associated Press on Tuesday. The WHO said there were “considerable uncertainties” about the Omicron variant. But it said preliminary evidence raised the possibility that the variant had mutations that could help it both evade an immune system response and boost its ability to spread from one person to another. The WHO stressed that while scientists were hunting for evidence to better understand the variant, countries should accelerate vaccinations as quickly as possible. Agencies contributed to this reportAs the child sex-trafficking trial of Ghislaine Maxwell entered its second day of testimony in New York City on Tuesday, the prosecution’s first witness put the British socialite in the middle of Jeffrey Epstein’s life – but also said he did not see Epstein engage in wrongdoing with minors on his private planes. The names of influential men who flew on Epstein’s planes were raised in court, among them Bill Clinton, Prince Andrew and Donald Trump. Epstein killed himself in August 2019 in jail, awaiting trial for the transportation and abuse of minor teenagers. Maxwell, 59, is being tried in federal court in Manhattan. She has pleaded not guilty to six counts arising from allegedly procuring teen girls for Epstein, some as young as 14. Lawrence Paul Visoski Jr, who worked for Epstein as a pilot from 1991 to 2019, began testimony on Monday. He testified that Maxwell was about 30 when he met her in 1991, and claimed “we interacted quite often. She was on a lot of the flights”. Visoski testified that Maxwell oversaw Epstein’s households. Questioned about her relationship with Epstein, he said: “I thought it was more personal than business.” The pair remained close into the 2000s. Visoski said they were not necessarily romantic but were “couple-ish”. He said he did not see them holding hands or kissing. On Tuesday, Visoski testified that Maxwell was “No 2” in Epstein’s hierarchy, with Epstein being “No 1”. “She was the one who … handled most of the finance, my expenses in the office,” he said, in response to prosecutors. Visoski also testified that the famous violinist Itzhak Perlman flew on Epstein’s plane to the high-profile Interlochen Arts Camp in Michigan, landing at an airport nearby. Epstein is alleged to have met an underage victim at the camp. The pilot said Clinton flew on Epstein’s plane “a few times” in the 2000s. Clinton denies any wrongdoing. Defense lawyers asked: “Are you familiar with Prince Andrew, the Duke of York?” “I am,” Visoski replied. “Did he ever fly on Mr Epstein’s planes?” “Yes, he did.” Maxwell also faces two counts for allegedly lying under oath, for which she will be tried separately. Those charges stem from claims by longtime Epstein accuser Virginia Giuffre, who alleges that Maxwell and Epstein coerced her into sexual activity with Andrew at the age of 17. Giuffre filed suit against Maxwell, who called her a liar. Maxwell and Andrew insist on their innocence. Visoski said he did not recall if Robert Kennedy Jr flew on Epstein’s plane. “What about Senator John Glenn?” the defense asked, of the former astronaut who represented Ohio as a Democrat from 1974 to 1999. “I do remember John Glenn, yes.” “The actors Kevin Spacey and Chris Tucker?” “Yes, I remember them as well.” Donald Trump also flew on Epstein’s plane before he was president, Visoski said. In cross-examination, Maxwell’s legal team sought to chip away at the possibility that Visoski saw Epstein engage in sexual misconduct, which is integral to establishing that Maxwell facilitated abuse. Visoski said he did not see underage-looking girls, or even women who appeared younger than 20, flying on Epstein’s planes without close relations. He did not check female passengers’ ages, he said, but repeatedly said the unaccompanied ones looked above age. He was asked if he ever saw Epstein engage in sex acts. “No,” he said. “You never saw sex acts with underage girls?” “Absolutely not.” While the cockpit doors were closed during flight, Visoski was able to leave the front of the plane if he needed the bathroom. The defense suggested he could have left the cockpit freely at any point, and therefore could have seen Epstein engaging in misconduct. The first half of the day’s proceedings was characterized by moments of strangeness and levity. Around 9.30am, Maxwell’s sister was spotted sketching her sibling in a lined notepad. Visoski spoke matter-of-factly and was even jolly at some junctures. He did not seem nervous at all. During questioning about how he was permitted to leave his cockpit to use the restroom, he said: “There’s times when you have to use the restroom – like now.” “That’s for me,” Judge Alison Nathan remarked. “I was hoping for a break,” Visoski said, spurring laughter throughout the court. Although he sported a conventional dark suit, white shirt and red striped tie, Visoski also wore black velvet slippers with a red monogram of what appeared to be his initials. On cross-examination, Visoski said Maxwell was Epstein’s “No 2” in a non-business context, managing his properties. She “was his go-to person to handle everything else that wasn’t business related”, he said. Maxwell had other hands-on tasks, he said, such as decorating and shopping. At Epstein’s New Mexico ranch, Visoski said, “she took care of the horses” and other animals. After the pilot’s testimony ended, the government called its first accuser, who was identified as “Jane”. In opening remarks on Monday, Maxwell’s lead attorney, Bobbi Sternheim, cast Maxwell as a patsy for Epstein’s crimes – and went so far as to invoke the Bible. “Ever since Eve was accused of tempting Adam for the apple, women have been blamed for the bad behavior of men and women are often villainized and punished more than the men ever are,” Sternheim argued. “The charges against Ghislaine Maxwell are for things that Jeffrey Epstein did. “But she is not Jeffrey Epstein. She is not like Jeffrey Epstein – and she is not like any of the other men, powerful men, moguls, media giants, who abuse women.” The prosecutor Lara Pomerantz argued that Maxwell was complicit in Epstein’s crimes, arguing: “She knew what was going to happen to those girls.” Maxwell “preyed on vulnerable young girls, manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused”, she said. “The defendant was trafficking kids for sex.” Pomerantz continued: “Maxwell was Epstein’s best friend and right hand. She was involved in every detail of Epstein’s life. The defendant and Epstein were partners in crime.” In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalSince the beginning of 2020, we have all become used to living with uncertainty: estimating relative risks; thinking of how to protect ourselves and others; attempting to plot out lives in which school, jobs, travel and time with loved ones have a question mark attached. Now that uncertainty has increased again. The World Health Organization has said that the Omicron variant poses a very high global risk of infection surges. Experts suggest that it will take around a fortnight before the extent of the threat it poses becomes clearer, in terms of how much it sickens those it infects and how well existing vaccines perform against it. The chief executive of the US drugmaker Moderna, Stéphane Bancel, has warned that “there is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness of vaccines] is the same level” as with Delta. The good news is that we are not back at square one: the variant is very unlikely to fully escape vaccines. This is why the government is once more counting on their power. It “will throw everything” at a booster drive, Boris Johnson said on Tuesday. The prime minister was announcing an ambitious target of 3.5m jabs a week, with all adults being offered (though not necessarily receiving) a booster by the end of January. The question is whether that is enough, and what we should do while we are waiting to find out. Even if Omicron proves no more likely than Delta to cause severe infection, it could still result in more hospitalisations and deaths if it is much more transmissible. It takes time to deliver boosters, and experts have repeatedly warned of the danger of counting on vaccines alone. Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, suggested that “not socialising when we don’t particularly need to” would be important; in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, people are advised to work from home if they can. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, is encouraging mask wearing in all enclosed spaces. But with a hospitality industry struggling to get off its knees and Tory backbenchers instinctively opposed to even minor restrictions, Mr Johnson said he saw no need to change the overall guidance on how people live their lives and told them not to cancel Christmas parties. He believes this is a “balanced and proportionate” response. The public may disagree. In previous waves, it has proved – rightly – more cautious than the government, with people reducing contact before the first lockdown and cancelling Christmas plans before the prime minister called a halt to festivities at the 11th hour last year. One survey found that 68% believe it is likely that further restrictions will be needed during the Christmas period. Several theatres will now insist that audience members cover their faces. It is hard to understand why masks are required on public transport and in retail settings, but not when people sit through performances together for hours. The government now risks being behind both public opinion and the progress of Covid once more. It should extend mandatory masking and set out the risks of socialising inside more clearly so that people are better empowered to make their own decisions. Finally, it must address shockingly inadequate sick pay. No one disputes that those who are infected should stay at home. But people can only protect themselves when they have both the knowledge and resources to do so.In May, Sir Keir Starmer attempted to reshuffle his shadow cabinet following the disastrous byelection defeat in Hartlepool. It was a chaotically botched job, resulting in a damaging standoff with his deputy, Angela Rayner, and a slew of negative headlines. Six months on, bolstered by at last landing significant blows on the government over sleaze and broken promises, Labour’s leader did the job properly on Monday and dramatically reconfigured his frontbench. All bar five members of his top team have been replaced or moved. After a long period of drift, Sir Keir’s determination to get on to the front foot is understandable and welcome. The new team contains strong and high-profile performers who have the talent and experience to discomfort their Tory opposite numbers. The appointment of Yvette Cooper as shadow home secretary follows an impressive performance as the longstanding chair of the home affairs select committee. Ms Cooper’s clashes with Priti Patel are likely to be Westminster box office. Her track record on immigration policy makes her an experienced pair of hands, in a debate that Labour must handle with care. David Lammy, who replaces Lisa Nandy as shadow foreign secretary, is also a former government minister and one of the party’s most accomplished media performers. On the face of it, Ms Nandy looks to have been demoted. But her deployment as shadow levelling-up secretary sets up another intriguing and crucial head-to-head battle – in this case with Michael Gove. This is a return to familiar terrain for the MP for Wigan. Before and after the Brexit referendum, Ms Nandy was an acute analyst of the “red wall” disillusionment that contributed to the leave victory, and of the dangers it carried for Labour. As Mr Gove struggles to extract levelling-up resources from the Treasury, Ms Nandy is a smart choice to fight on this battleground. The new team thus has important strengths. But the leadership’s suggestion that the reshuffle was merely a case of promoting the best people to the right roles is disingenuous. The removal of Ed Miliband as shadow business secretary – and his replacement by the City-friendly Jonathan Reynolds – is a retrograde step. Mr Miliband pursued his brief with vigour and radicalism when it came to the environment; he also fought a losing battle to keep public ownership on Labour’s economic agenda. Sir Keir seems intent on pushing the party down a far more cautious economic path. This is disappointing, at a time when ambition, imagination and proactive government is required to steer the post-Brexit, post-pandemic transition to net zero. The promotions of Bridget Phillipson to shadow education secretary and Wes Streeting to shadow health secretary – both youthful stars from the right of the party – also indicate the future direction of travel. These are, of course, the calls that Sir Keir is entitled to make as Labour’s leader. But though he has pitched his tent on what used to be called the centre ground of British politics, he should be wary of causing gratuitous offence to the party’s left and its allies. The decision to launch the reshuffle while a blindsided Ms Rayner made a key speech on sleaze seemed disrespectful. Disunited parties rarely make a good impression on the electorate. With some caveats, it is fair to say Sir Keir has strengthened his team. But to mount an effective election campaign, he will need the whole party to get behind it.Well, who would you trust with the nation’s health? On the Radio 4 Today programme, Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency and frequent celebrity guest at Downing Street press conferences, had rather suggested that she would be taking a more cautious approach to the Omicron variant than the government. Instead of ripping off her mask in the pub and getting trashed at any Christmas party to which she could get herself invited, she would be limiting her social contacts wherever possible. And if the rest of us knew what was good for us, we would be following her example. This clearly wasn’t quite the message Boris Johnson had intended for the country. He had expected Harries to be gung-ho and say any old shit like she had early on in the pandemic. But she had clearly wised up. No matter. In a straight fight between taking the advice of medical experts and doing anything for a quiet life, it’s no contest for the prime minister. Bertie Booster knows best. Everything will turn out just fine. Probably. But if you’re going to panic, it’s always best to do it later. When it really counts. Nothing worse than half-hearted panic. So within a couple of hours No 10 had officially disowned Harries. She was having a bad day and didn’t know what she was saying. The government was in charge and putting on a mask for 30 minutes a day and self-isolating if you came into contact with someone with the Omicron variant was more than enough to be getting on with. And just in case that wasn’t entirely clear, Johnson did a TV clip for Sky in which he insisted that what Harries had really said was that people should be careful. That they should think twice before socialising and then just say “fuck it” and do it anyway. Which she hadn’t said at all. Unfortunately nobody appeared to have told Maggie Throup, the truly hopeless vaccines minister, any of this before she opened the hastily arranged debate on the new Covid provisions that had actually come into effect nine hours earlier. So what followed was a total mullering. Even on a good day, Throup comes across as barely conscious. And this wasn’t a good day. It was a bad day. A very bad day. Almost immediately after Throup had got to her feet she was interrupted by the libertarian extremists on the Tory right for whom any new restriction is a total insult to civil liberties. First they piled in on Harries. How dare a doctor think she knew better than they did! So would Throup publicly denounce her? She wouldn’t. As she knew nothing, she just hedged her bets. “Everyone likes socialising,” she said, sounding thoroughly miserable, before meandering into a dreary anecdote about how washing her hands had played havoc with her skin. Luckily no one was listening to her humiliation as the lunatics had taken over the asylum. William Wragg was certain that Omicron was nothing to worry about as no one appeared to have died from it. Maggie didn’t have the nous to tell him it was a new variant and that the data was still being collected. That was one of the more intelligent contributions. Desmond Swayne was certain the only reason people got vaccinated was to make sure they didn’t get pinged. It hadn’t occurred to him that most people just didn’t want to die, get seriously ill or kill vulnerable friends and family. Graham Brady, another of the more intellectually challenged MPs, reckoned that if the Omicron variant was resistant to the vaccine then it was best all round if people died sooner than later. Then we’d know where we were. Craig MacKinlay rather agreed. There was no point developing a new vaccine that worked against Omicron as the virus would only mutate again. Christopher Chope couldn’t work out why people who had been vaccinated should be made to wear masks even if they were infectious, while the fundamentalist Steve Baker saw it as something of a crusade. The government had been poised between heaven and hell in making people wear masks on the bus and had chosen the path of eternal damnation. Seriously. How come it was only the men who were in urgent need of a stupidity vaccine? Later in the afternoon Boris and Sajid Javid were out giving a joint press conference in which they mostly told everyone what they had been telling them for the past few days. Saj was rather more measured. Almost team Jenny without actually spelling it out. Omicron was a very high global risk and there’s a lot we don’t know yet, he said. In which case, you might wonder why he wasn’t taking a more precautionary approach to the new variant. Then again, he’s clearly been taken hostage by Downing Street and is suffering from Stockholm syndrome. “If we want the best chance of Christmas with our loved ones, we need a booster jab,” he burbled. Yeah right. It was going to take until the middle of February to get everyone jabbed. Plus it takes two weeks for the vaccine to be effective. Do the maths and choose your Christmas parties with care. Boris, meanwhile, was back to being Bullshitter Bertie Booster. In his world everything is always going to turn out for the best, up until the time it doesn’t. So he was full of good cheer. Christmas? Nothing to worry about. He’d checked in with Jenny and he was sure she was back on message. The government’s response was balanced and proportionate. As in he’d done the bare minimum which also happened to be the most some of his more deranged backbenchers would tolerate. Besides, you only really needed masks if you were meeting people you didn’t know. Mmm. Fingers crossed and all that. John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation in-person or online by booking tickets here. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Dozens of feral peacocks and peahens are roaming the streets and leaping from the rooftops of Tracy, California. They claw at shingles and defecate on porches. Their calls, especially in mating season, echo through the community. They have no fear of pets nor people. Errant peafowl have milled around the city’s Redbridge neighborhood for years – some believe they originally came from a now-defunct nearby dairy farm – but the numbers have increased as the birds keep multiplying. Now they’re everywhere, and ruffling some residents’ feathers. “I’ll have like eight of them sitting on my porch railing pooping,” said Stephanie Voress, proprietor of the Redbridge General Store. “They’re a nuisance, but they’re beautiful.” In recent weeks, some community members decided that something had to be done. The homeowners association of Redbridge, a gated community, has proposed to humanely relocate about 30 to 40 peafowl through a deal with the city and a contract with Bay Area Wildlife Services. The homeowners association says it’s hoping to finalize an agreement between the government of Tracy, a city of about 90,000 people located about 60 miles east of San Francisco, and the Redbridge community to split the cost of the intended relocation – which is estimated at around $30,000. Tracy city council and animal services did not immediately respond to the Guardian’s requests for comment. The homeowners association is weighing a number of options on where to send the birds if the relocation plan goes through, but insists that it’s time the peafowl find a new home. “If this were a pack of 100 rats that were scuffling around the yard or on the roof, no one would wait to deal with that problem,” said Dave Lieberman, president of the Redbridge Homeowners Association. “Unfortunately the peacocks are beautiful birds, you want to admire them, but in these numbers they can be destructive.” Peacocks are known for their iridescent plumage marked with blue and green eyespots, but they are also large birds that grow up to 13 pounds and often move in groups. The males can make a distinctive shrieking noise. “They have a peculiar kind of cry that sounds like a baby wailing. It’s a little distressing,” Lieberman said. “It starts early in the morning, it’s loud and then they land on the roofs.” Residents have taken issue with the peafowl because of damage to their houses, scratches on cars and the noise from their squawks and rooftop roosting. And then there is the rampant defecation. “The poop is huge,” Voress said. “It comes out like soft serve.” Other areas of California have faced similar problems with peafowl in recent years, sometimes deeply polarizing communities over what to do with them. Earlier this year, stalled relocation efforts during the pandemic led to hundreds of feral peacocks free on the lawns and rooftops of Pasadena and San Gabriel Valley. Some residents became enchanted with the brightly colored birds, defying mandates against feeding them, while others developed a deep hatred of the peacock population and resorted to vigilante attempts to cull their numbers – running them down with cars or attempting to poison them. Much like in Southern California, there’s a contentious debate over the peacocks and peahens in Redbridge. Some residents like the birds and hope to keep them around, with Lieberman saying he has video of homeowners tossing feed for peacocks out kitchen windows. On the social media platform NextDoor, residents say the neighborhood is split between those who think the birds are an attractive addition to the community and those who are adamant that the birds have got to go. “I’m kind of neutral on it, because I do think they’re gorgeous,” Voress said. “But they do mess up my porch pretty badly.”Norway’s Magnus Carlsen and Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi played to a fourth draw in as many games on Tuesday in the latest instalment of their €2m world championship showdown in Dubai, which left the best-of-14 match in a 2-2 deadlock with 10 contests remaining. The peaceful result after 2hr 37min was the shortest of the encounter so far, where no blood has yet been drawn but which supercomputers evaluating the moves have indicated is the most accurate world title match ever played in the event’s history. Carlsen, playing with the favoured white pieces, opened with 1 e4 before the players quickly found themselves looking at the Petrov Defence (1 ... e5 2 Nf3 Nf6). The opening, seldom deployed by the Russian, took many observers by surprise but not Carlsen, who noted afterward that Nepomniachtchi played it during the eight-man candidates tournament where he secured his place as the world title challenger. “It was one of the main openings that I expected seeing that he played it in the Candidates and also, in (Nepomniachtchi’s) first black game, he went for a more classical approach rather than a sharp one,” said Carlsen, who also faced the Petrov as white in the sixth and 11th contests of his third world title defence against the American Fabiano Caruana in London three years ago. “So it was very much expected. Couldn’t know obviously which exact Petrov line he was going to go for, but the Petrov in itself was very much expected.” The queens came off the board within the first half-hour amid material exchanges that augured the quiet outcome ahead, though Carlsen was first to divert from the annals of known games with the rare 18 Nh4!? followed by the ambitious 19 g4. Further, the Norwegian’s decision to decline a draw by repetition with 27 d5 (instead of Nf6+) and the extensive time he spent on moves in the endgame when the draw appeared imminent – more than 22 minutes on 25 Nf6+ and nearly 35 minutes on 30 Ne8+ – indicated that he was still in search of winning chances. But much like the opening three games, where Nepomniachtchi was made to rely on accurate play to secure a half-point after Carlsen was first to stray from familiar theory, the challenger operated with extraordinary precision until the affair concluded with a threefold repetition of position after 33 moves. “It’s OK, I’ve started with a lot more draws than this [in the 2016 and 2018 world title matches], said Carlsen, brushing aside questions of whether he was frustrated by Tuesday’s relatively dry proceedings. “When you play a forced line as today, you don’t expect to hit very often. But the idea is to hit once in a while, take your opponent by surprise, and the other times you’ve usually got to be very safe. “Obviously I would have loved to win, would have loved to find more chances than I did, but I think overall it’s a normal result against a world-prepared opponent.” Carlsen, who celebrated his 31st birthday on Tuesday, has been at No 1 in the Fide ratings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he deposed Vishy Anand for the title in 2013. He is making his fourth defense of the world championship against Nepomniachtchi, also 31, who is the world No 5. Asked whether the half-point was a satisfying result, Nepomniachtchi was to the point: “Since I played Petrov, indeed.”Boris Johnson has contradicted leading scientists and one of his most senior health officials who advised people to cut back on unnecessary socialising in response to Omicron, as he urged people not to cancel their Christmas parties or nativity plays. The prime minister said the best thing to do to counter the threat of the Covid variant was to get booster jabs, with a massive NHS effort backed by the army to offer all adults one by the end of January. Asked what he would say to schools scaling back nativity plays and people dropping out of Christmas social events, Johnson said: “We don’t want people to cancel such events. We think that overwhelmingly the best thing for kids is to be in school, as I’ve said many times throughout this pandemic.” He also stressed that current guidance to wear masks on public transport and in shops was enough at this stage, despite Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, suggesting people should reduce their social contact as fears grow that existing vaccines will prove less effective against the Omicron variant. “Of course our behaviours in winter – and particularly around Christmas – we tend to socialise more, so I think all of those will need to be taken into account,” the former deputy chief medical officer for England told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “So I think [the solution is] being careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to, and particularly going and getting those booster jabs.” With 22 cases of Omicron now confirmed, including one Nottingham University student and nine linked to a social event in Scotland, senior scientists suggested it would be wise for people to cut back their social activities. Some scientists and Labour raised concerns that the government was not going far enough. Prof John Edmunds of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said: “Jenny Harries is, of course, correct. Reducing our social contacts now will slow the establishment of this new virus in our country. It will also help reduce the spread of the Delta virus which we are still struggling with. If you are intending to socialise or go to the office then the risk can be significantly reduced by taking a lateral flow test beforehand.” Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, said: “I am concerned that the intensification of mixing at Christmas social events will provide a boost to transmission at just the time when the Omicron variant will probably be picking up speed, potentially leading to an earlier peak in the new year before we have an opportunity to counteract this through boosters. Such a peak could seriously affect the ability of an already struggling NHS to provide adequate care. “In this context my personal view is that it is reasonable for people to reduce indoor mixing but on current evidence I would not want this to be enforced.” Others called for more clarity around advice. Michael Kill, chief executive of Night Time Industries Association, said venues were faced with “another poorly conceived communications strategy from government which has and will severely impact businesses”, with Christmas bookings and advance ticket sales already hit. Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, added: “Health leaders need clear and consistent messages to be given out by the government and its national bodies to the public on exactly what they are expected to do and when, both around vaccinations as well as on how they can keep themselves and those around them safe.” Wes Streeting, the new shadow health secretary, said he was concerned about Harries’ comments because “she is clearly worried that the government isn’t on track, isn’t doing everything it needs to do”. He called for measures such as requiring pre-departure Covid tests from all travellers arriving in the UK to help “ensure Christmas can carry on as we hope it will”. Johnson said he was not ruling out a move to “plan B” – an order to work from home and the introduction of vaccine passports – but he said it was not necessary at this point, with data on the effects of Omicron not expected for another two weeks. The threat of further restrictions and Harries’ comments sparked a backlash among some Conservative MPs, who warned of “mission creep”. Steve Baker, a Tory MP on the Covid Recovery Group of lockdown sceptics, challenged it in the House of Commons, saying it “appears now that employed civil servants are no longer bound to policy” and that it was a “recipe for chaos”. There was also concern among some Conservatives about the new isolation requirements for suspected contacts of Omicron cases, with 34 voting against the regulations in a vote and 24 against mandatory masks. Steve Brine, a former health minister, said the isolation rule change “bothers me a great deal more” than extending the use of masks, especially because of its impact on schools. He said: “We’re not just looking at a pingdemic in our economy and in our businesses, we’re looking at a pingdemic that’s going to devastate education again.” At his press conference in Downing Street, Johnson insisted there would be no return to the “pingdemic” of the summer, when many healthy contacts of those with Covid were required to stay at home. He also insisted that the booster programme and urging the unvaccinated to come forward were the best way of defeating Omicron, with the NHS announcing it would need an army of 10,000 volunteers and 1,500 new sites to help offer 25m vaccines over the next two months. But despite the prime minister’s encouragement to headteachers not to cancel their nativity plans, some schools are switching to virtual performances because of concerns about infection risks and the challenges presented by the new variant. Jamie Barry, headteacher of Yew Tree primary school in Walsall in the West Midlands, had hoped to put on a live nativity play this year with an audience, but it will now be a virtual performance amid concerns about the risk of staff and pupils having to isolate because of the new variant. “Until the new variant there was no risk of isolation for close contact,” said Barry. “Now if someone tests positive with the new variant, individuals have to isolate regardless of age or vaccination status. I can’t risk losing half my staff or children missing the final week of term. Boris wants schools kept open but if staff have to isolate, and there’s a national shortage of supply [teachers] we don’t have much choice.” He said the 12 schools in his cluster have changed their plans.The former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows will testify before the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack as part of an initial cooperation agreement reached with his lawyer, the panel’s chairman, Bennie Thompson, announced on Tuesday. The agreement involves Meadows appearing for a deposition and providing documents that are not protected by executive privilege. The move is aimed at staving off the threat of criminal prosecution for defying a subpoena in its entirety. “Meadows has been engaging with the select committee,” Thompson said. “He has produced records to the committee and will soon appear for an initial deposition. The committee will continue to assess his degree of compliance with our subpoena after the deposition.” The select committee is seeking to hear from Meadows since his role as White House chief of staff means he may hold the key to unlocking the extent of Trump’s involvement in efforts to stop the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The select committee also believes that Meadows remained by Trump’s side for most of 6 January and was therefore in a unique position to know what the former president was privately thinking and doing at the White House as the deadly attack on the Capitol unfolded. But after Trump directed his former aides to defy subpoenas issued by the select committee on grounds of executive privilege, Meadows refused to appear for depositions or turn over materials while he negotiated the scope of his cooperation with the committee. That left Meadows vulnerable to criminal prosecution for defying his subpoena first issued in September, but Thompson said in a statement on Tuesday that the select committee had at least tentatively resolved that impasse. Still, the agreement is understood to be delicate and Thompson appeared to suggest that Meadows still risked facing contempt of Congress charges alongside the former Trump adviser Steve Bannon and Trump Department of Justice official Jeffrey Clark, if he violated the deal. As part of the deposition arrangement, the select committee did not agree to take any topics for questioning off the table. Meadows also retains the ability to invoke executive privilege and refuse to respond over the course of his testimony. “As we have from the beginning, we continue to work with the select committee and its staff to see if we can reach an accommodation that does not require Mr Meadows to waive executive privilege,” Meadows’s attorney George Terwilliger said in a statement. The acknowledgment of the agreement, first reported by CNN, means the select committee may depose its first Trump White House aide before the end of the year after struggling to compel the cooperation of any other top Trump administration official. The select committee is expected to vote unanimously on Wednesday to hold Clark, the former Trump DoJ official, in contempt of Congress after he ignored a subpoena demanding documents and testimony in its entirety, citing vague claims of attorney-client privilege. The full House of Representatives earlier referred Bannon, Trump’s former adviser, to the justice department for prosecution after he also defied a subpoena. Bannon pleaded not guilty to two contempt of Congress charges and is expected to fight his indictment.The chief executive of the US drugmaker Moderna has predicted that existing vaccines will be less effective against Omicron than they have been against the Delta coronavirus variant, a comment that sharply lowered global stock markets. Stéphane Bancel said it would take two weeks to get data on how the existing vaccines performed against the new Covid variant and whether it caused severe disease – but it would take several months to tweak vaccines to tackle it. “There is no world, I think, where [the effectiveness] is at the same level … we had with Delta,” he told the Financial Times. Other leading voices, however, moved to try to calm fears. The maker of the Pfizer vaccine and the University of Oxford predicted existing jabs would continue to prevent severe disease. “We think it’s likely that people will have substantial protection against severe disease caused by Omicron,” said Uğur Şahin, the chief executive and co-founder of Pfizer’s German partner BioNTech, who defined severe disease as cases requiring hospital treatment. “To my mind there’s no reason to be particularly worried. The only thing that worries me at the moment is the fact that there are people that have not been vaccinated at all.” The two companies said on Friday that they could produce and ship an updated version of their vaccine within 100 days if the new Covid variant detected in southern Africa was found to evade the current one. Oxford University, which makes the AstraZeneca vaccine, said in a statement: “We will carefully evaluate the implications of the emergence of [Omicron] for vaccine immunity. “Despite the appearance of new variants over the past year, vaccines have continued to provide very high levels of protection against severe disease and there is no evidence so far that Omicron is any different.” Israel’s health minister expressed cautious optimism. Nitzan Horowitz was speaking on Tuesday after another two cases of Omicron were identified in the country, bringing its total to four. Without citing any data or reason for his optimism, he told reporters: “In the coming days we will have more accurate information about the efficacy of the vaccine against Omicron, but there is already room for optimism and there are initial indications that those who are vaccinated with a vaccine still valid or with a booster, will also be protected from this variant.” The remarks come amid conflicting information about how effective various vaccines and therapies are likely to be against the new variant. The German pharmaceutical Merck said it expected its Covid drug to be effective. Bancel suggested pharmaceutical companies would struggle between targeting Omicron and the existing Covid variants, and said it would be risky to shift Moderna’s entire production capacity to an Omicron-specific jab. He said there might be a case for giving more potent boosters to elderly people or those with compromised immune systems. He said the high number of mutations on Omicron’s spike protein, which the virus uses to infect human cells, and the rapid spread of the variant in South Africa, suggested there could be a “material drop” in effectiveness. The Moderna comments fuelled further falls in share prices around the world, adding to Friday’s sell-off. The Hong Kong stock index closed at its lowest level in more than a year, falling 1.6%. The FTSE 100 index in London fell by 1.5% to its lowest level in seven weeks, before closing down 50 points or 0.7% at 7059 points after the BioNTech comments. The FTSE 100 recorded its worst month in more than a year, trading down about 2.5% in November, the biggest drop since October 2020, when it lost nearly 5%, just before successful vaccine trials prompted a global rally in November 2020. Mohit Kumar, the managing director of Jefferies, said Bancel’s comments were concerning. “The comments probably reflect the reality of the current situation and the uncertainty surrounding the Omicron impact. We should get more clarity in a couple of weeks, but the market would remain subject to headline risk till then.”Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial in New York is an early morning affair, reporters, court artists, protesters and onlookers gathering as early as 6am each day to get in the courthouse or, in some cases, simply to get their message out. When the doors of the court open at 9am – and at lunch and 4pm – a line of black SUVs ferries well-turned parties in and out, a reminder, perhaps, that in some eyes at least this is about a public display of accountability for the crimes of Jeffrey Epstein as well as Maxwell’s trial on a set of criminal charges. If or until she takes the stand in her own defense, Maxwell remains a mystery. She is in court, seen by a few in the chamber but by most everyone else via court sketches. In fact, the Briton hasn’t been pictured in public since a shot was posted of her at an In-N-Out Burger in Los Angeles in August 2019, 10 days after Epstein, a ghost who haunts the federal charges against the 59-year-old Briton, was found dead in the grim Metropolitan detention center, steps away from where Maxwell is being tried. Federal prosecutors staged no perp walk – a custom of New York law enforcement. The sole picture of Maxwell released in recent months showed her with a bruise under her eye, an image released by her lawyer, Bobbi Sternheim, to illustrate claims of poor detention conditions. Reports from inside the court say Maxwell has appeared carefully coiffed and swathed in cashmere, hugging and air-kissing her defense team when she is brought into the chamber. It’s not clear how Maxwell, held in custody in Brooklyn, is brought to court each day. Observers who arrive before dawn have yet to see a Federal Bureau of Prisons van bringing her across the icy East River. But if Maxwell remains for now something of a cipher, the scene around the trial, filled with victim’s representatives or those looking to use it as a platform for their own purposes, are much in evidence. On Tuesday, Lisa Bloom was outside court again. The attorney is representing several women among approximately 150 people who have been paid a total of $150m from the Epstein Victims Compensation Program – whose administrators have been subpoenaed by Maxwell’s lawyers. Bloom, who helped the disgraced Hollywood mogul and convicted rapist Harvey Weinstein respond to his accusers, claimed lawyers for Maxwell wrote a “love letter” to Epstein when they said in opening statements he was akin to a “21st-century James Bond”, or even a biblical Adam to Maxwell’s Eve. “I think the lowest point for the defense was saying that Jeffrey Epstein was a 21st-century James Bond,” Bloom said, after the financier and sex-trafficker was portrayed as a “charming, intelligent and wealthy and a wonderful donor to the arts”. On Monday, the first day of the case, the steps outside court played host to followers of QAnon, one rapping such conspiratorial beliefs, the group now a near customary presence in any situation likely to attracted a media presence. So was an alleged Epstein victim, Sarah Ransome, pursued by a Netflix camera crew orchestrating her angles. Maxwell’s sister Isabel was seen arriving and later came close to being knocked over in a frenzied scrum of TV cameramen, pushing for pictures and comment. As prosecution witnesses are called – on Tuesday, Lawrence Visoski Jr, Epstein’s former pilot, described the Boeing 727 known to some as the “Lolita Express” as a “recreational vehicle” – scenes outside the trial are likely to settle down. It’s close to 17 months since Maxwell was arrested at a hideaway in New Hampshire. Soon enough, she will either appear on the courthouse steps after being acquitted, or face decades in a federal penitentiary.