The first jab of a new Ebola vaccine that may protect against multiple species of the virus is to be given on Thursday, researchers have said, with the vaccine based on similar technology to the Oxford Covid jab. Ebola haemorrhagic fever is caused by the Ebola virus and has caused devastation in some parts of the world. It is thought the outbreak in west Africa in 2014-16 may have led to more than 11,000 deaths, while the outbreak in the DRC between August 2018 and June 2020 claimed more than 2,200 lives. Highly effective vaccines against Ebola have been developed in recent years but experts warn these have only been approved for one of the four species of the Ebola virus. This is the Zaire species that is responsible for many outbreaks, and has the highest mortality rate, with estimates of between 70% and 90%. “There are three other important species of Ebola virus out there that these vaccines aren’t approved to prevent,” said Dr Daniel Jenkin, principal investigator of the trial at the Jenner Institute, University of Oxford. Of these other species, the Sudan Ebola virus is thought to have a mortality rate of about 50%, with Jenkin noting it has caused the second largest number of outbreaks. Now researchers at the University of Oxford say they are due to start human trials of a new Ebola vaccine that has been designed to protect against both the Zaire and Sudan species of the Ebola virus. “The two species that we’re targeting in this vaccine have caused almost all of the outbreaks and deaths,” said Jenkin. As with the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid jab, the Ebola vaccine is based on a virus that causes the common cold in chimpanzees, but which has been modified so it cannot cause illness in humans. However, instead of inserting spike protein genes from the coronavirus into the genetic material of this chimp virus – as was the case for the Covid vaccine – the team have loaded the chimp virus with genes for the main protein on the surface of the Ebola virus. “Basically, we have two copies of that – one copy from the Zaire Ebola virus species and one copy from the Sudan Ebola virus species,” said Jenkin. While there are other vaccines in development to protect against more than one species of the Ebola virus, Jenkin said the new jab was the first to use the same underlying technology as employed for the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine. That, he added, could bring practical benefits. “[The Covid jab] is now being manufactured at 20 different manufacturing sites, including in middle income countries,” he said. “Having that proof of concept that a similar vaccine can be manufactured on an incredibly large scale is also a very big advantage.” While the first jab of the new Ebola vaccine is being given on Thursday, the team say they are looking for 26 healthy volunteers, aged between 18 and 55, for the phase 1 clinical trial. Those interested in signing up can do so online. Participants will be given one dose of the jab and then followed up over a six-month period to allow researchers to explore the safety of the vaccine and the immune response it triggers. David Matthews, professor of virology at the University of Bristol, who was not involved in the development of the new Ebola jab, but was involved in studying mechanisms by which the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine works, said using the same technology made sense. “You have a huge safety profile database and you have [a] well-understood manufacturing process,” he said.Scam victims are facing a “reimbursement lottery” when they ask their banks to compensate them for their losses, the consumer group Which? has claimed. Three-quarters of customers who were turned down by their banks and took their cases to the financial ombudsman have been told that they should have received a payout, and the consumer group said with some banks this rose to eight in 10. Fraud cases have boomed in recent years, with the pandemic helping criminals to part people from their cash through the use of fake delivery texts and Covid-related messages. As the number of victims has grown, so has the number of complaints to the Financial Ombudsman Service, which adjudicates on disputes between consumers and financial companies. In 2020-21, the number of complaints involving authorised fraud – the majority of which involve people transferring cash to scammers – more than doubled from 3,600 to 7,770. Which? said figures it obtained from the FOS showed that NatWest and Royal Bank of Scotland, which are part of the same group, were being found to have made the wrong decision in 86% of cases. The group was followed by Santander, with 82% of decisions overturned by FOS. Other major banks also had high uphold rates. Most major banks have signed up to a voluntary code stating that they will reimburse customers who have done all they can to avoid falling victim to scams. However, Which? said a “reimbursement lottery” was leaving many victims facing an uphill struggle to recover their money when they have been targeted by criminals. Jenny Ross, Which? money editor, said: “Fraud can have a devastating financial and emotional impact on victims, so it’s shocking that so many banks are failing to handle cases correctly, often wrongly and unfairly denying victims reimbursement. “It’s clear banks can’t be trusted to make the right decision when it comes to reimbursing their customers who’ve fallen victim to APP scams.” Which? called on the payments regulator to introduce mandatory requirements for companies to protect customers and treat them consistently, and said there should be a reimbursement obligation on all firms using faster payments. A spokesperson for NatWest told Which?: “Our proactive stance and relationship with FOS has brought forward the settlement of many of our cases earlier than required … As a result of this our overturn rate for the period is inflated, we do however expect to see this normalise in 2022.” Santander said: “We have a great deal of sympathy for all those who are victims of the criminals who carry out fraud. We invest a great deal in protecting our customers against fraud, raising awareness of scams and fraud, and work closely with FOS, as well as other industry bodies, to ensure customers are treated fairly.” Which? found that those who took an authorised fraud complaint to the ombudsman faced waiting an average of nine-and-a-half months to have their case resolved.Prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s popularity has plummeted in two new polls, as New Zealand struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. The Ardern-led Labour party dropped five points to 41% over the past months, according to the Talbot Mills Research poll published by the New Zealand Herald on Thursday. While that result still places it firmly ahead of the opposition National party, it represent’s Labour’s worst polling result in more than a year, and since before Covid-19 reached New Zealand. The result was echoed by Curia polling commissioned by lobby group the Taxpayer’s Union, which showed Labour support had dropped six points to 39%, with National up four points to 26%. While Ardern was far ahead of any of her opponents in the preferred prime minister stakes, her ranking had dropped to 47% – down from previous highs of up to 65% in the midst of the early pandemic lockdowns. Curia’s polling put Ardern’s personal popularity even lower, at 34% – down 13 percentage points from last month in the preferred prime minister stakes. Opposition leader Judith Collins was wallowing at 6%, and libertarian-right-wing Act party leader David Seymour, who has enjoyed a recent surge in support, was at 10.5%. The drop in support for the prime minister comes amid recent changes in New Zealand’s pandemic fortunes: after more than a year of keeping Covid out of the country and crushing small outbreaks as they arose, New Zealand is now battling a Delta outbreak and being forced to reckon with an imminent future of Covid circulating through the population. New Zealanders have overwhelmingly supported their government’s Covid response so far, with public approval often reaching past the 80% mark. But the Talbot Mills poll showed that support was crumbling: those who rated the government’s handling of the pandemic as “good” had dropped from 60% in October to just 46%, and those rating it as poor rose from 16% to 26%. “The prime minister’s own high poll ratings and Labour’s polling last year were based on a real sense of trust, earned by the Covid response,” said political analyst and former National government staffer Ben Thomas. “The greater difficulty in stamping out Delta means that trust has really been damaged – and that shows up in the polls.” Labour is still in an extremely strong position as overall share of vote – especially when grouped with traditional coalition partners the Greens. If an election was held tomorrow, the two parties would win a majority of seats without needing other coalition partners. But there were other signs of trouble for the government in the research. In the Curia poll, the portion of New Zealanders who felt the country was headed in the wrong direction had surpassed those who thought it was headed the right way for the first time since the Global Financial Crisis. A total 44% of respondents said New Zealand was headed in the “right direction” while 45% said “wrong direction”. “That’s the stat that wins you or loses you elections,” Thomas said. “If people think things go well, they will probably vote for the government of the day. If they don’t? They will vote for change.” Dr Lara Greaves, co-director of the Public Policy Institute at University of Auckland, said that a downward trend line for Ardern and Labour was to be expected – and the party could not have sustained the extreme highs it reached earlier in the pandemic. “That was a huge high point … pretty much everyone has expected that Labour would never be able to hold on to that high a lead.” Under New Zealand’s coalition based mixed-member proportional representation political system, she said, “we might never see that again”. The recent drop, Greaves said “has been exacerbated by potential discontent in Auckland,” which has now been in lockdown for three months. And while New Zealanders may currently be punishing their government for Covid difficulties, the next election was still nearly two years away, she noted.That wraps up today’s blog and will be all from me, Samantha Lock, for now. Don’t miss a thing by following along with all our breaking coronavirus coverage here. Stay safe and I’ll join you next time! New Zealand prime minister Ardern’s popularity has plummeted in two new polls, as the country struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. Ten Republican-led US states sue over vaccine mandate for healthcare workers. The lawsuit contends that the vaccine requirement threatens the jobs of millions of workers and could “exacerbate an alarming shortage” in healthcare fields, particularly in rural areas where some health workers have been hesitant to get the shots. The first case in the UK of a pet dog catching coronavirus, apparently from its owners, has reportedly been detected. A fifth lion at Singapore Zoo has also tested positive for Covid-19, the Animal and Veterinary Service (AVS) said on Wednesday. Israel to hold world’s first drill to test readiness for the possible emergence of a lethal ‘Omega’ variant. Brazil has had 12,273 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 280 deaths, the health ministry said on Wednesday. France is at the beginning of a fifth wave of the coronavirus epidemic, health minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday. Demand for Covid booster jabs jumped in France after Emmanuel Macron said a top-up dose would be necessary for people to retain their vaccine passes. The US has brokered a deal between Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Covax vaccine-sharing program for the delivery of the company’s Covid vaccine to people living in conflict zones. The UK reported another 39,329 Covid cases and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, official data showed. Russia’s coronavirus death toll surpassed 250,000. The country reported a record 1,239 Covid-related fatalities in the previous 24 hours, taking the official death toll to 250,454. Soaring coronavirus rates in Germany are threatening plans for a rollout of the country’s famous Christmas markets, due to open in about a week’s time. A story from our New Zealand correspondent Tess McClure just in. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s popularity has plummeted in two new polls, as New Zealand struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. The Ardern-led Labour party dropped five points to 41% over the past months, according to the Talbot Mills Research poll published by the New Zealand Herald on Thursday. While that result still places it firmly ahead of the opposition National party, it represent’s Labour’s worst polling result in more than a year, and since before Covid-19 reached New Zealand. The result was echoed by Curia polling commissioned by lobby group the Taxpayer’s Union, which showed Labour support had dropped six points to 39%, with National up four points to 26%. While Ardern was far ahead of any of her opponents in the preferred prime minister stakes, her ranking had dropped to 47% – down from previous highs of up to 65% in the midst of the early pandemic lockdowns. Curia’s polling put Ardern’s personal popularity even lower, at 34% – down 13 percentage points from last month in the preferred prime minister stakes. Opposition leader Judith Collins was wallowing at 6%, and libertarian-right-wing Act party leader David Seymour, who has enjoyed a recent surge in support, was at 10.5%. Read the full story here. A coalition of 10 states sued the federal government on Wednesday to try to block a Covid-19 vaccine requirement for healthcare workers, marking a new front in the resistance by Republican-led states to the pandemic policies of President Joe Biden’s administration. The lawsuit filed in a federal court in Missouri contends that the vaccine requirement threatens the jobs of millions of healthcare workers and could “exacerbate an alarming shortage” in healthcare fields, particularly in rural areas where some health workers have been hesitant to get the shots. The suit follows similar ones by Republican-led states challenging new Biden administration rules that will require federal contractors to ensure their workers are vaccinated and that businesses with more than 100 employees require their workers to get vaccinated or wear masks and get tested weekly for the coronavirus. All of the mandates are scheduled to take effect on 4 January. Read the full story here: Good morning from a very rainy start to the day over here in Sydney. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from Tom Ambrose for the next short while. First up, some numbers just released out of Australia for you. The state of NSW has recorded 261 new Covid-19 cases and 1 death. The Victorian numbers are in and we are once again seeing a slight bump with 1,313 cases overnight and 4 deaths. In case you missed it earlier, experts say they have detected the first case in the UK of a pet dog catching coronavirus, apparently from its owners. The canine’s infection was confirmed after testing on 3 November. It is not the first time that pets have tested positive for the virus; the same laboratory detected coronavirus in a cat last year, while research from the Netherlands has previously suggested that the virus is common in cats and dogs owned by people who have Covid. Some experts have suggested owners with Covid should avoid their pets to prevent spreading the virus to them, and have raised concerns the animals could act as a reservoir of the virus, potentially passing it back to humans. Brazil has had 12,273 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 280 deaths, the health ministry said on Wednesday. The South American country has now registered 21,909,298 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 610,036, according to ministry data, in the world’s third worst outbreak outside the United States and India and its second-deadliest. As vaccination advances, the rolling 14-day average of Covid deaths has fallen to 240 daily, compared to the toll of almost 3,000 a day at the peak of the pandemic in April. The breakfast show Good Morning Britain has received 1,428 complaints about a broadcast which featured a discussion about the coronavirus yellow card reporting system. The broadcast on 1 November saw regular contributor Dr Hilary Jones draw attention to letter drops about the risks of vaccination purporting to be from the Government. He described them as “complete misinformation” and said they could be dangerous. He told co-hosts Richard Madeley and Susanna Reid: “Beware of bogus letter drops, which are complete nonsense. This is complete misinformation. “It looks like a Government UK yellow card reporting scheme for adverse reactions to any kind of medicines or vaccines. “But this purports to talk about all sorts of adverse reactions to vaccines, which are completely bogus and hoax.” Madeley asked: “So it is anti-vaccine?” Jones responded: “Oh absolutely - and this would put a lot of people off the vaccine, dangerously, because it is completely misinformation.” Madeley then ripped one of the leaflets in half. Broadcasting watchdog Ofcom said the complaints, received between 2 and 8 November, related to a discussion on the ITV show on the coronavirus yellow card reporting system. It did not say whether an investigation had been launched. In the US, about 900,000 children aged 5 to 11 will have received their first dose of the Covid vaccine in their first week of eligibility, the White House said today. “We’re off to a very strong start,” said White House Covid coordinator Jeff Zients, during a briefing with reporters Wednesday. Final clearance for the shots was granted by federal regulators on 2 November, with the first doses to children beginning in some locations the following day. The estimated increase in vaccinations in elementary school age children appears similar to a jump seen in May, when adolescents ages 12 to 15 became eligible for shots, the Associated Press reported. Now nearly 20,000 pharmacies, clinics and physicians’ offices are administering the doses to younger kids, and the Biden administration estimates that by the end of Wednesday more than 900,000 of the child doses will have been administered. Additionally about 700,000 first-shot appointments are scheduled for the coming days. About 28 million 5 to 11 year-olds are now eligible for the low-dose Pfizer vaccine. Kids who get their first of two shots by the end of next week will be fully vaccinated by Christmas. France is at the beginning of a fifth wave of the coronavirus epidemic, health minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday. “Several neighbouring countries are already in a fifth wave of the COVID epidemic, what we are experiencing in France clearly looks like the beginning of a fifth wave,” Veran said on TF1 television, adding the circulation of the virus was accelerating. The health ministry registered 11,883 new cases on Wednesday, the second day in a row with a new case tally over 10,000. New cases have seen double-digit percentage increases week-on-week since around mid-October. Good evening, I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be seeing you through the rest of the night with all the latest Covid news. We start with news that Israel is to conduct the world’s first national Covid drill to test the country’s readiness for an outbreak of a new and lethal variant of the virus. My colleague Harriet Sherwood has the full story but here is an excerpt below: The drill, scheduled for Thursday, will take the format of a war games exercise and will be led by the prime minister, Naftali Bennett. It will test the capabilities of government departments and national agencies to respond to the emergence of an “Omega” variant of Covid-19. A statement from the Israeli government press office said no such variant had yet been discovered in the country. Israel had beaten a fourth wave of Covid and “we are on our way toward exiting the Delta variant”, Bennett said. However, he added, the battle against the virus continued. “We are continuing to hold drills and to challenge ourselves … We must continue to closely monitor the situation and prepare for any scenario.” The exercise will be run by Israel’s civil defence minister at the National Management Centre in Jerusalem, which handles national crises. Click below to read the full story. Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today: People testing negative for Covid-19 despite exposure may have ‘immune memory’, a study has found. Scientists found that a proportion of people experience “abortive infection” in which the virus enters the body but is cleared by the immune system’s T-cells at the earliest stage meaning that PCR and antibody tests record a negative result. The discovery could pave the way for a new generation of vaccines targeting the T-cell response, which could produce much longer lasting immunity, they said. Story here. The United States has brokered a deal between Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Covax vaccine-sharing program for the delivery of the company’s Covid vaccine to people living in conflict zones. The US secretary of state Antony Blinken announced the agreement at the opening of a meeting of global foreign ministers convened by Washington on the pandemic, but provided no details on how many doses would be delivered, when or to which countries. The UK reported another 39,329 Covid cases and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, official data showed. Tens of thousands of care home residents in England face losing vital support as unvaccinated carers clock off for the last time before double jabs become mandatory. About 50,000 care home staff who have not had two doses will not be allowed to work from Thursday. Analysis by the Guardian suggests that on current staff/resident ratios without other measures to tackle the problem, the care of about 30,000 people could be affected. Story here and the view from one home here. The UK recorded its first case of a pet dog catching coronavirus, apparently from its owners. The dog’s infection was confirmed after testing on 3 November. It’s not the first time that pets have tested positive for the virus; the same laboratory detected coronavirus in a cat last year, while research from the Netherlands has previously suggested that the virus is common in cats and dogs owned by people who have Covid. Story here. Russia’s coronavirus death toll surpassed 250,000. The country reported a record 1,239 Covid-related fatalities in the previous 24 hours, taking the official death toll to 250,454. It came two days after most of Russia’s regions emerged from a week-long workplace shutdown designed to curb the spread of the virus. Only four other countries have surpassed the grim quarter-million milestone. Officially, the US has reported 757,309 fatalities, Brazil 609,756, India 461,849, and Mexico 290,110, according to data from John Hopkins University. Demand for Covid booster jabs jumped in France after Emmanuel Macron said a top-up dose would be necessary for people to retain their vaccine passes, the country’s main appointment booking site said. “The Macron effect” prompted 149,000 requests for shots, most during and immediately after the president’s televised address on Tuesday evening, in which he warned that coronavirus cases were again on the rise. The EU signed its eighth Covid vaccine deal, approving French company Valneva’s jab. The European Commission said the contract with Valneva provides the possibility for EU member states to purchase nearly 27m doses in 2022. Valneva is hoping its candidate, which uses more traditional technology than the mRNA vaccines, could be a more reassuring option for Europeans still reluctant to be immunised. It said last month that it demonstrated efficacy “at least as good, if not better” than AstraZeneca’s vaccine in a late-stage trial comparing the two, with significantly fewer adverse side effects. Thailand plans to set aside up to 500,000 doses of Covid vaccines for foreign workers as it prepares to welcome them back to the country to help ease a labour shortage. The government plans to allow workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos to re-enter the country beginning next month and fill up shortages in big exporting industries such as food and rubber production, the labour minister Suchart Chomklin said. Boris Johnson came under fire from the World Health Organization’s special envoy for Covid-19 after being photographed without a face covering during a hospital visit. Asked about pictures of the British prime minister walking through Hexham General without a mask, Dr David Nabarro said: “I’m not sitting on the fence on this one – where you’ve got large amounts of virus being transmitted, everybody should do everything to avoid either getting the virus or inadvertently passing it on.” Bedrooms are already standing empty at the Greenways care home outside the Warwickshire village of Long Itchington because there aren’t enough staff. Claire Callender, 42, the manager, has already closed 12 of her 27 beds because “there aren’t people who want to do the job”. And on Wednesday she said goodbye to another care worker, this time because of the new rule making double Covid jabs a condition of deployment for all care home workers in England as of Thursday. Katie Madden, who worked night shifts at Greenways for the last 18 months, came close to tears when she told the Guardian about leaving. She worked through a Covid outbreak at the home and was ill herself with the virus for weeks. She had planned to get the vaccine, but was anxious about it making her ill again. “The decision was taken out of my hands [when the law making it mandatory was introduced] … and I thought, ‘No, I’m not ready,’” she said. She washes residents, prepares them for bed and checks on them through the night. In the morning she gets them up and arranges breakfast. “This is a job I am going to be really upset about leaving,” she said. “I built a relationship with them all. We were all there through thick and thin when everyone was poorly … I could have run away when there was coronavirus, but the old people were getting it and it was breaking my heart. But I went there, breaking my back to help, and it turns from that to ‘You can go now’. I feel really let down.” For care managers, already dealing with staff shortages caused by exhaustion, pay that averages barely £9 an hour and the flow of foreign carers being choked off by Brexit, the rule is only made more difficult by the fact that NHS workers won’t have to get vaccinated until April 2022. Many care staff reluctant to have the vaccine have as a result already moved to the health service. “The [situation] is absolutely ridiculous,” said Callender. “I have to turn a healthcare worker away if they are not vaccinated, but not visitors.” Read the rest of this story here: We all know that person who, despite their entire household catching Covid-19, has never tested positive for the disease. Now scientists have found an explanation, showing that a proportion of people experience “abortive infection” in which the virus enters the body but is cleared by the immune system’s T-cells at the earliest stage meaning that PCR and antibody tests record a negative result. About 15% of healthcare workers who were tracked during the first wave of the pandemic in London, England, appeared to fit this scenario. The discovery could pave the way for a new generation of vaccines targeting the T-cell response, which could produce much longer lasting immunity, scientists said. Leo Swadling, an immunologist at University College London and lead author of the paper, said: Everyone has anecdotal evidence of people being exposed but not succumbing to infection. What we didn’t know is whether these individuals really did manage to completely avoid the virus or whether they naturally cleared the virus before it was detectable by routine tests. The latest study intensively monitored healthcare workers for signs of infection and immune responses during the first wave of the pandemic. Despite a high risk of exposure 58 participants did not test positive for Covid-19 at any point. However, blood samples taken from these people showed they had an increase in T-cells that reacted against Covid-19, compared with samples taken before the pandemic took hold and compared with people who had not been exposed to the virus at all. They also had increases in another blood marker of viral infection. The work suggests that a subset of people already had memory T-cells from previous infections from other seasonal coronaviruses causing common colds, which protected them from Covid-19. These immune cells “sniff out” proteins in the replication machinery – a region of Covid-19 shared with seasonal coronaviruses – and in some people this response was quick and potent enough for the infection to be cleared at the earliest stage. “These pre-existing T-cells are poised ready to recognise SARS-CoV-2,” said Swadling. The study adds to the known spectrum of possibilities after exposure to Covid-19, ranging from escaping infection entirely to severe disease. Full story here: Secretary of state Antony Blinken said on Wednesday that the United States has brokered a deal between Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Covax vaccine-sharing program for the delivery of the company’s Covid vaccine to people living in conflict zones. He announced the agreement at the opening of a meeting of global foreign ministers convened by Washington on the pandemic, but provided no details on how many doses would be delivered, when or to which countries. We need to ensure that people who cannot be reached by government vaccination campaigns aren’t left out of our efforts. They need to be protected too. We’re eager for people in these difficult circumstances to get protection against Covid-19 as soon as possible. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) welcomed the announcement, calling it a “positive step” to getting more vaccines to conflict zones and other humanitarian settings. “In countries suffering from years of conflict, such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan and Yemen, less than 2% of the population have been vaccinated against COVID-19,” said Esperanza Martinez, head of the ICRC’s Covid-19 crisis management team. “This shocking inequality must be rectified.” The meeting follows a virtual summit of world leaders arranged by the US president Joe Biden on 22 September, when he pledged that Washington would buy 500 million more Covid vaccine doses to donate to other countries. Health experts say rich countries have not done enough in that regard and have criticised the United States in particular for planning booster shots for fully vaccinated Americans while much of the world’s population still has no access to vaccines. They said planned US dose donations are welcome but insufficient and noted that the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is difficult to administer in poorer countries, which lack sophisticated infrastructure for storing and shipping the shots. Addressing the meeting, World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus called on foreign ministers to fully fund the Access to Covid-19 Tools Accelerator, which funds research and production of new medicines to fight the virus, and the African Union’s vaccine fund. “We ask those countries that have promised to donate vaccines to make good on those promises, as soon as possible,” Tedros said. “We ask you to support local production of vaccines.” The US Food and Drug Administration classified the recall of Ellume’s over-the-counter Covid home test as Class 1, the most serious type of recall, after the Australian diagnostic test maker removed some of its tests from the market last month. Ellume had cited higher-than-acceptable false positive test results for SARS-CoV-2 as the reason for the recall. A ‘false positive’ indicates that a person has the virus when they actually do not. The antigen test, which detects proteins from the SARS-CoV-2 virus from a nasal sample, is available without a prescription for use by people above two years of age with or without Covid symptoms. The agency said on Wednesday there have been 35 complaints of the antigen test giving false positive results, but no death had been reported related to the test. Ellume has so far recalled 2,212,335 tests in the United States. Soaring coronavirus rates in Germany are threatening plans for a rollout of the country’s famous Christmas markets, due to open in about a week’s time. There had been considerable fanfare over municipalities’ plans to stage the markets this year after they were called off a year ago. Hopes that the vaccine campaign – which started in Germany on 27 December last year – would have enabled markets to go ahead have been thwarted by a low uptake rate – only about 67% of Germans are fully vaccinated – and the spread of the more infectious Delta variant. Now authorities from Bavaria in the south to Saxony and Thuringia in the east have begun announcing the cancellation of many scheduled markets, saying a rising infection rate means it would be irresponsible for them to go ahead. Full story here: Here is my colleague Nicola Davis’s story on the pet dog in the UK who contracted Covid from its owners: The UK reported another 39,329 Covid cases on Wednesday and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, official data showed. The figures compared to 33,117 cases and 262 deaths reported on Tuesday. One of the UK’s longest-suffering patients with Covid has revealed he was confronted by a conspiracy theorist during his 10-month stay in hospital and heard claims that the virus was a hoax. Cancer survivor Andy Watts, 40, said her feared he would die after falling seriously ill with coronavirus in December last year. The father-of-two spent eight months in intensive care, including five weeks in an induced coma, when doctors considered switching off his ventilator after his condition deteriorated. He was moved out of intensive care in August and spent another two months on a hospital ward as he learnt how to talk, eat and walk again. Watts made a remarkable recovery, finally leaving to applause from medical staff at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Woolwich, southeast London, on 21 October - 300 days after being admitted for treatment. Watts, from Bexley, said some visitors in his hospital ward believed the virus was a hoax despite his ordeal. He said he was confronted by one person visiting a non-Covid patient who told him the virus was “all a conspiracy”. He said: I just thought: ‘Whatever’, and put my headphones back in. I don’t want to get involved in conversations like that. I didn’t want to get into an argument. It’s up to them what they want to believe. In the end, I just thought: ‘Here’s the proof - if you don’t want to believe it, what can I do?’ Now vaccinated, Watts said he still has oxygen therapy at night and has physiotherapy twice a week, along with daily exercises. He said: The last two years have made me appreciate life a lot more. You never know what’s round the corner. Don’t take things for granted. Every day is special. Sky News has the story. Frontline workers cannot expect to remain unvaccinated in a pandemic and to keep working with vulnerable people, writes Guardian columnist Frances Ryan. Here are some extracts from her column: In some ways, it is remarkable that requiring NHS staff who have face-to-face contact with patients to be vaccinated is even controversial. Healthcare workers have a professional duty of care not to harm patients, which is why the majority have already taken the vaccine, and few could expect to remain unvaccinated in a pandemic and to keep working with vulnerable people. However, mandating health measures is not something to be done lightly. As I’ve written before, workers – especially pregnant women and people from minority ethnic groups – must be given time to overcome fears, as well as paid time off to get the jab and sick leave for any mild side effects. That’s why staff will be offered one-to-one meetings with clinicians if they want to discuss their concerns as they make their choice. But “persuasion” cannot go on for ever. It has been almost a year since health and care workers were first given priority access to the jab. There surely comes a point when we must acknowledge that some staff will never take the vaccine without it being mandatory, and be honest about what we are asking the public to face in the meantime. Medics are not immune to doubting science or guaranteed to put their patients’ wellbeing first. Every request to give staff more time to feel comfortable with being vaccinated is another day that clinically vulnerable people’s lives are put at risk. It’s important to be clear about what [Sajid] Javid has mandated. No one will be forced to have the vaccine. It is simply that those staff who choose to remain unvaccinated will not have the right to a job on the frontline of the NHS. This is not unprecedented. Staff in some areas of the NHS, such as surgery, are already obliged to get vaccinated against hepatitis B. That’s because it’s widely understood that not taking sensible precautions to prevent passing on a disease to patients would be a form of neglect. The myth that “patients are jabbed so no one else needs to be” is another straw man. Some clinically vulnerable people can’t have the vaccine because of their illness, while others will receive insufficient protection from the jab because they’re taking certain medications or because they have weak immune systems. That’s why it’s so important for frontline health workers to be vaccinated; multiple studies show it significantly reduces the risk of transmission. We don’t stop making seatbelts compulsory in cars because some people still die in accidents. Many lives are saved by them, and that’s enough reason for us all to wear them. The full column is here: Far from being irresponsible Covid spreaders, the vast majority of students at English universities have been vaccinated at least once and would request a test if they had symptoms, according to a survey. Students’ wellbeing has suffered this autumn, however, with a third of those surveyed reporting that their mental health had deteriorated since the start of term, the report by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) says. The survey found the average life satisfaction score among students was 6.6 out of 10, significantly lower than among 16- to 29-year-olds in general, who scored 7.0, and the overall adult population in Great Britain, at 7.1. The ONS report says mental health has worsened as the term has progressed, with 32% of students reporting that their wellbeing has deteriorated, compared with 26% in late September. It is better than it was last May, when half of students who took part in the survey said their mental health had deteriorated. Most students at that time were studying online owing to lockdown restrictions, while this term students have returned to campuses for more face-to-face teaching. On vaccination, the survey – which is based on experimental data drawn from responses from almost 1,000 students in England during October and November – found that 91% of respondents had been vaccinated against Covid at least once. The proportion of students who have been double-vaccinated was 85%, up from 78% in late September. Of the 8% who said they had not been vaccinated, almost a third (32%) said they were fairly or very likely to take a vaccine if offered. Students also showed they were willing to test for Covid: 92% said they would request a test if they developed symptoms, and 49% said they had taken a test in the previous seven days. Meanwhile, 57% said they would stay at home for 10 days if they developed symptoms. Last year students were often accused of spreading the virus by holding parties in breach of restrictions, and some were fined and threatened with exclusion from their university studies. The full story is here: A care home manager in England who has lost a sixth of her staff because of the UK government’s mandatory vaccination policy has told of the anguish of reading their “heartbreaking” resignation letters. Niccii Gillett, manager of Elmfield House Residential Home in Woking, Surrey, said six of her 36 staff have already resigned due to the requirement rather than face dismissal. Thursday is the deadline for care home staff in England to have been doubled jabbed, except for those who are medically exempt. The latest figures from the NHS show more than 60,000 staff had not been recorded as fully vaccinated as of 31 October, meaning tens of thousands face losing their jobs. Gillett said her staff “firmly stated” in every resignation letter that they did not want to stop working. Two had been at the 18-bed family-run home for seven years. The 37-year-old told the PA news agency: The sad thing is none of them wanted to leave. And reading their resignation letters was heartbreaking. They’re so grateful for the opportunities and the first one that left, we gave gifts. It was such an emotional afternoon and for days afterwards my residents were heartbroken because they saw this person as one of them, and even a resident, they have said ‘I wish she could come back, I don’t care that she’s not vaccinated’. Tens of thousands of care home residents in England face losing vital support as unvaccinated carers clock off for the last time before double jabs become mandatory. About 50,000 care home staff who have not had two doses will not be allowed to work from Thursday. Analysis by the Guardian suggests that on current staff/resident ratios without other measures to tackle the problem, the care of about 30,000 people could be affected. Care operators and health chiefs have warned staff shortfalls could prevent thousands of people from being discharged from hospitals this winter, limiting admissions and clogging up wards. They say it will increase pressure on remaining care staff to work longer hours, despite many being already exhausted. Full story here: A pet dog has fallen ill with Covid in the UK after reportedly contracting the virus from its owners. The dog tested positive for the virus following tests at the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) laboratory in Weybridge, Surrey, on 3 November. It is understood that the dog, who is recovering at home, contracted the virus from its owners, who had previously tested positive for coronavirus. Experts claim there is no evidence the animal was involved in the transmission of the disease to its owners, or that pets or other domestic animals are able to transmit the virus to humans. It is the first confirmed case of a dog becoming infected with Covid in the UK, after the virus was detected in a cat in the same laboratory last year. Cat or dog owners who have Covid-19 should avoid their pets while infected, experts warned a few months ago. Scientists in the Netherlands found that coronavirus is common in pet cats and dogs where their owners have the disease. While cases of owners passing on Covid to their pets bring negligible risk to public health, the scientists said there is a “potential risk” that domestic animals could act as a “reservoir” for coronavirus and reintroduce it to humans. The latest UK government guidance for animal owners on how to care for their animals during the pandemic can be found here. A fifth lion at Singapore Zoo has tested positive for Covid-19, the Animal and Veterinary Service (AVS) said on Wednesday. The African lion, which showed signs of illness on Monday, tested positive along with four Asiatic lions from the Night Safari, who tested positive on Tuesday after displaying signs of sickness over the weekend. The lions, whose symptoms included coughing and sneezing, are isolated within their respective dens. A Mandai Wildlife Group spokesman said in a statement on Wednesday that all its lions that have been unwell are “bright, alert and active for now”, adding: While we expect them to fully recover soon, we are monitoring them very closely. We have added vitamin C to their diet but have not needed to administer other medications. The World Health Organisation for Animal Health has advised that the risk of transmission from infected animals to humans is very low. Nevertheless, we have closed the exhibits while our lions rest. It is believed the lions contracted the virus from three infected zookeepers. It is one of the most recent cases of animal infection with the virus. There have been a small number of confirmed cases in pets, including cats and dogs, in countries in Europe, North America and Asia. In June, 15 lions became infected at a zoo in Chennai, India. Two of the lions died, while the other 13 recovered. And last week, two spotted hyenas at Denver Zoo in the US became the first in the world to test positive for the virus and showed mild symptoms including “a little bit of coughing and sneezing”, nasal discharge and lethargy. Other reported incidents from around the world include a wild white-tailed deer cluster in Iowa in the US, and infections on mink farms in Denmark, which led to mass nationwide culling and incineration of millions of minks. After a troop of western lowland gorillas fell ill with Covid in San Diego Zoo in the US in January, four orangutans and five bonobos became the first non-human primates to be vaccinated against the disease in March. Several other zoos around the world have begun giving animals the vaccine to protect them from Covid. Russia on Wednesday reported a record 1,239 deaths from Covid in the previous 24 hours, two days after most of its regions emerged from a week-long workplace shutdown designed to curb the spread of the virus. It takes the official death toll to 250,454 deaths. Only four other countries have surpassed the grim quarter-million milestone. Officially, the US has reported 757,309 fatalities, Brazil 609,756, India 461,849, and Mexico 290,110, according to data from John Hopkins University. A further 38,058 coronavirus cases were also recorded across Russia, including 3,927 in Moscow, in the past 24 hours, according to the government’s Covid task force. New daily cases have retreated slightly in the past four days after hitting a peak of 41,335 on Saturday. “For now we cannot say with confidence that the situation has stabilised and the infection rate is declining,” the deputy prime minister Tatyana Golikova told a government meeting. Her assessment was markedly more downbeat than that of the health minister Mikhail Murashko, who had said on Tuesday that the nationwide “non-working days” from 30 October to 7 November had turned the tide in Russia’s fight against the pandemic. Murashko told parliament on Wednesday that oxygen reserves at hospitals in 12 of Russia’s regions would last for two days or less, unless they were replenished. At the same time, he said, some regions were already reporting a decline in infections and the vaccination campaign was bearing fruit as only 3-4% of inoculated Russians have been infected. More than 62 million Russians have received at least one dose of a Covid vaccine, Murashko said. Golikova told a government meeting that 22 million more people needed to get inoculated and about 9 million needed to get a booster in order to have 80% of the adult population vaccinated and thus achieve a minimum level of collective immunity. *I’m grateful to reader Francisco for flagging this to me. Demand for Covid booster jabs jumped in France after Emmanuel Macron said a top-up dose would be necessary for people to retain their vaccine passes, the country’s main appointment booking site said on Wednesday. “The Macron effect” prompted 149,000 requests for shots, most during and immediately after the president’s televised address on Tuesday evening, in which he warned that coronavirus cases were again on the rise, Doctolib told AFP. Anticipation of tougher rules had already sparked 96,000 bookings on Monday, compared with an average of 50,000 a day in recent weeks. Macron announced that from 15 December people over 65 would require a booster shot if they want to continue using their vaccine passes to gain entry to bars, restaurants, cinemas and other public venues. He added that from the age 50, people would be allowed to request an additional vaccine dose, without it being mandatory for the Covid passes of 50- to 64-year-olds. France has one of the strictest vaccination regimes in Europe, with the passes required to take intercity trains, visit museums and go to gyms, among other amenities. That has pushed France’s overall vaccination rate to 75%, a level relatively unchanged in recent weeks. Doctolib said only 20,000 of the Tuesday bookings were for first-time vaccinations. In his speech, Macron urged the roughly 6 million people in France yet to get even a first jab to do so: This is an appeal for responsibility – get vaccinated. He also said face masks will again be mandatory for all schoolchildren in a bid to avoid a new wave of cases. The government is also considering making vaccines available to children under 12. As of Tuesday, there have been an average of 36 daily Covid deaths in hospital over the past week, a 21% rise from the previous week, according to health ministry figures. France’s total death toll since the start of the pandemic stands at 118,023. French vaccines company Valneva saw it shares jump more than 20% after it won approval from the European Commission for a deal under which it would supply up to 60m doses of VLA2001, its inactivated Covid vaccine candidate, over two years. It is the eighth such deal by the executive body as it speeds up its fight against rising infections on the continent. “The Valneva vaccine adds another option to our broad portfolio, once it is proven to be safe and effective by the European Medicines Agency,” the EU health commissioner Stella Kyriakides said. “The message remains the same: trust the science, and vaccinate, vaccinate, vaccinate.” Valneva is hoping its candidate, which uses more traditional technology than the mRNA vaccines, could be a more reassuring option for Europeans still reluctant to be immunised. It said last month that it demonstrated efficacy “at least as good, if not better” than AstraZeneca’s shot in a late-stage trial comparing the two, with significantly fewer adverse side effects. The European Commission said the contract with Valneva provides the possibility for EU member states to purchase nearly 27m doses in 2022. Member states can then make a further order of up to 33m additional vaccines in 2023. The deal includes the possibility to adapt the vaccine to new coronavirus variants. “We are grateful to the European Commission for its support and are eager to help address the ongoing pandemic,” Valneva chief executive Thomas Lingelbach said in a statement. In September, the UK scrapped a contract for about 100m doses of Valneva’s Covid vaccine over concerns the vaccine might not receive approval. Thailand will set aside up to 500,000 doses of Covid vaccines for foreign workers as it prepares to welcome them back to the country to help ease a labour shortage, a government minister said on Wednesday. The government plans to allow workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos to re-enter the country beginning next month and fill up shortages in big exporting industries such as food and rubber production. Workers will be placed in a two-week quarantine and during that time the vaccines will be administered, labor minister Suchart Chomklin said. They will also be tested for Covid. “We have prepared 400,000 to 500,000 doses to inoculate migrant workers,” he said. the Labor Ministry estimates there is an immediate demand for 420,000 migrant workers. Easing the controls will also help stop smuggling of workers, the government said. Nearly 11,000 people were arrested in cases linked to smuggling last month, compared to 1,456 arrests over the same period last year. Italy has clamped down on protests against the country’s Covid-19 health pass. The protests, at times violent, have become more prolific since Italy made the pass mandatory for all workers in October. Demonstrations will no longer be able to take place in city or town centres. “For weeks the so-called ‘no pass’ protests have been paralysing the centres of many cities every Saturday, creating inconvenience for citizens and shop-keepers, as well as creating crowds of unvaccinated people,” said Carlo Sibilia, undersecretary at the interior minister. Protests in the northern city of Trieste are believed to have triggered a surge in coronavirus infections. There was also controversy earlier this month after protesters marched through the streets of the city of Novara wearing striped bibs while comparing themselves to prisoners of Nazi concentration camps. In October, a demonstration in Rome turned violent after neo-fascist militants ransacked the headquarters of a trade union. The so-called ‘green pass’, which shows evidence of vaccination, immunisation or a negative test, is required by Italians when entering their workplaces and for dining inside at bars or restaurants, travelling by plane or long-distance train as well as entering museums, theatres, cinemas, nightclubs and stadiums. Boris Johnson has come under fire from the World Health Organization’s special envoy for Covid-19 after being photographed without a face covering during a hospital visit. Asked about pictures of the British prime minister walking through Hexham General without a mask, Dr David Nabarro said: We all need to be able to do what we’ve got to do, regardless of what politics we adopt. He told Sky News: I’m not sitting on the fence on this one – where you’ve got large amounts of virus being transmitted, everybody should do everything to avoid either getting the virus or inadvertently passing it on. We know that wearing a face mask reduces the risk, we know that maintaining physical distance reduces the risk, we know that hygiene by regular hand-washing and coughing into your elbow reduces the risk. We should do it all and we should not rely on any one intervention like vaccination on its own. So, please, would every leader be wearing face masks, particularly when in indoor settings. This virus is unforgiving and we need to do everything possible to prevent it getting in between us and infecting us. Dr Nabarro also expressed regret that means of mitigating the spread of Covid, such as use of face masks, have been politicised. He told the broadcaster: Perhaps that’s the toughest thing about Covid, is that the responses get politicised – in some places if you wear a mask, you’re taught to belong to a particular political party. That’s the most regretful thing about the present situation; we all need to be able to do what we’ve got to do, regardless of what politics we adopt. The latest row came after Johnson was pictured last week at the Cop26 climate change summit sitting maskless alongside the 95-year-old environmentalist and broadcaster Sir David Attenborough. A No 10 spokesman earlier said of his visit to Hexham General hospital: The prime minister followed the Covid measures that were in place throughout his visit, including wearing a mask in all clinical areas. He also took a PCR test before the visit. The hospital trust has issued a statement making clear the PM followed its guidelines. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Germany’s national disease control centre reported a record-high number of new coronavirus cases today, as one of the country’s top virologists warned that another lockdown would be needed if vaccinations do not quickly accelerate. “We have a real emergency situation right now,” Christian Drosten, the head of virology at Berlin’s Charite hospital, said regarding the situation at many hospital intensive care units across the country. “We have to do something right now.” Hungary recorded 8,434 new Covid-19 infections today, the highest daily tally since early April, with new cases again doubling from last week. Slovakia reported 7,055 new cases – the highest level the country has seen since the pandemic began. The Czech Republic has recorded its highest number of Covid cases since March 2021, with 14,539 new positive tests. Ladislav Dušek, director of the country’s health information and statistics organisation, warned that “high numbers of infections in the most vulnerable part of the population increases the probability of an additional burden on hospitals, in numbers which can potentially double up very quickly.” The World Health Organization’s Covid envoy Dr David Nabarro has warned to minimise international travel even as borders open up, saying: “I’m trying to say to everybody travel if you must – and there are often essential emotional reasons as well as essential economic and another reasons – but try not to travel if you don’t have to. Because travelling does increase your risk, we know that the more contacts you have with other people, the more likely you are to both get the virus and to spread it, so minimise travel please.” Nabarro has also criticised UK prime minister Boris Johnson for appearing in a hospital without wearing a face mask this week, urging all world leaders to wear masks when in indoor settings. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid said this morning he does “not want to see anyone have to walk away from their job” as he urged health and social care staff to get a Covid-19 vaccine ahead of making it compulsory for NHS England staff from 1 April. Dr Maggie Wearmouth, who sits on the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in the UK, said that legislating mandatory vaccines for frontline health and care workers in England was a “blunt instrument” but she was “supportive” of the move. Indonesia and Malaysia have agreed to introduce a travel corridor between them on a gradual basis, starting with key areas like capital cities and the holiday island of Bali. Vietnam has said it will by the end of this month have sufficient vaccines to cover its population against Covid-19. Four lions at a Singapore wildlife park have tested positive for coronavirus after coming into contact with infected zookeepers, and have symptoms including coughing and sneezing, officials have said. The European Union’s drug regulator expects to decide in about two months on whether to allow the use of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine in children aged six to 11 after the US pharmaceutical company sought approval. However, several European countries including Sweden, Germany and France have paused or recommended pausing its use for people 30 or younger due to rare heart-related side-effects. People who trust Fox News Channel and other media outlets that appeal to Republicans and conservatives are more likely to believe falsehoods about Covid-19 and vaccines than those who primarily go elsewhere for news, a study in the US has found. The most widely believed falsehood is about the government exaggerating Covid deaths. 60% of Americans either believe that or said they didn’t know whether or not it was true. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the days Covid news from the UK and around the world. Andrew Sparrow has our live UK politics coverage, and Alan Evans is live at Cop26. I will see you here again tomorrow, take care and stay safe. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid said this morning he does “not want to see anyone have to walk away from their job” as he urged health and social care staff to get a Covid-19 vaccine. Javid told media outlets this morning the decision to make vaccines compulsory for staff in England from next April was “about patient safety”, adding that it was the government’s and NHS’s duty to protect the vulnerable, who are at increased risk of death from coronavirus. During his appearances, PA Media quotes him telling LBC Radio: The vast majority of NHS workers are already vaccinated and I want to, of course, thank them for that. They’ve done that not only to protect themselves or their colleagues, most of all I think they’ve done it to protect their patients. We know that people in hospital, they’re already very vulnerable, and the last thing they want is to be exposed to Covid-19 when it could have been prevented, and that can be fatal for them in that condition. I think, ultimately, this is the right call – it is the duty of the NHS and the government to do everything that we can to protect vulnerable people. Javid said staff who refuse a jab could be moved to non-patient facing roles, but that figures in the government’s impact assessment regarding how many could leave were a “cautious estimate”. There are between 80,000 and 100,000 unvaccinated NHS staff in England The European Union’s drug regulator expects to decide in about two months on whether to allow the use of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine in children aged six to 11 after the US pharmaceutical company sought approval. “The current timeline for evaluation foresees an opinion in approximately two months, unless supplementary information or analysis is needed,” the European Medicines Agency (EMA) said in a statement. Reuters notes that the European Union had in July authorised the vaccine for use in teens aged 12 to 17 years, but several countries including Sweden, Germany and France have paused or recommended pausing its use for people 30 or younger due to rare heart-related side-effects. I’ll be continuing to bring you the latest Covid news from the UK and around the world, but we’ve also got another couple of live blogs up and running now that might catch your eye. Andrew Sparrow has launched the UK politics live blog. He is leading with the swirl of sleaze around Boris Johnson’s government. We’ve also got live coverage by Alan Evans from Cop26, on an important day for the conference, as a draft agreement has emerged. Hungary recorded 8,434 new Covid-19 infections today, the highest daily tally since early April, with new cases again doubling from last week. Slovakia reported 7,055 new cases – the highest level the country has seen since the pandemic began. This map shows the worsening situation across Europe right now. Germany’s national disease control centre reported a record-high number of new coronavirus cases today, as one of the country’s top virologists warned that another lockdown would be needed if vaccinations do not quickly accelerate. The 39,676 cases registered by the Robert Koch Institute surpassed the previous daily record of 37,120 new cases it reported on Friday. The institute said Germany’s infection rate rose to 232.1 new cases per 100,000 residents over the past seven days. Berlin’s Charite hospital said Tuesday it had to cancel planned surgeries due to the number of staff members caring for people with Covid-19. Authorities have said most of latest patients are unvaccinated. “We have a real emergency situation right now,” Christian Drosten, the head of virology at Charite, said regarding the situation at many hospital intensive care units across the country. “We have to do something right now.” Drosten said he expects “a very strenuous winter” if vaccinations don’t pick up quickly. “We probably need to control infection activity again through contact measures – not probably, but certainly,” he said. “We’re in a bad situation: we have 15 million people who could have been vaccinated and should have been vaccinated,” Drosten said. Several hospitals have said in recent days that they are again working at their limits and have ICUs so full of coronavirus patients that they cannot admit new patients at the moment. Kirsten Grieshaber notes for Associated Press that Germany has a caretaker national government following a September federal election. The parties that are expected to form the next government plan to introduce legislation this week that would allow a declaration since March 2020 of an “epidemic situation of national scope” to expire at the end of the month and provide a new legal framework for instituting coronavirus measures. As during other periods of the pandemic, the country has a patchwork of regional rules. Most places restrict access to many indoor facilities and events to people who have been vaccinated against the virus, have recovered from Covid or recently received negative test results – with the latter category now excluded in some areas. However, there are complaints that the rules are often laxly enforced. UK television network ITV is on track to enjoy the best year for advertising revenues in its 66-year history as businesses pour money into marketing to drive a post-pandemic recovery, while content such as the Euro 2020 tournament proved a hit with viewers. The UK’s biggest free-to-air commercial broadcaster said it was performing more strongly than in 2019 before Covid-19 hit, with total advertising revenue for the first nine months rising 30% year on year to £1.3bn. The company expects total ad revenues for the year, including the growing income from ads on its streaming service, ITV Hub, to be up by 24% compared with 2020 to hit an all-time high. Read more of Mark Sweney’s report here: Pandemic bounceback puts ITV on course for record year of ad revenues An odd one here from Agence France-Presse: Four lions at a Singapore wildlife park have tested positive for coronavirus after coming into contact with infected zookeepers, and have symptoms including coughing and sneezing, officials have said. The endangered Asiatic lions started displaying signs of illness at the weekend, prompting officials to order coronavirus tests. The infected big cats along with five others at the Night Safari park have been placed in isolation in their den, the government’s animal and veterinary service said. “All the lions remain bright, alert and active,” said Sonja Luz, from Mandai Wildlife Group, which operates the park. “We expect that the lions will make a full recovery with minor supportive treatment.” Three zookeepers from the Night Safari are confirmed to have been infected. The park is an open-air zoo home to hundreds of animals, which welcomes visitors at night. An African lion at Singapore Zoo – which is adjacent to the Night Safari – has also fallen sick, and officials have ordered virus tests. Both Singapore Zoo and the Night Safari remain open, although the lion exhibits have been temporarily closed. Animals have become infected with the virus on previous occasions. Lions, tigers and gorillas have tested positive at US zoos, while domestic cats and dogs have also been hit. Germany’s vaccine advisory committee recommends people under 30 be vaccinated only with the Biontech/Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, as it showed a lower number of heart inflammations in younger people than the Moderna vaccination, it said this morning. The committee, known as STIKO, said it also recommends pregnant women, independent of their age, be inoculated only with the Biontech/Pfizer vaccine as well. France’s vaccine advisory board made a similar recommendation earlier this week. People who trust Fox News Channel and other media outlets that appeal to Republicans and conservatives are more likely to believe falsehoods about Covid-19 and vaccines than those who primarily go elsewhere for news, a study in the US has found. While the Kaiser Family Foundation study released this week found the clear ties between news outlets that people trusted and the amount of misinformation they believe, it took no stand on whether those attitudes specifically came from what they saw there. “It may be because the people who are self-selecting these organisations believe (the misinformation) going in,” said Liz Hamel, vice president and director of public opinion and survey research at Kaiser. Associated Press reports that Kaiser polled people on whether or not they believed seven widely circulated untruths about the virus, among them that the government is exaggerating the number of deaths attributable to the coronavirus, hiding reports of deaths caused by vaccines or that the vaccines can cause infertility, contain a microchip or can change DNA. For people who most trusted network or local television news, NPR, CNN or MSNBC, between 11% and 16% said they believed four or more of those untrue statements, or weren’t sure about what was true. For Fox News viewers, 36% either believed in or were unsure about four or more false statements, Kaiser said. It was 46% for Newsmax viewers and 37% for those who said they trusted One America Network News. The most widely believed falsehood is about the government exaggerating Covid deaths. Kaiser said 60% of Americans either believe that or said they didn’t know whether or not it was true. There’s been a lot of news recently about reopened travel routes, including the opening of the US-Mexico border and the resumption of transatlantic flights. One person not looking to take advantage of that is the World Health Organization’s Dr David Nabarro. As part of his Sky News interview in the UK this morning he had this to say about travel: Why am I not travelling very much? Because I don’t want to get Covid – I’m in the wrong age group and I’ve got other adverse factors as well. So, I’m trying to say to everybody travel if you must – and there are often essential emotional reasons as well as essential economic and another reasons – but try not to travel if you don’t have to. Because travelling does increase your risk, we know that the more contacts you have with other people, the more likely you are to both get the virus and to spread it, so minimise travel please. I’m asking everybody if they’re organising meetings, make sure they’re either virtual or hybrid, so that if people are unable to travel, they can still participate fully from a distance. Another quick Reuters snap here – Indonesia and Malaysia have agreed to introduce a travel corridor between them on a gradual basis, starting with key areas like capital cities and the holiday island of Bali, the two countries’ leaders have said. Speaking in Indonesia on his first official visit overseas, Malaysian prime minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob also said Malaysia would grant an amnesty to Indonesian migrants working in the country on expired permits. It is part of a gradual loosening of travel restrictions in the region. Yesterday Thailand said it plans to reopen its borders to workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos. Singapore and Malaysia have previously announced they will allow quarantine-free travel between both countries for individuals vaccinated against Covid-19 from 29 November. Dr David Nabarro, special envoy on Covid-19 for the World Health Organization, has criticised UK prime minister Boris Johnson for appearing in a hospital without wearing a face mask on Sky News. He said: I’m not sitting on the fence on this one. Where you’ve got large amounts of virus being transmitted, everybody should do everything to avoid either getting the virus or inadvertently passing it on. And we know that wearing a face mask reduces the risk. We know that maintaining physical distance reduces the risk. We know that hygiene by regular handwashing and sneezing and coughing into your elbow reduces the risk. We should do it all. And we should not rely on any one intervention like vaccination on its own. So yes, yes, yes, please – would every leader be wearing face masks, particularly when in indoor settings, and could everybody please be face-masked if they possibly can when they’re up close and personal with other people, especially in non-ventilated environments. This virus is unforgiving and we need to do everything possible to prevent it getting in between us and affecting us. No 10 has insisted that Boris Johnson followed the rules – despite the website of the Hexham General hospital he visited saying masks should be worn at all times. Johnson did wear a mask at some points during the visit. A source told the Guardian’s political correspondent Aubrey Allegretti that the maskless pictures were taken when he had just left a meeting where he was speaking, was not in a clinical area, and put a mask on shortly afterwards. The hospital incident follows Johnson being seen unmasked at Cop26 while those around him – including veteran TV presenter David Attenborough – were wearing theirs. A quick snap from Reuters that Vietnam will by the end of this month have sufficient vaccines to cover its population against Covid-19, a deputy prime minister has said. “The fight against the pandemic, however, will continue,” Vu Duc Dam told the national assembly, adding people must maintain health protocols. Dr Maggie Wearmouth, who sits on the Joint Committee for Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in the UK, said that legislating mandatory vaccines for frontline health and care workers in England was a “blunt instrument” but she was “supportive” of the move. PA Media quote him telling LBC Radio: I’m broadly in favour of this move. I think legislation is a blunt instrument, but as frontline health and social care workers our goal and our main responsibility should be the health and protection of the very vulnerable, frail and elderly patients in our care. As a frontline health worker myself, I find it incomprehensible that someone would want to work in a job like mine and wish not to be vaccinated, so I broadly support it. Daily testing is really quite cumbersome. I test twice a week and that’s bad enough. I do think that you make a choice if you’re a frontline worker, and the choice should be to protect your patients. UK health secretary Sajid Javid has made a slightly belated appearance on Sky News – he got lost in the Cop26 corridors on the way to the studio – and the first topic has been the newly announced vaccine mandate for NHS staff. He said: This is about patient safety. We know that the vaccines work. We also know that patients in hospital care, these are some of the most vulnerable people in our society. And if they are exposed to Covid it could be fatal, and I think it’s our duty to make sure that they are as safe as they can be. There will be absolutely no scapegoating, no singling out, no shaming, but working with colleagues to support them in every way that we can to help them make this positive decision. So they can protect themselves, their colleagues, and most of all their patients. I don’t want to see anyone lose their job. I don’t want to see anyone have to walk away from their job. Most of all, what I don’t want to see is someone being exposed to Covid when it could have been prevented. And perhaps they might even die from that, and I think that would be totally unacceptable. The Czech Republic has recorded its highest number of Covid cases since March 2021, with 14,539 new positive tests. While we tend to look at longer trends than day-by-day, this is significantly higher caseload than yesterday’s total of 9,253, which will be a concern to authorities. The Denik N news site reported that there was a total of 336 new hospitalisations. That makes 3,295 Covid patients in Czech hospitals, of which 462 were in the ICU. Ladislav Dušek, director of the country’s health information and statistics organisation, warned that “high numbers of infections in the most vulnerable part of the population increases the probability of an additional burden on hospitals, in numbers which can potentially double up very quickly.” Yesterday Radio Prague International reported that the Czech government would meet today in order to discuss potentially tightening Covid restrictions across the country. South Korea encouraged its citizens to take Covid-19 booster shots on Wednesday, as more elderly people fell ill and reported vaccine breakthrough infections, driving serious and critical cases to a record. Severe coronavirus cases jumped from the mid-300s in October to 460 on Wednesday, official data showed. Of the severely ill patients, more than 82% were aged 60 and older. Son Young-rae, a senior health ministry official, told a news conference that the increase is not posing a threat to the country’s healthcare system yet, as there are nearly 500 ICU beds available. He said the speed of the rise in severe cases and the size of total infections, especially among the unvaccinated, are the major points to consider in deciding its future response to the healthcare system. Sangmi Cha reports from Seoul for Reuters, and says that South Korea’s overall rate of vaccine breakthrough infections remains low at 85.5 people per every 100,000 inoculated. But it has steadily risen in recent weeks, led by the elderly, as vaccine protection wanes over time and the group’s weaker immune system makes them more vulnerable to infections. Of the total serious and critical patients with vaccine breakthrough infections in the past eight weeks, 93% were from those aged 60 and above, according to the government data. Hello, Martin Belam here in London. Health secretary Sajid Javid is doing the morning media round in the UK – I’ll have the key quotes in due course, which will no doubt focus on the vaccine mandate for NHS staff. Here’s the latest UK figures on Covid. Welcome back to our Covid blog this Wednesday. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be reporting from Sydney, Australia, to bring you all the latest headlines. China has reported a drop in daily Covid cases for the first time since a new outbreak saw the nation implement a strict zero-Covid policy. A total of 54 new coronavirus cases were recorded for 9 November compared with 62 a day earlier, its health authority said today. French president Emmanuel Macron has urged for an acceleration of the nation’s Covid booster rollout while also announcing that many citizens will need a third vaccination in order to maintain a valid health pass from next month. Here’s everything else you might have missed. China reports a drop in Covid cases with 54 new confirmed cases for 9 November compared with 62 a day earlier, its health authority said today. The Chinese city of Chengdu said it had tested 30,000 Covid-19 tests on visitors at a big entertainment centre, and rounded up those who tried to flee the site, in the second mass screening in days. France pushes to accelerate update of Covid-19 booster shots for elderly and vulnerable citizens. President Macron said a third injection would be made available to those aged 50-64 from early December. Anyone over 65 who was vaccinated more than six months ago will need to get a booster shot by mid-December for their “health pass” to remain valid, Macron said. Covid cases surge in Greece with a record of 8,613 new cases in the last 24 hours – the highest since the pandemic began. Cases have more than doubled in less than a fortnight. Virus deaths in Russia hit daily record of 1,211 Covid-19 deaths, the highest daily death toll in the pandemic, and 39,160 new cases. Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered many Russians last month to stay off work between 30 October and 7 November. Latvia, one of the least vaccinated countries in the European Union, is facing its most severe outbreak of Covid-19 yet. The World Health Organization has warned there could be shortfall of up to 2bn syringes in 2022, which threatens to hamper vaccine efforts globally is production does not improve, AFP reports. Loved ones reunite at US-Mexico border as Covid travel restrictions lifted. UK health secretary Sajid Javid says staff must be fully jabbed by April 2022 or risk dismissal raising concerns 32,000 care home staff and tens of thousands of NHS workers could quit. Daily Covid-related deaths in the UK rose above 250 again, with 262 reported on Tuesday. Covid-19 patients in Singapore who remain unvaccinated by choice will have to pay for their hospitalisation bills from 8 December, the government has ruled. Pfizer asks FDA to approve Covid booster shots for all US adults. Older Americans and other vulnerable groups have had access to a third dose of the Pfizer and BioNTech vaccine since September but the Food and Drug Administration has said it would move quickly to expand boosters to younger ages if warranted. Moderna also applied for European authorisation of its Covid-19 vaccine in children aged six to 11, weeks after it delayed a similar filing with US regulators. The European Union drugs regulator is set to authorise the use of two monoclonal antibodies to treat Covid-19 patients in coming days, two EU sources told Reuters, in its first approvals of such therapies. The US will buy another $1bn-worth of the Covid-19 pill made by Merck &amp; Co Inc and partner Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, the companies said on Tuesday. Canada authorised the use of Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine as a booster shot for people 18 and older.Labor has left the door open to supporting extra government funding and investment rules changes to support carbon capture and storage, as two Coalition backbench senators reveal they oppose the legislation. Although Labor has previously blocked attempts to use the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and Australian Renewable Energy Agency to support CCS, the government’s new $1bn low emissions technology fund will challenge the opposition because it is likely to have the casting vote. Liberal senator Gerard Rennick said he doesn’t think the CEFC “should exist at all” and he can’t support an injection of $500m into the new fund or rule changes that amount to “signing up to the whole philosophy” of the green bank. Rennick said he doesn’t want “any government schemes” to support one form of electricity over another and also dislikes “pissy pseudo-banks” like the CEFC and Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility. “The government has a habit of creating funds for purposes that don’t do anything,” he told Guardian Australia. “For example, there’s a $4bn drought fund that would be better off just spent to build some dams so we have a real asset not a paper asset.” Rennick also pointed to his recent vow to withhold his vote until the government stops supporting vaccine mandates and provides immediate assistance to people who have suffered adverse affects from Covid-19 vaccines. The Therapeutic Goods Administration says the protective benefits of Covid vaccines “far outweigh the potential risks of vaccination”, and serious side effects are “very rare”. Nationals senator Matt Canavan told The Australian he would oppose the low emissions technology fund because it is part of the government’s net zero emissions by 2050 policy that he has promised to campaign against at the election. “It is going to be a no from me,” he reportedly said. The loss of two government votes means Labor’s support will be critical to passing a bill in the Senate to create the low emissions technology fund and CEFC rule changes, given likely opposition from the Greens, One Nation and Rex Patrick. Labor’s opposition has softened, as the government’s proposal contains $500m of new money, but the party is yet to determine its position. Anthony Albanese on Thursday noted the two Coalition defections, telling Channel Nine’s Today that Scott Morrison “can’t even get the support of his own side at this stage” but at least the pair were “fair dinkum”. “They say they don’t support any policy on climate change … which really reflects what the Morrison government have done,” he said. “Look, we haven’t seen any legislation, but this is an announcement in search of policy once again.” Albanese took aim at Morrison for claiming he wants “less government” but then provides more funding for CCS and $600m to build a gas-fired power plant in Kurri Kurri. “The contradictions are there from day to day. By the time we get back to parliament, this policy will have changed five or six times.” Morrison called on Labor to support the government’s ability to invest in carbon capture and storage, noting that US president Joe Biden and Bill Gates also acknowledge “this is an important technology”. “These are the technologies that actually will get you to net zero by 2050 without having to put taxes on, without telling people what to do,” he told Today on Thursday. Morrison continued to defend his backflip in support of electric vehicles by mischaracterising Labor’s policy as involving mandates and increased taxes on petrol. “Labor wanted to force people to do this and I still don’t want to do that,” he told Channel Seven’s Sunrise. “You don’t get people to do something else by pushing up the price that they are currently doing that is still what Labor wants to do.” Labor’s current electric vehicle policy and the one taken to the 2019 election did not include a mandate and did not increase costs on petrol vehicles. Morrison committed to release net zero modelling “before we get back to parliament”, on 22 November.A federal judge has approved a $626m settlement for victims of the lead water crisis in Flint, Michigan, in a case brought by tens of thousands of residents affected by the contaminated water. Announcing the settlement on Tuesday, district judge Judith Levy called it a “remarkable achievement” that “sets forth a comprehensive compensation program and timeline that is consistent for every qualifying participant”. Most of the money will come from the state of Michigan, which was accused of repeatedly overlooking the risks of using the Flint River without properly treating the water. “This is a historic and momentous day for the residents of Flint, who will finally begin to see justice served,” said Ted Leopold, one of the lead attorneys in the litigation. Earlier this year, the judge gave preliminary approval to a partial settlement of lawsuits filed by victims of the water crisis against the state. Flint’s troubles began in 2014 after the city switched its water supply to the Flint River from Lake Huron to cut costs. Corrosive river water caused lead to leach from pipes, contaminating the drinking water and causing an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease. The Flint water crisis was one of the country’s worst public health crises in recent memory. The case became emblematic of racial inequality in the United States as it afflicted a city of about 100,000 people, more than half of whom are African-Americans. The contamination prompted several lawsuits from parents who said their children were showing dangerously high blood levels of lead, which can cause development disorders. Lead can be toxic and children are especially vulnerable. The former Michigan governor Rick Snyder was charged in January with two counts of willful neglect of duty over the lead-poisoning of Flint’s drinking water. Payouts from the settlement approved on Wednesday will be made based on a formula that directs more money to younger claimants and to those who can prove greater injury. Michigan’s attorney general has previously said that the settlement would rank as the largest in the state’s history. “Although this is a significant victory for Flint, we have a ways to go in stopping Americans from being systematically poisoned in their own homes, schools, and places of work,” said Corey Stern, a counsel for the plaintiffs, in a statement after the judge’s order on Wednesday. The judge said it was “remarkable” that more than half of Flint’s 81,000 residents have signed up for a share of the settlement. It’s not clear just how much each child will receive. Flint resident Melissa Mays, a 43-year-old social worker, said her three sons have had medical problems and learning challenges due to lead. “Hopefully it’ll be enough to help kids with tutors and getting the medical care they need to help them recover from this,” Mays said. “A lot of this isn’t covered by insurance. These additional needs, they cost money.” She considers the settlement a win. “We’ve made history,” Mays said, “and hopefully it sets a precedent to maybe don’t poison people. It costs more in the long run.”Kari Paul here, signing off for the night! Below are the top stories of the last few hours. Joe Biden and Xi Jinping will hold a highly-anticipated virtual summit on Monday. Kamala Harris is in France attempting to calm a strained US-France relationship following a controversy around a submarine deal. The trial of 18-year-old murder suspect Kyle Rittenhouse has been thrown into jeopardy Wednesday after his lawyers sought a mistrial. Joe Biden will host Justin Trudeau and Andrés Manuel López Obrador for a summit on Canada-Mexico-US relations next week. A federal judge has approved a $626m settlement in a Flint, Michigan water pollution case. Another federal judge has overturned an executive order in Texas that would have banned schools from enforcing mask mandates. Federal judge overturns Texas ban on in-school mask mandates A federal judge has blocked an executive order from Texas governor Greg Abbott prohibiting schools from issuing mask mandates, saying it violates the Americans with Disabilities Act. District Judge Lee Yeakel on Wednesday has blocked the attorney general’s office in Texas from enforcing the anti-mask order, saying it would disproportionately impact children with special health needs. “Children with certain underlying conditions who contract Covid-19 are more likely to experience severe acute biological effects and to require admission to a hospital and the hospital’s intensive-care unit,” he said. The federal lawsuit was filed in August by advocacy group Disability Rights Texas, which argued the governor’s order would deny children with disabilities access to public education – in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. Local officials will again be allowed to create their own rules around mask mandates to stop the spread of the coronavirus. Judge approves $626m settlement in Flint water case A federal judge on Wednesday approved a settlement of $626m with tens of thousands of residents of Flint, Michigan who sued the state over drinking water tainted by lead and bacteria. Judith Levy, a federal judge in Michigan, called the settlement a “remarkable achievement,” noting in her 178-page opinion that it “sets forth a comprehensive compensation program and timeline that is consistent for every qualifying participant”. Flint’s troubles began in 2014 after the city switched its water supply to the Flint River from Lake Huron to cut costs. Residents began to notice effects like hair loss and rashes and doctors soon found dangerous levels of lead in the blood of children. Corrosive river water caused lead to leach from pipes, contaminating the drinking water and causing an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease. Corey Stern, a lawyer representing 4,000 children from the Flint area, said in a statement the agreement wouldn’t have been possible “without the children and families of Flint relentlessly taking a stand against those who failed to keep them safe.” “Flint families are finally going to get some justice,” he said. Read the full story here. Biden to host Trudeau, Amlo for summit next week The White House announced Wednesday that Joe Biden plans to host Canadian president Justin Trudeau and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador (Amlo), in Washington, D.C. next week. It will mark the first North American Leaders’ Summit since 2016, according to a White House release. On the agenda: During the Summit, the United States, Mexico, and Canada will reaffirm their strong ties and integration while also charting a new path for collaboration on ending the COVID-19 pandemic and advancing health security; competitiveness and equitable growth, to include climate change; and a regional vision for migration. Strengthening our partnership is essential to our ability to build back better, to revitalize our leadership, and to respond to a widening range of regional and global challenges. The summit’s announcement comes days after the US modified travel restrictions on visitors from dozens of countries, including Canada and Mexico. Visitors crossing into the US from Canada or Mexico are still required to show proof of vaccination. Kyle Rittenhouse lawyers seek mistrial as judge upbraids prosecution The trial of Kyle Rittenhouse has been upended by requests from his lawyers for a mistrial over apparently out-of-bounds questioning from a chief prosecutor. Rittenhouse, 18, has been charged with killing two men and injuring a third during a night of turbulent protests and counter-protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year after a local Black man was shot by a white police officer. The judge did not immediately rule on the request and is allowing the trial to continue. More from my colleague Maya Yang: The startling turn came after Rittenhouse took the stand and testified that he was under attack when he shot the three men. “I defended myself,” the 18-year-old said. During cross-examination, prosecutor Thomas Binger asked Rittenhouse about whether it was appropriate to use deadly force to protect property. Binger also posed questions about Rittenhouse’s silence after his arrest. At that, the jury was ushered out of the room, and circuit judge Bruce Schroeder loudly and angrily accused Binger of pursuing an improper line of questioning and trying to introduce testimony that the judge earlier said he was inclined to prohibit. The defense asked for a mistrial with prejudice, meaning that if one is granted, Rittenhouse cannot be retried in the shootings. When Binger said he had been acting in good faith, the judge replied: “I don’t believe that.” Full story here. Harris attempts to calm strained US-France relationship in visit following submarine controversy Speculation has followed Kamala Harris on her trip to France this week regarding how the vice president will handle ongoing fallout over a botched submarine deal. The US in September brokered a deal with Australia to share nuclear submarine technology, leading the latter country to cancel its $65m submarine order with France. Officials in France called the move a “stab in the back” and something “Mr. Trump would do”, responding strongly by temporarily recalling its ambassadors in the US and Australia. Joe Biden meanwhile conceded publicly at the G20 summit in Rome that the US handling of the deal “was clumsy”. Administration officials have said the trip is “extremely important” to the relationship between the two countries following the submarine snub. “Building on the great conversation that you and President Biden had, I look forward to the next few days,” Harris said at the French palace on Wednesday night. Harris in France will meet with president Emmanuel Macron in addition to attending a number of diplomatic engagements including the Paris Peace Forum and the Libya Conference, where she will join 20 heads of state to encourage an end to violence in Libya and open democratic elections on Dec. 24. Harris will also mark Armistice Day in France and Veterans Day in the US by visiting Surenes, an American World War I military cemetery. “We’ll work together and renew the focus that we’ve always had on a partnership and a benefit to the people of France and the people of the United States and the people of the world,” Harris said in her Wednesday address. Biden and Xi Jinping to hold virtual summit on Monday A widely-awaited meeting between President Joe Biden and Chinese leader Xi Jinping is scheduled to take place virtually on 15 November, according to Politico. The meeting has been gaining momentum after the two leaders expressed a desire to establish a positive tone in recent weeks, both sending letters of congratulations on Tuesday to the National Committee on United States-China Relations (NCUSCR) to mark its 55th anniversary. “China stands ready to work with the United States to enhance exchanges and cooperation across the board ... so as to bring China-US relations back to the right track of sound and steady development”, Xi’s letter, read aloud at a NCUSCR black-tie gala dinner stated. Biden, meanwhile, underscored in his letter read at the same event the “global significance” of the US-China relationship in addressing issues “from tackling the Covid-19 pandemic to addressing the existential threat of the climate crisis”. The summit marks a major opportunity to reset a historically tense bilateral relationship exacerbated by inflammatory rhetoric against China from former president Donald Trump. While no major breakthroughs are anticipated from the meeting, it symbolizes an opportunity to make progress on a range of issues including “easing of visa restrictions, the creation of a bilateral nuclear weapons dialogue and a possible framework to ease trade frictions to demonstrate bilateral resolve to move the relationship from confrontation to cooperation”, according to Politico. The meeting was confirmed to Politico by both a US official and a non-administration source familiar with the planning. Biden vows to fight inflation My colleague Lauren Gambino has a report to share from the ground in Baltimore, where Joe Biden is discussing his Build Back Better agenda. Framed by shipping crates and cranes and a setting sun, Joe Biden took a long-awaited victory lap over the passage of his infrastructure bill during a visit to the Port of Baltimore. “Infrastructure week has finally arrived,” he said with a chuckle. The audience included longshore workers, several members of the Maryland congressional delegation, the mayor of Baltimore and the state’s governor, Larry Hogan, a Republican who praised the bill’s passage. During his remarks, Biden promised to fight inflation that is causing the price of “everything from a gall of gas to a loaf of bread” to rise. Biden then offered a lengthy explanation of supply chains, something no one thinks about until they have to, he said. He said recent actions taken by the White House to ease bottlenecks in the supply chain will help bring prices down and ensure shelves are stocked in time for the holidays. In the long-term, he said the infrastructure bill will help build greater resilience for future supply chain disruption: pandemics, climate disaster or cyber attacks. Biden again made the case for his Build Back Better agenda, which is facing new hurdles in the wake of a consumer index report that showed climbing prices. Senator Joe Manchin, already a holdout on the bill, said Washington can “no longer ignore the economic pain” caused by inflation. Biden said tackling inflation was a “top priority” and made the point again in his remarks. He argued that his Build Back Better would help bring down inflation by easing the financial pressures on American families, especially parents and seniors. “We’re going to build a better America – not a joke,” he said. “We’re going to mess the world again – not a joke.” But in typical Biden fashion, he ended with a joke. acknowledging that he can be long-winded, he told a man in the crowd with “as little hair as mine” to put back on his hat. “I’d put it back on – you’re gonna get cold,” he said. Jill Biden honors kids of injured soldiers as ‘hidden heroes’ In her first solo event at the White House on Wednesday, first lady Jill Biden honored the children and caregivers of injured US troops, calling them “hidden heroes”. While President Joe Biden was offsite for a speech at the Port of Baltimore this afternoon, Jill Biden welcomed family members of wounded soldiers in the East Room of the White House. Biden’s late son Beau earned a Bronze Star in Iraq, making the issue personal to her, she said. She told attendees she often visited Walter Reed National Military medical center in 2009 throughout the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. “I would sit near the beds of the wounded warriors, usually with a spouse close by, and listen to their stories of courage and sacrifice,” she said. “Over time, I built relationships with those families. And my heart went out to the spouses who cared for them – so often young moms, bouncing babies on their hips.” The event comes after the White House Joining Forces initiative teamed up with the Elizabeth Dole Foundation and Wounded Warrior Project earlier this year launch Hidden Helpers, designed to provide support for the children of America’s 5.5 million military caregivers. Hello all! This is Kari Paul taking over the blog for the next few hours. Stay tuned for updates. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague Kari Paul will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden will sign the bipartisan infrastructure bill on Monday, the White House announced. At the bill-signing ceremony, the president will be joined by a bipartisan group of lawmakers who helped craft the legislation. The event will come a week and a half after the House passed the bill, which will provide $550bn in new federal funds for roads, bridges and other projects. US inflation hit a 30-year high last month, according to a new report from the labor department. Prices have risen 6.2% over the past 12 months, marking the highest year-over-year increase since December 1990. Biden pledged to address rising inflation during an event at the Port of Baltimore this afternoon. The president acknowledged that “consumer prices remain too high,” and he argued his economic agenda would soon help lower costs for American families. “Thanks to those steps we’re taking, very soon we’re going to see the supply chain start catching up with demand,” Biden said. “So not only will we see more record-breaking job growth, we’ll see lower prices, faster deliveries as well.” The National Archives is expected to start delivering Trump White House documents to the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection on Friday. A federal judge ruled last night that the House committee could have access to the documents, dismissing Donald Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. Trump intends to appeal the ruling. The Democratic chair of the select committee said the judge’s ruling was a “big deal,” as the panel gathers evidence on Trump’s response to the insurrection. “We have the law on our side, and you know, we are a nation of laws,” chair Bennie Thompson told CNN last night. Kari will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden acknowledged that “consumer prices remain too high,” after the labor department released a report showing US inflation hit a 30-year high last month. “Everything from a gallon of gas to a loaf of bread costs more, and it’s worrisome, even though wages are going up,” Biden said. “We still face challenges, and we have to tackle them. We have to tackle them head on.” The president argued that his economic agenda, including the bipartisan infrastructure bill, will help resolve supply-chain issues and bring down prices as a result. “Thanks to those steps we’re taking, very soon we’re going to see the supply chain start catching up with demand,” Biden said. “So not only will we see more record-breaking job growth, we’ll see lower prices, faster deliveries as well.” Before wrapping up his speech, Biden expressed his gratitude to the members of the local International Longshoremen’s Association chapter who led the president’s tour at the Port of Baltimore. Biden will now head back to Washington. Joe Biden is now delivering remarks about the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill at the Port of Baltimore. Celebrating the House’s passage of the bill last week, the president said, “Infrastructure week has finally arrived.” Poking fun at his predecessor’s failure to pass an infrastructure bill, Biden said with a laugh, “How many times did you hear over the last five years, ‘Infrastructure week is coming’? Yeah, uh-huh.” The White House has just announced that Biden will sign the infrastructure bill on Monday, and a bipartisan group of lawmakers will be in attendance for the event. Joe Biden participated in a tour at the Port of Baltimore, where he will soon deliver remarks on the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. The president viewed machinery that is imported and exported at the port, the White House told the press pool. Maryland Governor Larry Hogan, a Republican, and several members of the local International Longshoremen’s Association chapter joined Biden for the tour. A White House official said Joe Biden will use the signing of the infrastructure bill as an opportunity to outline how his administration is responding to supply-chain issues and rising inflation. “Coming after his visit to the Port of Baltimore, the President will also emphasize the array of steps he and his administration are taking thanks to the bipartisan deal to build on the hard work he and his team have been doing to strengthen supply chains and address bottlenecks in moving goods across the country,” the official said. “And he will reiterate that a large body of experts have shown that these infrastructure investments will help to act against inflationary pressures by making it easier to receive the unparalleled volume of goods that need to be moved after we achieved the re-opening of the economy this summer.” The announcement of the Monday bill-signing comes hours after the labor department released a report showing US inflation hit a 30-year high last month, as prices rose for everything from gasoline to meat products. Joe Biden will sign the bipartisan infrastructure bill on Monday, the White House has just announced. At the bill-signing, the president will be joined by a bipartisan group of lawmakers who helped craft the legislation, as well as governors, mayors and labor leaders who pushed for the proposal’s passage. “At the signing ceremony, the President will highlight how he is following through on his commitment to rebuild the middle class and the historic benefits the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal will deliver for American families,” the White House said in its statement. The bill-signing will come a week and a half after the House passed the infrastructure bill, which includes $550bn in new federal funds for roads, bridges and other projects. Biden is scheduled to soon deliver remarks on the benefits of the infrastructure bill at the Port of Baltimore, so stay tuned. The White House has released a readout of Joe Biden’s meeting this morning with Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission. “They welcomed the revitalization of U.S.-EU ties, which has led to the resolution of long-standing trade differences as well as cooperation on ending the COVID-19 pandemic, fighting climate change, and investing in the infrastructure needs of the 21st century,” the White House said. “The leaders addressed the humanitarian situation on the European Union’s border with Belarus and expressed deep concern about the irregular migration flows. They discussed our shared commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. In addition, they expressed their continued support for political and economic stability in Northern Ireland.” German Chancellor Angela Merkel has also asked Russian President Vladimir Putin to intervene in the crisis unfolding along the border between Belarus and Poland. The Guardian’s Andrew Roth reports: In a phone call on a crisis that has escalated dramatically since Monday, when 1,000 people mainly from Iraqi Kurdistan arrived on the border, the German chancellor told Putin that the ‘use of migrants by the Belarusian regime was inhuman and unacceptable and asked [Putin] to influence the regime in Minsk’, according to the chancellor’s spokesperson, Steffen Seibert, who described the situation as ‘state-sanctioned human trafficking’. The conversation came hours after Poland’s prime minister accused the Russian president of ‘masterminding’ the surging numbers and underlined the role that regional alliances were playing in the standoff and ensuing humanitarian crisis. Thousands of people are in the forests along the border, where temperatures fall below zero after nightfall. Cop26 is not short of controversial subjects, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has demonstrated she is not afraid to get stuck into the big questions: namely, would she like the Scottish fizzy drink Irn-Bru? The bright orange drink has become the surprise curiosity of Cop26, and is on sale throughout the SEC convention centre due to a deal between building’s owners and drinks manufacturer AG Barr. Delegates from all over the world have been sharing their thoughts on its unique taste, with mixed reviews. In an Instagram video of herself trying the drink for the first time, the US congresswoman said: “Oh my God, love it, love it. This tastes just like the Latina soda Kola Champagne.” “I was so shocked at having something in Glasgow that tasted like home,” she added in a caption. “However Irn-Bru is also very unique on its own. It’s got pizazz. Will bring some cans home to NY for sure!” Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon tweeted a photo of herself handing a can to Ocasio-Cortez on Wednesday, after the congresswoman indicated she hoped to try it while in Glasgow. “Amidst all the serious business at Cop26 today, I’m pleased to also report that AOC now has a supply of Irn-Bru,” she wrote. John Kerry, the president’s special envoy for climate, celebrated the new agreement between the US and China to curb methane emissions. Speaking at the Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow, Kerry noted that cutting methane emissions is considered to be “the single fastest and most effective way to limit warming”. “And that’s why it’s been a top priority for President Biden and many of our partners here in Glasgow,” Kerry said, adding that China’s commitment will help limit global methane emissions in this “critical decade”. China and the US announced a surprise plan to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions in the crucial next decade, in a strong boost to the Cop26 summit, as negotiators wrangled over a draft outcome. The world’s two biggest emitters had been trading insults for the first week of the conference, but on Wednesday evening unveiled a joint declaration that would see the world’s two biggest economies cooperate closely on the emissions cuts scientists say are needed in the next ten years to stay within 1.5C. The remarkable turnaround came as a surprise to the UK hosts, and will send a strong signal to the 190-plus other countries at the talks. China and the US will work together on some key specific areas, such as cutting methane – a powerful greenhouse gas – and emissions from transport, energy and industry. “Both sides recognise that there is a gap between the current effort and the Paris agreement goals, so we will jointly strengthen our Paris efforts and cooperation … to accelerate a green and low carbon transition,” said Xie Zhenhua, China’s head of delegation. “Climate change is becoming an increasingly urgent challenge. We hope this joint declaration will help to achieve success at Cop26.” The Biden administration is attempting to downplay the alarming news that US inflation hit a 30-year high last month, as prices rose for everything from gasoline to used cars and meat products. In a tweet thread, the president’s Council of Economic Advisers noted that month-to-month price changes can be “volatile” and emphasized that the country’s recovery from the pandemic will not be “linear”. “Inflation has picked up in many countries as the global economy restarts after the pandemic,” the council added. “While the United States has seen a higher level of inflation than the Euro Area, indexing to inflation growth in 2019, the United States has seen a relatively similar increase as in the Euro Area.” In his own statement about the inflation news, Joe Biden acknowledged that there is “more work to do” to help the US economy recover from the pandemic. “Inflation hurts Americans pocketbooks, and reversing this trend is a top priority for me,” the president said. A Washington, DC personality on the right-wing website and TV entity Newsmax, Emerald Robinson, has been permanently suspended from Twitter for repeatedly breaking the social media company’s rules against spreading lies about Covid-19. Robinson, whom Newsmax features as a politics correspondent, had previously been suspended for promulgating conspiracy-theory-type vaccine disinformation. CNN’s Daniel Dale further notes: Gerrymandering is surging in states where legislatures are in charge of redrawing voting districts used to elect members of Congress, according to a new analysis today. The Associated Press reports: North Carolina Republicans are well positioned to pick up at least two House seats in next year’s election - but it’s not because the state is getting “redder”. The state remains a perennial battleground, closely split between Democrats and Republicans in elections. But, last week, the GOP-controlled legislature finalized maps that redraw congressional district boundaries, dividing up Democratic voters in cities to dilute their votes. The new plan took the number of GOP-leaning districts from eight to 10 in the state. Republicans even have a shot at winning an eleventh. North Carolina’s plan drew instant criticism for its aggressive approach, but it’s hardly alone. Experts and lawmakers tracking the once-a-decade redistricting process see a cycle of supercharged gerrymandering. With fewer legal restraints and amped up political stakes, both Democrats and Republicans are pushing the bounds of the tactic long used to draw districts for maximum partisan advantage, often at the expense of community unity or racial representation. “In the absence of reforms, the gerrymandering in general has gotten even worse than 2010, than in the last round” of redistricting, said Chris Warshaw, a political scientist at George Washington University who has analyzed decades of redistricting maps in U.S. states. Republicans dominated redistricting last decade, helping them build a greater political advantage in more states than either party had in the past 50 years. Republicans’ potential net gain of three seats in North Carolina could be fully canceled out in Illinois, where Democrats control the legislature. In the 13 states that have passed new congressional maps so far, the cumulative effect is essentially a wash for Republicans and Democrats, leaving just a few toss-up districts. That could change in the coming weeks, as Republican-controlled legislatures consider proposed maps in Georgia, New Hampshire and Ohio that target Democratic-held seats. “Across the board you are seeing Republicans gerrymander,” said Kelly Ward Burton, executive director of the National Democratic Redistricting Committee, which oversees redistricting for the Democratic Party. Former Attorney General Eric Holder, who leads the Democrats’ effort, has called for more states to use redistricting commissions. In Maryland, Democrats are considering a proposal that would make it easier for a Democrat to oust the state’s only Republican congressman. Newly passed congressional maps in Indiana, Arkansas and Alabama all maintain an existing Republican advantage. Here’s where the day stands so far: The National Archives is expected to start delivering Trump White House documents to the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection on Friday. A federal judge ruled last night that the House committee could have access to the documents, dismissing Donald Trump’s claims of executive privilege over the materials. Trump intends to appeal the ruling. The Democratic chair of the select committee said the judge’s ruling was a “big deal,” as the panel gathers evidence on Trump’s response to the insurrection. “We have the law on our side, and you know, we are a nation of laws,” chair Bennie Thompson told CNN last night. US inflation hit a 30-year high last month, according to a new report from the labor department. Prices have risen 6.2% over the past 12 months, marking the highest year-over-year increase since December 1990. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Federal prosecutors had sought a 44-month prison sentence for Scott Fairlamb, who pleaded guilty to assaulting a police officer during the Capitol insurrection. Prosecutors wrote in a court filing, “Law enforcement officers were overwhelmed, outnumbered, and in some cases, in serious danger. The rule of law was not only disrespected; it was under attack that day.” US District Judge Royce Lamberth ultimately handed down a 41-month sentence for Fairlamb, who said he has “nothing but remorse” for his actions on January 6. The AP has more details on Fairlamb’s role in the Capitol attack: Fairlamb picked up a police baton as he joined the mob that broke past a line of police officers and breached the Capitol, according to prosecutors. A video showed him holding the collapsible baton and shouting, ‘What (do) patriots do? We f——— disarm them and then we storm the f——— Capitol!’ After he left the building, Fairlamb shoved and punched a Metropolitan Police Department officer in the face, an attack captured on video by a bystander. The officer said he didn’t suffer any physical injuries, according to prosecutors. A New Jersey man who pleaded guilty to assaulting a police officer during the Capitol insurrection has been sentenced to 41 months in prison. CNN reports: New Jersey gym owner and former MMA fighter who punched a police officer during the January 6 riot was sentenced to 41 months in prison on Wednesday, becoming the first rioter sentenced for violence against the police during the attack. Scott Fairlamb pleaded guilty to assaulting a police officer and obstructing an official proceeding in August. ‘I truly regret my actions that day. I have nothing but remorse,’ Fairlamb said in court Wednesday, later adding to the judge: ‘I just hope you show some mercy on me sir.’ According to Politico, Fairlamb’s prison sentence is the longest yet among those facing charges connected to the Capitol insurrection. However, other insurrectionists who have been charged with assault may soon face similarly lengthy sentences. Joe Biden met this morning with Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, in the Oval Office. Speaking to reporters after the meeting, von der Leyen said she and Biden had a “very productive” discussion about the need to increase coronavirus vaccination rates. Biden is now en route to Baltimore, Maryland, where he will deliver a speech this afternoon on the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. The House passed the infrastructure bill on Friday night, sending the proposal to Biden’s desk, although the president has not yet signed it. Biden did not take any questions from reporters as he left the White House to start the short trip to Baltimore. Prince Harry has said he warned Twitter’s boss Jack Dorsey about his platform allowing political unrest a day before the Capitol riot that led to five deaths. The Duke of Sussex made the comments at the RE:WIRED tech forum in the US. He said: “I warned him his platform was allowing a coup to be staged. That email was sent the day before. And then it happened and I haven’t heard from him since.” On the day of the 6 January riots, Donald Trump tweeted allegations of vote fraud before a rally in Washington DC. Members of the Proud Boy movement, a rightwing militia, stormed the Capitol to disrupt the official certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the White House race, as part of an attempt to overturn the election result. Harry was speaking via video chat at a session discussing whether social media was contributing to misinformation and online hatred. Dorsey, who is Twitter’s chief executive, has so far not commented. Despite centrists’ concerns about the reconciliation package, it’s worth noting that some economists have said the bill will not have a negative long-term impact on inflation. Jason Furman, who served as the chair of the Council of Economic Advisers under Barack Obama, said on Twitter, “Your regular reminder: The reconciliation bill would have essentially no discernible effect on the medium- or long-term path of inflation. That legislation should be evaluated on other criteria like what it does for opportunity, climate change &amp; long-term growth.” The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, echoed that message, arguing that the reconciliation bill would help curb rising inflation by lowering the costs of childcare and prescription drugs. “Good news out there for members of Congress (you too Republicans) there is a bill that they can support that will bring down costs and combat inflation. We welcome your support!” Psaki said on Twitter. Democratic Senator Joe Manchin, one of the holdout votes in the negotiations over the reconciliation package, expressed serious concern about the latest inflation report. “By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse,” the West Virginia senator said on Twitter. “From the grocery store to the gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.” Manchin does not explicitly mention the reconciliation package in his tweet, but he has previously warned that the bill could have a negative impact on inflation. Manchin wrote in a September op-ed for the Wall Street Journal, “An overheating economy has imposed a costly ‘inflation tax’ on every middle- and working-class American.” He added, “Ignoring the fiscal consequences of our policy choices will create a disastrous future for the next generation of Americans.” However, since Manchin wrote that op-ed, the top-line cost of the reconciliation bill has been cut in half -- from $3.5tn to $1.75tn -- because of his demands. So that may have allayed some of his concerns about the inflationary impact. Time will tell. Joe Biden acknowledged there is still “more work to do” to strengthen the US economy, after the labor department reported that inflation reached a 30-year high last month. “Inflation hurts Americans pocketbooks, and reversing this trend is a top priority for me,” the president said in a new statement. “I want to reemphasize my commitment to the independence of the federal reserve to monitor inflation, and take steps necessary to combat it.” Biden noted he will travel this afternoon to Baltimore, Maryland, where he will “highlight how my Infrastructure Bill will bring down [energy] costs, reduce these bottlenecks, and make goods more available and less costly”. The House passed the bipartisan infrastructure bill last week, although Biden has not yet signed the legislation. Meanwhile, Democrats continue to negotiate over their $1.75tn reconciliation package. The president urged Congress to pass the reconciliation package, which he argued will “get more Americans working by reducing the cost of child care and elder care”. “We are making progress on our recovery. Jobs are up, wages are up, home values are up, personal debt is down, and unemployment is down,” Biden said. “We have more work to do, but there is no question that the economy continues to recover and is in much better shape today than it was a year ago.” US inflation reached a 30-year high in October as rising energy costs, supply shortages and increased consumer demand drove up prices. Over the past 12 months prices have risen 6.2%, according to a labor department report released on Wednesday. The rise was the largest since December 1990. Inflation increased by 0.9% in October, faster than September’s 0.4% and above economists’ expectations. The news comes as the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve have tried to downplay rising costs, arguing they are a temporary phenomena driven by Covid-19’s unprecedented impact on the global supply chain. The increase was “broad-based, with increases in the indexes for energy, shelter, food, used cars and trucks, and new vehicles among the larger contributors”, the labor department said. “The energy index rose 4.8% over the month, as the gasoline index increased 6.1% and the other major energy component indexes also rose. The food index increased 0.9% as the index for food at home rose 1%.” Read the Guardian’s full report: Bennie Thompson, the chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, said the federal judge’s ruling was a “big deal”. “We have the law on our side, and you know, we are a nation of laws,” Thompson told CNN anchor Chris Cuomo last night. The Democratic chair urged Donald Trump to accept the judge’s ruling, although the former president plans to appeal the decision to give Thompson’s committee access to White House documents. “If you take your issue to court and lose, then you need to man up and deal with it and not be a spoiled brat,” Thompson said. “So I look forward to getting this information.” Although Trump’s appeal could affect this timeline, the National Archives is expected to start sending White House documents to the select committee starting Friday. In case you missed it yesterday: The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol issued further subpoenas on Tuesday to 10 Trump administration officials, including the former senior adviser Stephen Miller and press secretary Kayleigh McEnany, expanding their inquiry into Donald Trump’s involvement in circumstances surrounding the attack. The subpoenas demanding documents and testimony are focused squarely on activities involving the White House and come a day after the select committee subpoenaed other top Trump lieutenants who aimed to undercut the results of the 2020 election while working from the Willard hotel in Washington. The Mississippi Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson, who chairs the select committee, said in a statement that he authorized the subpoenas to the Trump officials in order to “know precisely what role the former president and his aides played in efforts to stop the counting of the electoral votes”. Thompson added the select committee also wanted the 10 Trump officials to help inform whether anyone outside the White House was involved in attempting to overturn the results of the 2020 election. “We believe the witnesses have relevant information.” Although Donald Trump intends to appeal the federal judge’s ruling, the National Archives is expected to start turning over documents to the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection starting Friday. CNN reports: As of now, the National Archives remains on track to turn over to the House a number of documents on Friday, including White House call logs, video logs and schedules related to January 6 as well as three pages of handwritten notes from Trump’s then-chief of staff. The outcome in court also could help the House in its pursuit of more information from those around Trump, including witnesses who’ve been subpoenaed and haven’t spoken to the committee yet. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. A federal judge ruled late last night that documents from the Trump White House can be turned over to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. The decision marked a crucial loss for Donald Trump, who has tried to shield the documents from the committee’s investigation by claiming executive privilege. US district judge Tanya Chutkan said in her ruling: “His position that he may override the express will of the executive branch appears to be premised on the notion that his executive power ‘exists in perpetuity’... but presidents are not kings, and plaintiff is not president.” Trump is expected to appeal the ruling, but the decision is still an important victory for the select committee, which is seeking phone records, visitor logs and other documents to shed more light on the former president’s response to the insurrection. Combined with the new subpoenas that the committee has issued this week, the investigation seems to be picking up steam. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The acclaimed Vietnamese American poet Ocean Vuong has hit back with humour after perplexed Australian year 12 students bombarded him on social media complaining about his “confusing” text in their final English exam. More than 60,000 New South Wales HSC students sitting their English paper one exam on Tuesday were given excerpts to analyse from Vuong’s award-winning 2019 debut novel, On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous. The non-linear coming-of-age novel draws on Vuong’s own family story. It is told from the perspective of a character called Little Dog, the son of Vietnamese immigrants to the US, and is framed in the style of a letter to his illiterate mother. One of the extracts given to the HSC students feature Little Dog plucking grey hairs from his grandmother’s head as she regales him with stories, while another involves the protagonist engaging in a romance with a book. After the exam, the author, who has received a 2016 Whiting award and the 2017 TS Eliot prize for his poetry, received a deluge of messages to his Instagram from baffled students asking what his text means. Sharing the messages on Instagram stories, Vuong wrote back to one student: “Meaning… I, too, am haunted by it.” Vuong took the complaints in his stride, posting a picture of a dog with the caption: “yo, what the hell is an HSC exam and why are all of y’all failing it?” He also shared more messages, along with ripostes. “UR TEXT WAS GOOD BUT SO CONFUSING,” wrote one student. “MISSION ACCOMPLISHED,” quipped Vuong. “So u da one that got us all fucked up,” wrote another student. “Don’t let ’em tell you literature can’t change lives,” Vuong responded. Another message appeared to blame Vuong for scuppering their chances at higher education: “Ur text was in our major exams in Australia.. Those exams determine our entry into university ... WTF WAS UR TEXT.” Vuong responded: “Yikes, next time quote from the opening chapter of William Empson’s ‘Seven Types of Ambiguity’ on the slipperyness of language and its destabilized meanings as a convincing and robust alternative answer. Good luck, blokes.” When a student’s mother joined the post-exam pile-on (“Can you send me more information? My son tried to write about your text today and he still didn’t know what it’s about”), Vuong exclaimed: “Guys, they got the MOMS out here digging hard in my DMs. Don’t y’all have Spark Notes in Australia?” Later, Vuong posted another Instagram Story saying: “For what it’s worth, I didn’t get into ‘uni’ either out of high school. I went to a local community college where I did some of my best learning (I was introduced to Foucault and Annie Dillard in Comp 101!).” In 2017, Indigenous writer Ellen van Neerven received abusive messages on social media from NSW HSC students after her poem Mango was featured in the English paper one exam. The NSW Educations Standard Authority called on the students to apologise.Scott Morrison thrives in the empty space between three-year terms and 30-year plans. Whether it is climate change, nuclear submarines or budget repair – it is no accident the prime minister with the shortest planning horizon in living memory is our greatest announcer of long-run plans. While the vacuousness of Morrison’s net-zero “plan” and his refusal to release the underpinning modelling has been widely condemned, the reality is: no matter how detailed a plan to transition the Australian economy over the next 30 years is, it will always be a work of fiction. Imagine if you asked economists in 1981 to predict the relative cost of smartphones v landlines, or electric cars v petrol cars. To be crystal clear, us economists can’t predict the price of oil next month or the rate of inflation next year. Asking us to predict the likely costs of technologies that haven’t been invented yet is fantasy stuff. You can see why Morrison is a fan. Good economic management has nothing to do with the number of decimal places in forecasts of future costs and benefits. It revolves around setting clear goals, putting policies in place, monitoring progress and adapting when necessary. Morrison is world-class when it comes to the goal setting part; he’s at the head of the queue, gold standard, and of course, so much better than Labor at it. But when it comes to delivering on his promises our prime minister is a laggard not a leader. Rather than move heaven and earth to achieve his goals, Morrison just shifts the goalposts, and the blame. But Morrison is no fool. He knows his audience, and his opponents. Throughout his life he hasn’t just avoided responsibility for his failures, he’s thrived on them. His long-run plans are nonsense, but he knows his audience craves them all the same. Marketing 101 tells Morrison to give the customer what they want, and to sell them something new before they notice their last delivery never arrived. While most people will tell you the best way to complete a long journey is to get started now, Morrison is using long-term plans to explain why there is no rush to do anything. But, while there is no doubt Morrison has mastered the art of hiding inaction behind a pile of pamphlets, it’s important to remember it’s not even his trick. Back in 1997, a newly elected John Howard released his grandiose climate plan entitled Safeguarding the Future. It’s worth quoting at length: Today I announce the largest and most far-reaching package of measures to address climate change ever undertaken by any government in Australia … It provides a durable framework to promote Australia’s national interest towards the year 2010 and beyond. In a comprehensive manner, it replaces and far exceeds the random, disjointed projects of the previous government. Without further action, Australia’s emissions are expected to grow by around 28 per cent from 1990 to 2010. This is based on a comprehensive approach excluding land use change. Emissions from the energy sector alone are expected to grow by around 40 per cent. The package I announce today will achieve a dramatic reduction of a third in our expected net emissions growth from 1990 to 2010. These measures will reduce our net emissions growth from 28 to 18 per cent in that period, or some 39 million tonnes of emissions … This is a realistic, even conservative, calculation of the emission benefits. But it wasn’t. As shown below, Howard’s 13-year plan to reduce emissions didn’t even manage to slow the rate of emissions growth, let alone deliver anything near the “conservative, realistic” reductions he promised. So much for Morrison’s absurd assertion that Australia always delivers on its promises. No matter who is in power and how much modelling they release, no government can say with certainty what our electricity, transport, industrial or commutations systems will look like in 30 years. The biggest problem with Morrison’s net zero plan isn’t a lack of modelling, but a lack of conviction. Any “plan” to transition to a net-zero economy that involves building new coalmines, opening new gas basins and new gas-fired power stations, is a fraud. Morrison must know that but he’s betting that voters will settle for plans over performance. Time will tell. • Richard Denniss is chief economist at independent thinktank the Australia Institute @RDNS_TAIThe federal government has outlined a detailed plan to reform Australia’s whistleblowing laws and remove secrecy offences to drive “trust and accountability in the public sector”, as new research shows the current scheme is failing to protect those who speak out about wrongdoing. The assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, told the National Whistleblowing Symposium on Thursday that the government would move to reform the Public Interest Disclosure Act, which is designed to shield public sector whistleblowers from reprisal. The government was warned of the failings of Australia’s whistleblower laws more than four years ago, in a review by Philip Moss, but has not yet acted on his recommendations. The former attorney general Christian Porter signalled a willingness to reform the act in 2019, after the police raids on the ABC and the search of Herald-Sun political editor Annika Smethurst’s home. But Stoker on Thursday laid out for the first time a detailed plan for reform. She described the current whistleblower laws as “inaccessible and overly complex” with “structural and technical flaws, which make its provisions difficult to navigate and interpret”. Stoker signalled the government would seek to make it easier for whistleblowers to access legal advice and compel the heads of government agencies to take greater steps to support them during the disclosure process. Witnesses to alleged wrongdoing would also be better protected, she said, and all investigation reports produced as a result of a disclosure would be required to go to the Commonwealth Ombudsman or the intelligence watchdog, the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security. Those agencies would be given greater powers to perform oversight roles to ensure disclosures were properly handled, including the ability to “make inquiries and recommendations about an investigation report”. “Further consideration is also being given to prescribing additional agencies as investigative agencies,” Stoker said. “This will give disclosers additional avenues through which to make a disclosure and will leverage the investigative agencies’ expertise and specialist powers under their own legislation to address wrongdoing.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Stoker also signalled the government would tighten the kinds of conduct that could prompt a disclosure. Disclosures made in the pursuit of workplace grievances, she said, would not attract protection. “This will free up agencies’ valuable resources to focus on allegations of more serious wrongdoing,” she said. The government, she said, wanted to remove the general secrecy offence, which broadly criminalises the revelation of anything secret, saying it was “not fit for purpose and is limiting the ability of agencies to respond to alleged wrongdoing”. The intention of the reforms was to bring the public sector whistleblowing laws in line with the recently reformed corporate whistleblowing scheme, which had been widely praised by experts. That would involve expanding the definition of “detriment” to protect against a broader range of reprisals against whistleblowers, and reversing the burden of proof in civil claims to make it easier for whistleblowers to prove their claim for protection. It would also clarify that protections would be afforded to former public officials, not just current ones, and would shield those who had the potential to make a disclosure, regardless of whether or not they actually go ahead with it. That would protect people who become aware of information that could enable them to make a disclosure. Stoker also reaffirmed greater protections for journalists, including a review of secrecy provisions to give greater protection to public interest journalism, and introducing safeguards against warrants being issued for journalists over unlawful disclosures. The government would not commit to the reforms prior to the election. But Stoker said work on the reforms was “well advanced”. The reform pledge comes as new research out of Griffith University showed the current whistleblowing regime was failing to protect individuals, even in high-priority cases. As a result of making a disclosure, about 77% of whistleblowers reported experiencing collateral damage, including stress, isolation or ostracism, and 43.7% reported direct damage, including harassment or intimidation, discipline, or the denial of promotions. Prof AJ Brown, a leading expert in whistleblower protections, welcomed Stoker’s commitments to reform, telling the symposium he was heartened to hear the detailed plan for the first time. He told the symposium that less than half of all whistleblowers who were high priority for protection and experienced repercussions received any remedy. Compensation, the data showed, was extremely rare. “There’s not much evidence that compensation is flowing in cases where it’s really needed,” Brown said. He said the research showed the urgent need for reforms to the whistleblower regime. “I’m really glad to say that what senator Stoker has outlined is really starting to address some of those issues, many of those issues, indeed,” he said. “And the question now is how quickly we can get on to it.”A San Francisco Bay Area man has been sentenced to 30 years in federal prison for running an audacious solar energy Ponzi scheme that defrauded investors of $1bn, the biggest criminal fraud scheme in the district’s history. Jeff Carpoff, the 50-year-old owner of the solar energy company DC Solar, was sentenced on Tuesday. His wife, Paulette Carpoff, 47, faces up to 15 years in prison after pleading guilty at the same time to money laundering and conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States. The couple started DC Solar, based in Benicia, as a legitimate company that made solar generators mounted on trailers, prosecutors said. But the company was later used in an “egregious scheme” to scam its investors, including Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. The Carpoffs used the money to buy and invest in more than 150 luxury cars, 32 properties, a subscription to a private jet service, a semipro baseball team, a Nascar racecar sponsorship and a suite at the new Las Vegas Raiders stadium. The couple has agreed to forfeit more than $120m in assets, including a fleet of collector cars and vacation homes in the Caribbean, Mexico, Lake Tahoe and Las Vegas purchased entirely with cash. Prosecutors said they intend to use the assets in partial restitution to victims of the fraud. The government already auctioned off 148 vehicles, including the 1978 Firebird previously owned by late actor Burt Reynolds, netting more than $8.2m. DC Solar marketed its generators between 2011 and 2018 as being able to provide emergency power for cellphone companies or to provide lighting at sporting and other events. But prosecutors say the owners began telling investors they could benefit from federal tax credits by leasing the generators back to DC Solar, which would then provide them to other companies for their use. In fact, prosecutors say the generators never provided much income, and early investors were paid with funds from later investors. Carpoff and others covered up the scheme with fake financial statements and lease contracts, prosecutors said. They eventually stopped building the mobile generators altogether, and at least half the company’s claimed 17,000 generators didn’t really exist, prosecutors said. Instead, they said Carpoff and others said the generators were in locations where they did not really exist. They traded identification number stickers on generators that had been constructed previously. And they hoodwinked investors during equipment inspections. “He claimed to be an innovator in alternative energy, but he was really just stealing money from investors and costing the American taxpayer hundreds of millions in tax credits,” Talbert said. The company was involved in $2.5bn in investment transactions between 2011 and 2018, costing investors $1bn, prosecutors said earlier. Among the investors was Berkshire Hathaway, which lost about $340m. The case represents the biggest criminal fraud scheme in the history of the federal court district that covers inland northern California, according to acting US attorney Phillip Talbert. “Carpoff’s egregious scheme fueled his rapacious desire for luxury and prominence with showy, public expenditures,” said Sean Ragan, special agent in charge of the FBI’s Sacramento field office. Aside from the Carpoffs, five others have pleaded guilty to related offenses and are awaiting sentencing.Australia’s jobless rate jumped to 5.2% in October as more people began to look for work even as the economy shed 46,300 jobs during a period when half the economy was still in Covid-triggered lockdowns. The increase in unemployment according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics was worse than the markets had expected. The Australian dollar eased to a one-month low of 73.17 US cents in the wake of the report’s release as investors pared back expectations of an early move by the Reserve Bank to raise interest rates. Labour force figures are notoriously volatile, with the Covid disruptions making estimates more difficult. The ABS survey covered the period from 26 September to 9 October, which included a jump in Census-related jobs but also the depths of the lockdowns in the major states of NSW and Victoria. Pushing the jobless tally higher was an increase in some states of the number of people looking for work, with the so-called participation rate rising from 64.5% in September to 64.7% last month. The increase was the first since June. NSW appears further out of the Covid-induced economic downturn than Victoria. Last month, 57,000 more people in the state – which accounts for about one-third of the national economy – started looking for work, of which 22,000 succeeded. That still leaves the participation tally about 218,000 down on the number in May. “In contrast, while Victoria’s unemployment also increased, by 29,000 people, employment fell by a further 50,000, with their participation rate falling by 0.4 percentage points,” Bjorn Jarvis, head of labour statistics at the ABS, said, adding the state’s workforce also remained 113,000 lower than in May. “It may seem counterintuitive for unemployment to rise as conditions are about to improve,” Jarvis said. “However, this shows how unusual lockdowns are, compared with other economic shocks, in how they limit being able to work and look for work.” NSW’s jobless rate rose 0.8 percentage points last month to 5.4%, Victoria’s gained 0.9 percentage points to 5.6%, while the ACT’s lockdown saw the rate jump by half 6.6%. At 5.2%, the unemployment rate is close to pre-pandemic levels. Several central banks, including the Reserve Bank of Australia, have lately lamented the challenges facing forecasters. On the one hand, consumers and businesses have been loaded up with billions of dollars in Covid support. There is also the added “wealth effect” of rising housing prices in many markets, the single largest assets for most people. On the other, there are many supply disruptions from Covid outbreaks, and policymakers can’t be sure if there is vaccine-resistant strain around the corner. “I think everything’s set up for a cracking 2022 provided we don’t have any more issues on the Covid front,” Gareth Aird, head of CBA’s economics team said ahead of today’s release. “In terms of what you can forecast things look very good.” Sarah Hunter, the chief Australia economist for BIS Oxford Economics, notes the national hours worked tally eased 0.1% in October, but again Victoria was the main drag. “Total hours worked in NSW and the ACT rose strongly (+3.9% and +3.1%, respectively) on the month, a clear indication that businesses in both regions were gearing up for reopening through this period,” Hunter said. “There was also a sizeable decline in the number of people working fewer or no hours for economic reasons, further confirmation that the east coast states are in recovery mode.” Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the data showed the economy had “turned the corner”. “Business and consumer confidence are both up, our business confidence [is] back to where it was in April,” he said. “Consumer confidence [is] now up eight out of the last nine weeks. Job ads are more than 30% higher than they were at the start of the pandemic and at a 12-year high.” He said “$340bn is now accumulated in household and business balance sheets”. Last Friday, the RBA’s quarterly monetary policy statement showed the central bank is expecting the jobless rate to “be a little below 5% at the end of 2021, and is forecast to decline steadily from there, reaching 4% by the end of 2023. “The participation rate is expected to bounce back quickly to historically high levels, in contrast to the experience of some other advanced economies,” the RBA said. Westpac, which was close to picking the jump in jobless numbers with its 50,000 loss prediction, said it remains unclear how many people will resume job hunting, and therefore, what the unemployment rate will be. “We currently have unemployment peaking at 5% in December as the re-opening of the economy would generate a short-run mismatch between workers returning to the labour force and when they started new jobs,” Westpac senior economist Justin Smirk said in a briefing note. “The October update suggests workers are returning workers at a much faster pace than anticipated.” ANZ senior economist Catherine Birch said her bank anticipated a rapid post-lockdown rebound in employment and hours worked over coming months. “Newly lodged job ads have jumped 39% over the past two months in NSW,” Birch said. “Over the past month, they’ve lifted 15% in Victoria and 12% in the ACT, to be at or above pre-lockdown levels, according to the Internet Vacancy Index.”Rheanna Lotter is no stranger to the transformative power of art. A proud Yuin woman who grew up in the Southern Highlands of New South Wales, she once aspired to be a professional athlete. But on a return trip to her childhood home, she found solace in the act of painting. It gave her the tools to tell her stories – and opened up a path she’d never considered. “Mum had some paints out, so I painted a platypus,” Lotter smiles. “[At the time] I hadn’t seen my grandparents on my Indigenous side for a while and the painting just sparked this creative feeling in me, this connection to who I am. I started sharing art on my social media and that led to the Blak Markets [at Carriageworks], where I first got noticed. It just grew organically from there.” Lotter started painting under the name of Ngandabaa, pronounced yun-da-baa, a business she founded and named after Keith Thorne, her grandfather, a lifelong source of inspiration. “It means red belly black snake, my grandfather’s totem,” she says. “[When he] passed, he was really proud of what I was doing. He had such an impact on people who knew him.” Through Ngandabaa, Lotter has focused on making art that celebrates her connection to her culture while fulfilling a social mission. In 2017, she was approached to design uniforms for the Australian Paralympics team. Her artwork, which featured circles and lines representing the journey that binds Paralympians together, was on display at the 2021 Tokyo Paralympic Games. Two years later, she was approached by Specsavers to design a limited-edition pair of glasses with the aim of raising money to help close the gap in vision loss between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and other Australians. Cathy Rennie Matos, head of public relations at Specsavers, says the optical group was drawn by Lotter’s commitment to social justice. Rheanna Lotter’s Limited Edition Specsavers frames are available in sunglasses and optical. “Rheanna wanted to work together in a way that raised awareness for both Indigenous art and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander eye health,” Rennie Matos says. “We are really blessed that she has leant her art to this project and to hear about her heritage.” The initiative, which grew out of a long-term partnership between Specsavers and the Fred Hollows Foundation, began a decade ago, fuelled by a shared commitment to making eye care accessible to all segments of society. It started with a commitment to providing eye health services to Indigenous communities in places such as remote Western Australia through ventures such as the Lions Outback Vision Van, a mobile eye health clinic operated by one of the foundation’s program partners, the Lions Eye Institute. According to 2019 data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 38% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people suffer from vision impairment. They are three times more likely to go blind than the wider population. In 2014, Specsavers and the foundation launched a project to raise funds to help close the gap and fund intensive cataract surgery sessions, through limited-edition glasses featuring the artwork of an Indigenous artist. “We identified some artists who had actually been the recipients of cataract surgery that had been organised by the foundation,” Rennie Matos says. “As soon as they had the cataract surgery, they were able to see again, and importantly get back to their painting.” Specsavers partnered with Indigenous artists who had experienced cataract surgery, such as the late Langaliki, and Peter Datjing, a renowned painter from north-east Arnhem Land. These artists gave permission for their work to be transferred onto the limited-edition frames, highlighting the way the foundation’s work enables them to carry out their artistic vocation. But these limited-edition collaborations, which donate $25 from each pair of glasses to the Fred Hollows Foundation, and which have raised more than $400,000 to date, also use art to raise awareness of Indigenous visual culture. The initiative closes the gap when it comes to Indigenous eye care and empowers communities to prevent problems that could affect their vision down the track. Last year’s limited-edition frames were adorned with Lotter’s Saltwater Dreamin, a striking blue artwork featuring black-and-white turtles, which drew attention to the importance of protecting waterways. Lotter says Specsavers shared her vision for helping vulnerable communities, and understood how art can hold a mirror up to defining issues. “I love to paint about the environment and people forget that there are living animals that rely on us,” she says. “Our values were so aligned [towards] making our society better, especially for people from vulnerable communities. We were like two peas in a pod.” Lotter’s visual language celebrates connection. Forms are often joined by lines, evoking threads that join us. Shapes recur, speaking to our similarities. Rheanna Lotter’s artwork, Unity. Over the past two years, Lotter says, the pandemic has fragmented our society. Often, these divisions are heightened by social media. Her new artwork, the subject of this year’s limited-edition frames, is Unity. The work features a series of circles painted in rOver the past two years, Lotter says, the pandemic has fragmented our society. Often, these divisions are heightened by social media. Her new artwork, the subject of this year’s limited-edition frames, is Unity. The work features a series of circles painted in red, yellow and ochre along with lines that resemble streams or pathways. Lotter says some of her paintings take careful planning. Others are a matter of following her creative instincts. In the case of Unity, she wanted to convey how urgent it was for all Australians to come together, despite historical and cultural barriers. “It’s about coming together, moving together, acknowledging our past and planning for a brighter future for everyone,” she says. “It’s about being guided by our elders and our ancestors and not brushing over things that are difficult.” In Unity, she says, the circles are highly symbolic. “Circles for me are really significant,” she says. “[They] are a meeting place. It is about how we are all equal and valued. The circle doesn’t break. The ‘u’ shape is about us sitting down and having tough conversations. Everything in Unity has a story to tell.” Lotter hopes Unity will spark conversations that can ripple through society. “[It’s] really important to talk about relationships, about how art brings us together,” she says. “It’s a form, like music, where you can listen to a song and say, ‘I relate to that, I feel that’. With my paintings, you can understand the symbolism.” Lotter believes that in Indigenous culture, art is an “unwritten language”. In the case of her collaboration with Specsavers, she hopes that this language will raise awareness of the importance of connection – while inspiring communities to access support. “I hope that by seeing the artwork on the frames, learning more about me, it makes people feel comfortable,” she says. “I don’t want people to think that Aboriginal art is just on a canvas or on a cave – it’s part of our history, part of us.” Discover the Specsavers limited-edition collection in collaboration with the Fred Hollows Foundation.Anthony Albanese says China has become “far more forward-leaning” and that is what is driving Australia to change its foreign policy, implicitly pushing back at criticism from the former prime minister Paul Keating. The opposition leader on Thursday avoided directly criticising Keating – a Labor elder who said both major parties had lost their way – but made it plain that he did not share the assessment of the strategic circumstances Australia now faces. “China has changed its posture - that’s the truth,” Albanese told the Nine Network when asked to respond to Keating. “They’re far more forward-leaning. Australia is right to speak up for our own values. China is the nation that’s changed in terms of their attitude towards Australian imports, for example, and Australian businesses are suffering.” Keating, who served as prime minister from 1991 to 1996, said Beijing was “in the adolescent phase of their diplomacy” and had “testosterone running everywhere”, but Australia had no alternative but to engage with an increasingly powerful China. Reprising a mantra from when he was prime minister, Keating told the National Press Club the Morrison government was wrongly “trying to find our security from Asia rather than in Asia”. Keating also played down criticism of China’s militarisation of disputed features in the South China Sea by saying “big powers are rude”, and said Australia “should not be drawn into a military engagement over Taiwan” because the democratically governed island of 24 million people was “not a vital Australian interest”. Albanese later told reporters he aways listened to Keating, as a respected former leader, “but the Labor party determines our policy going forward”. “And that’s a policy based upon principle but also based upon recognising where we are in 2021.” Albanese’s comments are another sign of the opposition attempting to minimise difference with the government on national security and foreign affairs, seeking to head off efforts by Scott Morrison and his ministers to portray Labor as weak in the lead-up to the election due by May. Morrison told voters on Thursday “you really can’t trust them when it comes to these national security issues”. Labor has supported the Aukus partnership with the US and the UK to deliver at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines, based on advice that they will need to be able to travel further with less detection as the outlook in the Indo-Pacific worsens. But Labor has also sought assurances about concerns such as Australia’s freedom to differ from the US on military matters. The opposition accused Morrison of botching the diplomacy around Aukus, after France’s president Emmanuel Macron said the prime minister had lied to him about Australia’s plan to scrap the previous $90bn conventional submarine contract. The US president, Joe Biden, told Macron it had been handled clumsily. Over the past 18 months, as Australia’s relationship with Beijing deteriorated, Labor has tended to focus on matters of competence rather than the big strategic questions, accusing the Coalition of heightening rhetoric for domestic political purposes and failing to have a proper strategy for handling a more assertive China. Keating argued the foreign policy debate in Australia was now driven by “the spooks” in the security agencies, and when it came to the major foreign policy choices the Coalition and Labor were “fundamentally not up to it”. He said Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, had opted for a “reasonably quiet political life” by effectively taking the position that “there shouldn’t be an ounce of daylight between her and the Liberal party” on foreign policy. Wong did not respond to the critique, but Albanese said Labor’s policy needed to recognise “where we are in 2021” including the “era of strategic competition between the United States and China”. He said he agreed with the Biden administration “that what we need is competition without catastrophe” and that would require engagement – but it also required an acknowledgement of China’s change in its external posture. Albanese said Labor’s foreign policy was based on three principles: “Our alliance with the United States, engagement in our region and support for multilateral forums.” The defence minister, Peter Dutton, labelled the former Labor prime minister as “Grand Appeaser Comrade Keating”: Morrison argued that Keating was reflecting the views of “a lot of people in the Labor Party”. Morrison said Keating was “certainly out of line with what our government’s policy is, and we certainly don’t share that view”. Pivoting to an election message about national security, Morrison told the Nine Network: “[To] secure Australia’s interests in our part of the world, you’ve got to be strong. You’ve got to be able to stand up for it. You’ve got to be able to see things clearly.” Morrison said Australia wanted a positive relationship with China “but at the same time we’re not going to get pushed around”. He accused Albanese of “joining with the Chinese government and others from overseas having an attack on me the other day”. In fact, Albanese did not endorse Beijing’s positions, but cited Macron’s accusation that Morrison had lied to further Labor’s narrative that the prime minister could not be trusted. Albanese also criticised Morrison over the “extraordinary” decision to release a text message he had received from Macron. Victorian Labor MP Peter Khalil said he did not subscribe to Keating’s “defeatist position”. Khalil said it was flawed to assume the Chinese Communist party would become a benign superpower. He argued that was not consistent with its pattern of behaviour over the past five to 10 years. But Khalil backed concerns over the timelines for submarine delivery and said Morrison had displayed a “shallowness” on strategic policy. “We’d be very different from both Keating and Morrison in government,” Khalil said.Out the back of a suburban home on a leafy Shepparton street, a humble tree bearing 10 different fruits has just claimed a Guinness world record for most types of fruit on a single tree. The tree is the result of a decade of Hussam Saraf’s hard work, transforming his modest stretch of grass in regional Victoria into a tropical oasis bearing rare fruit trees and edible natives. “The previous record was five fruits grafted onto one tree, so I decided to graft 10,” Hussam said. “But I was waiting to hear back and they told me my application was rejected, because they needed five different species, not varieties.” The previous record of five grafted fruits – apricot, cherry, nectarine, plum and peach – had been held by Luis H Carrasco of Chile for two decades. Hussam’s initial application, for grafting white and yellow nectarines, white and yellow peaches, blood and yellow plums, peachcots, apricots, almonds and cherries was deemed to only represent five types of fruit, placing him at a tie with Carrasco. “I told them he had nectarine and peach which they counted as two, when it should have been one. So they said OK, changed the previous guy to four, and me to five,” Hussam says. “I said OK, I’m happy, it’s amazing. Sometimes you just need to have a conversation.” Hussam’s record tree was officially accepted for grafting plum, apricot, almond, peach and cherry. Hussam told Guinness World Records his tree provided a message of “peaceful coexistence”; the colours, shapes and different leaves and fruits on the branches of his creation a metaphor for diverse society, respect and acceptance. Hussam opened his garden to the public five years ago, and has since attracted a devout following of enthusiasts who regularly ask him for recommendations and advice. The process of grafting is at once simple and complex – Hussam’s tree started as a nectarine tree from seed, which was gradually expanded by grafting the branches of other trees together from their sides. “Every branch is a unique tree by itself,” he says. “And if I don’t eat the fruits, I give it to my neighbours. Relatives, friends come to the garden and taste it. They like the taste.” Depending on the time of year, his dense garden flowers with coconut and banana trees, rosella, kumquats and noni fruit, beside more common varieties like strawberries and sweet plum in bulging pots. “It’s not just a garden, it’s a community,” he says. “I saw this tree as our multicultural community’s tree, the cultures we have here – religions, traditions, all come together as one. My multicultural work and gardening work I see as one, I’m grafting it all together.” Hussam arrived in Australia in 2009 from Iraq. Throughout his childhood, gardening was a regular part of high school, where students learned singular grafting with figs. In the school holidays, Hussam would spend three months at his grandparent’s farm where dates, figs, citrus and pomegranate were fragrant and abundant, and his passion for gardening grew. Since moving to Shepparton, Hussam has become a multicultural officer at the city’s major public school – a recent merger of four high schools in the area. “The kids are excited, they’ve followed it on Instagram … the young generation is all on Insta,” he says. “I wanted to give them an example to aim high. Don’t say it’s too hard; you can do it if you put in the hard work and have a target. Never say ‘I can’t do it’. “I hope people will come from Bendigo, Melbourne, interstate just to see the tree. To have something big like this recognised by the Guinness World Records, it’ll bring money to the town … and I wanted to prove I could do it.” Hussam is yet to have received the hard copy of his certificate – he got the news last night when an email pinged while he was posting pictures of strawberries and chillies on Facebook – but when he does, he says it’ll accompany him on markets, where he’ll hang it up. Still, Hussam isn’t satisfied with one record. He currently has two further records pending – the most variety of stone fruits on one tree, and the tree with the most apple fruits. He also plans to enter the record for the longest lily flower, which usually grow between 40 and 80 cm. “My flower so far is 1.530 m,” Hussam said. “Some day, I also want to grow 50 stone fruit on one tree, each branch with different varieties. Why 50? Someone in the US did 40, so I want to do 50, as a personal effort. He got help, it’s not easy.” The crowning glory, though, when Covid restrictions ease, would be to beat the record for the largest gardening lesson. “I’ll need the help of the community for that one,” Hussam says. “For the record they got 280 people, I want 1,000.” The fruits of Saraf’s labour White Nectarine (White Satin) – grafted 05/4/2019 Blood Plum (Satsuma) – grafted 07/05/2020 Peachcot (Peachcot) – grafted 02/10/2020 Yellow Plum (Gulf Gold) – grafted 13/10/2020 Almond (Prunus Amygdalus) – grafted 05/10/2021 Yellow Peach (Florda Prince) – grafted 09/4/2021 Apricot (Glengarry) – grafted 10/4/2021 Cherry (Stella) – grafted 05/10/2021 Yellow Nectarine (Sunwright) – grafted 06/10/2021 White Peach (Tropical Snow) – grafted 06/11/2020Values influence our behaviours. For me, it has been a lifetime journey of learning, understanding and implementing values that influence my behaviours. I mess up, but I do my best every day. Sixteen years ago when I decided to walk the path of sobriety, at first it was just about getting off the drink. Alcohol for me was problematic and it impacted everyone and everything around me. When I drank, I walked the path of drugs, and that combination was a dangerous concoction that led to dangerous behaviours. Inevitably it is our behaviours that get us into trouble, but on the other side of the coin, it is behaviours that get us out of trouble too. A life of sobriety allowed me to look at my behaviours and over many years become more aware and implement positive change. Every single one of us is in behavioural patterns and cycles of trauma. But there is a varying degree and depth of trauma that affect us as individuals; therefore we either repeat the behaviours, or we become aware and address them. The question is: which one are you doing? Every one of us is on a varying path of discomfort. The cycle of trauma runs deep, not just in communities but also within the family home. I think people sometimes don’t understand the full concept of what trauma is – thinking that trauma is an event or a behaviour that we experience during our life, without understanding the full depth and the long term impacts. Trauma isn’t just what happens to us physically, mentally or emotionally; trauma is the structural process that happens inside of us, as a result of what we have experienced. From that, we all build different behaviours, ways to cope and survive, the best way we know how. When you understand the depth of this concept, you understand that we are all just doing our best to firstly understand, process and untangle the many coping mechanisms we have built over many, many generations; a lot of the time through learned behaviour. None of us are exempt from this, we are all just at different points along the track. Some people are aware, others completely unaware of the impact of their own behaviours, both on themselves and on others. It is in the behaviours we all grow up with – that are normalised since birth. When Aunty Prof Judy Atkinson first said to me that every negative behaviour in a community is a product of trauma, I didn’t quite understand. But over time I began to understand that all behaviour is speaking a language: we just have to understand the reason behind the behaviours, or what the behaviour is trying to tell us. Usually, these behaviours are formed to regulate our own individual pain and discomfort that has been developed over many generations as a means to cope with challenging environments. When we become aware of our behaviours we can dive in a little deeper to identify where the behaviour comes from, even right back to the thought process that drives it. It is our behaviour that shapes how we are perceived by others. When we begin to be aware of every behaviour, every thought and every reaction, it is shaped by the early conditions of the environment we are raised in from birth. Where to from here? These patterns have started way back when, during the colonisation process. How can we implement the changes to heal? Healing is a gradual process. You don’t wake up and say: “OK, sweet, I’m aware, I’m making changes, I’m fixed.” If only it were that simple. Healing such behaviours is a journey that takes a great deal of time. It’s not just about changing our physical behaviours, but also being aware of our first response in the mind – learning to live in a state of presence and being more in the moment is key. I have always been an advocate of saying it is living the old ways that is key to healing communities. What I mean by that is learning to live in a state of presence. By looking at practices of culture – it could be art, dancing, hunting, or walking country. All of those actions required a sense of being present. Culture is about presence. When we are living present, we become more aware of our thought patterns and the inner chat that speaks to us. It is in this place of mindfulness that we can slowly begin to implement change. • Joe Williams is a Wiradjuri/Wolgalu First Nations man, former professional sportsman, founder of The Enemy Within, published author, having contributed to many books and his own autobiography titled Defying The Enemy Within, and adjunct associate professor at the University of Queensland’s School of Psychology.Picture this: you’re in a position to buy a home for yourself and your partner or your family. You’ve found the neighbourhood you want to call home. You’ve even found the house. The only catch is … the house leaves a little to be desired. Sure, you could learn to love it, or you could gut it and put off your move-in date while renovations take place. But there’s a third option that allows you to stay in the neighbourhood you love and create a home that suits your lifestyle without compromising on space, floor plan or design: knockdown rebuild. Boutique Homes offers a comprehensive knockdown rebuild service that comprises everything from site assessments and council approvals to demolition, interior design, and finance solutions, meaning owners can be involved as much or as little as they like from start to finish. We chatted to three families that have been through the knockdown rebuild process, and asked them to shed a little light on what can be expected, and offer some advice for those ready to send in the wrecking ball. Renee and Bernie: chasing the dream “The moment we stepped into ‘the Grange’, we loved it,” says Renee. After scrapping plans to build a custom designed home due to budget constraints, medical professionals Renee and Bernie spent months wandering display homes, looking for a design in which they could comfortably raise their daughters, Ava and Sienna. Transitioning to a knockdown rebuild did require a bit of a mindset shift for the couple, but now they’re in their new home, they don’t feel they’ve missed out. “The moment we stepped into ‘the Grange’, we loved it,” Renee says. “We loved the entryway with high ceilings and the open-plan living with separate living spaces for our family.” While display-home inspections can feel time-consuming, Renee believes these and their thorough research stood them in good stead to see out the knockdown rebuild process and enjoy their home into the future. “Choose a design and layout that not only suits your block, but also suits you and your lifestyle, how you will live in a home and utilise all the spaces,” she says. Sira and William: learning to love again Sira believes it pays to do your research, seek advice from family and friends, and trust your gut. Sira and her husband, William, approached the knockdown rebuild process with caution after suffering through a previous private build, which she describes as “chaos”. Collaborating with a reliable builder was “a must” for any future home building projects. They were pleasantly surprised by their experience with Boutique Homes; being involved at every step of the way restored their faith in the process. “To be honest, there is no perfect builder, but compared to our previous experience … Boutique Homes has done excellent work,” Sira says. “Gavin, our site manager, was amazing. He always tried his best to accommodate us, for all requests, big or small.” If any of their experience or the trepidation it caused rings true, Sira suggests thinking about the search for a homebuilder you can trust like dating - you’ll know when you find “the one”. As with dating, it always pays to do your research, seek advice from family and friends, and trust your gut. Lucinda and Brendan: shifting the goalposts Lucinda and Brendan found the Boutique social community a great source of inspiration in the early planning stages. Lucinda and Brendan had originally planned to renovate their California-style bungalow, but quickly learned the cost of the project was more prohibitive than starting again from scratch. They pivoted to a knockdown rebuild, which offered the flexibility they were looking for with inclusions and floorplan. But unlike Sira and William, or Renee and Bernie, Lucinda says she, a high-school teacher, and husband Brendan, an inner-city retail manager, didn’t have the capacity to get stuck in the weeds. “We felt that we actually didn’t have the time or the inclination to be a part of every step of the process, and instead wanted to feel comfortable to defer to the experts - which we did with Boutique Homes,” she says. The idea of handing over the reins to someone who doesn’t have to live in the home they’re building could be scary to some, but Lucinda says she and Brendan found support and advice in unexpected places. “We found the Boutique social community a great source of inspiration in the early planning stages, but along the way it became an even greater source of information and alerted us to things we would never have thought of,” she says. “That was really helpful in terms of considering extras, inclusions and pitfalls to look out for.” Whether you decide to collaborate closely with your site managers, designers and financial partners, or take a step back and let someone else do the heavy lifting, the beauty of a knockdown rebuild is that you’ll feel right at home every step of the way. To learn more about a full-service knockdown rebuild and decide if it’s right for you, visit Boutique HomesBeijing’s Winter Olympics organising committee has rejected accusations that journalists have been blocked in their attempts to cover preparations for the Games. Earlier this month the Foreign Correspondents Club of China (FCCC) accused the Chinese authorities of “continuously stymying” attempts by foreign media to cover the Winter Olympics due to begin near the Chinese capital in February. In a scathing statement, the FCCC alleged a pattern of authorities denying or ignoring requests for access, and following, harassing and abusing journalists. It contained several accounts of specific instances from foreign journalists, including the verbal abuse and freezing-out of a journalist who mentioned human rights boycotts in a report. “Our members’ repeated inquiries towards the Beijing Winter Olympics organising committee [Bocog] on how international media can report on the Games have been met with conflicting answers or neglected completely,” the FCCC said. “FCCC members report spending weeks trying to obtain contact details for Bocog media facilitators, only to receive dismissive or inaccurate information from them.” In response the Bocog said China “has never recognised the organisation”. “What this organisation said is inconsistent with the facts and cannot represent the true voice of foreign journalists in China,” it told the Guardian in a lengthy statement. The Bocog said it “guaranteed the freedom of reporting” by international media on the Games, in accordance with “relevant Chinese policies” and on the proviso journalists abided by “relevant Chinese laws, regulations and anti-epidemic policies”. However the statement also made several pledges which appeared to answer calls made by the FCCC, including for a dedicated media liaison desk during the Games, and for foreign media to be invited to domestic press events. It said depending on the epidemic situation there would be three press conferences for foreign media organised with the speed skating stadium, Olympic village, and sports centre. “As the competition unfolds, we will also increase the registration quota of foreign media in the test competition,” it said. The statement said BOCOG had “always welcomed” media attention and reports from foreign journalists on the Games preparations, had always provided good services, and denied there was “so-called ‘inadequate information disclosure’”. As part of its defence it noted the delivery of 28 issues of an Olympics newsletter to 183 media outlets. It did not refer to calls by the FCCC to approve long-stalled visas of foreign journalists, after dozens were expelled in 2020.Brighter than the bygone reds in fabric shops on the high street, bright as bonfires, these are bloody, socialist reds hiding behind the church. Danger and luck, warning and blessing, feast and poison, say these paradox reds; there’s truth in the harmony of opposites. On the Welsh side of the River Teme, at the back of St Edmund’s church in Knighton, these are the red berries of celyn. A stone’s throw across the river into England, this is a holly tree. The hollies of the Welsh Marches are some of the oldest specimens of Ilex aquifolium in Europe, perhaps thanks to superstitions that it’s bad luck to cut them down, that they ward away storms and evil spirits, and that they have a symbolic place indoors as decorations. Trees such as this one draw the redwings, fieldfares and mistle thrushes from the far north to join local birds in the feast of the Holly King who rules from midsummer to midwinter, then yields to the Oak King. A bright, cool November light flashes over the prickles and makes the berries glow. Perhaps this is a mast year, with a bumper crop of fruit – there are other trees about with abundant berries – but a cold snap and an influx of hungry birds could see these stripped bare in no time. Poisonous to children and violently emetic, there is a curious link to something sickly in the churchyard grass. What looks at first like a splash of vomit, is – dog’s vomit, Fuligo septica, a slime mould, not a fungi but a protist – an amoeba-like, single-celled blob. These feed on other micro-organisms that feed on decaying vegetation, and hunt invisibly until heavy rain when they begin to move together uncannily, as if controlled by a swarm mind, to form a collective organism, a gelatinous mass. This then produces sporangia – yellowish, spore-bearing organs – to begin a new life cycle. These amazing creatures with a brainless mind and non-binary sexes, that can negotiate mazes and are being used to create algorithms to detect dark matter, seem stranger and more fictive than any of our superstitions. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryElon Musk has sold about $5bn in shares amounting to roughly 3% of his Tesla holdings, the billionaire reported in filings on Wednesday, just days after he polled Twitter users about selling 10% of his stake. About $4bn worth of the sale – 3.6m shares – could be considered as counting towards his 10% pledge on Twitter. Another $1.1bn worth, amounting to 934,000 shares, was sold under an options arrangement to acquire nearly 2.2m shares that was already in train before the poll. Shares in the electric vehicle manufacturer make up the vast part of his estimated $281.6bn fortune, according to Forbes. Musk on Saturday polled Twitter users about selling 10% of his stake, helping to push down Tesla’s share price after a majority said they agreed with the sale. The stock sank 12% on Tuesday in a multi-day selloff that endangered the company’s position in the $1tn club. It recovered 4.3% on Wednesday. The options-related sales were set up in September through a trading plan that allows corporate insiders to establish preplanned transactions on a schedule, the filing said. The sales of the option-related shares paid for associated taxes. It was not clear how or whether the trading plan related to Musk’s Twitter poll. Tesla did not respond to a request for comment. The additional share sales were separate and provide Musk with sizeable reserves of cash, given his wealth is largely tied to his stakes in Tesla and SpaceX. Musk has more than 20m further stock options that are due to expire in August 2022. If Musk carried out the 10% stock sale plan, it would be a slight negative near term, said Mark Arnold, chief investment officer at Hyperion Asset Management in Brisbane where Tesla is the top holding in its global fund. “But the stock is pretty liquid and it’s not a huge percentage of total issued shares, so it shouldn’t have that much of an impact … we’re quite comfortable with the outlook for the business,” he said. While Tesla has lost close to $150bn in market value this week, retail investors have been net buyers of the stock. Some 58% of Tesla trade orders on Fidelity’s brokerage website on Wednesday were for purchases, rather than sales. Retail investors made net purchases of $157m on Monday and Tuesday, according to Vanda Research. Tesla is now up more than 51% in 2021, thanks largely to an October rally that was fuelled by an agreement to sell 100,000 vehicles to rental car company Hertz. “The company itself is on fire, with strong results,” said Tim Ghriskey, a senior portfolio strategist at New York-based investment management firm Ingalls and Snyder.Ten-year-old Gabriel Estrella beams as he talks about T-shirts he bought on his first day out at a shopping mall after nearly two years of staying away due to coronavirus restrictions in the Philippines. “Before the pandemic, buying T-shirts used to be boring,” he said, sweaty after playing with his eight-year-old sister. “Now, it’s exciting! I bought four shirts. They’re anime shirts. “I feel mostly happy that I can be social again because I felt I became really antisocial because of the pandemic.” Gabriel and his sister Caitlin were among dozens of kids running around the grassy playground at a commercial complex in southern Manila, which was bustling with activity as families took their children out, one day after the government allowed it on 5 November. Children can enter restaurants, toy stores, arcades and other shops in Manila for the first time since the pandemic began and the government imposed stay-at-home orders to combat the spread of Covid. The easing of restrictions this month came as daily cases of Covid-19 declined and more people got vaccinated, although children under 12 are not yet being given jabs. Gabriel and Caitlin’s parents, both doctors on the frontline of the fight against Covid, closely watched them and fixed their masks and face shields from time to time to make sure they were wearing them properly. Their mother, Anne Estrella, a pulmonologist, said her children were showing signs of cabin fever so she and her husband, an infectious diseases doctor, decided to take them out. “They questioned a lot of things,” she said. “We tell them that the virus kills people and they see people dying through our work. They understand that aspect. Still, they ask why it’s taking so long.” Babies in strollers, girls on bicycles and scooters, boys jumping up and down, and children rolling on the grass were typical scenes at shopping malls, popular leisure spots across Manila. Parents took photos and videos of their children as they enjoyed their day out, while also making sure they kept their face masks and face shields on. Six-year-old Percy Zamora said his face mask itched but he was happy to wear it if it meant he could go out. “We went to church and then rode a horse at the park so I’m very happy,” he said, while lined up with his 10-year-old sister Chloe for a quick ride on bumper cars at the amusement park by Manila Bay. “I also want to ride a boat,” he said, giddy as the sound of the bumper cars being turned on drowned out his voice. His father, Alfredo, says he and his wife will restrict their family outings to outdoor places for now while waiting for vaccines for their three children. “It’s very sad seeing children not being able to enjoy their childhood. We sometimes feel sorry for our kids that they are not able to enjoy the outdoors as often as they want to.” The toll of lockdown Children in the Philippines have endured among the strictest lockdowns in the world, as the government has considered them high risk throughout the pandemic. In July, children were allowed to play outside in playgrounds and parks for the first time in more than a year. As children in Manila take another step toward normality, concerns remain over the toll lockdowns have taken on their mental health. Psychology professor and clinical psychologist Anna Cristina Tuazon says children have wrestled with a range of emotions including isolation, depression and anger. She said the pandemic had left some children with “nothing … to look forward to”. Tuazon says mental health problems resulted from “underserved” development needs caused by the lockdown. “Children’s development requires a lot. They require physical space, physical activity, socialisation with peers,” she said. While not all children will have been damaged by the experience, Tuazon says for some their socio-emotional development will have been “stunted”. She said even adults found their social skills regressed during lockdown. “Imagine how it is for kids, when they don’t even have the foundation yet or the opportunities to develop these skills.” Yet she stresses that any mental health impact on children was “not completely irreversible”, adding, “With proper attention, they can really bounce back.” The Philippines’ department of health has reported about 2.8m Covid cases and more than 44,500 deaths. Daily cases have fallen to around a nine-month low but testing remains limited. Just below 30% of the total population has been fully vaccinated. ‘It’s back to normal’ For some parents, the risk from Covid still outweighs the need to give their children freedom from being kept at home. Jill Cardenas, mother to seven-year-old Libby and four-year-old Miguel, says she would only consider taking their children to the mall and other indoor public areas once they had been vaccinated. “I see the impact of the pandemic more on my eldest because she was already going to school and we had a routine on going out on the weekend before the lockdown,” she says. “Since then she’s become moody and restless.” “My husband and I were out and he told me, ‘See, children can already go to the mall’,” she says. “Well, just because you can doesn’t mean you should. I can bring them outdoors, where there are less people.” In one of the biggest malls in the country, already decorated for the Christmas holidays, Juvy Matic is all smiles looking at seven of her grandchildren posing for photos in front a toy store. “Everyone’s super excited to be out, even us adults,” Matic said. “The children deserve this day out. They were surprised when we told them we were going out. They actually couldn’t believe it at first.” While none of her grandchildren have received Covid jabs, Matic says she is not too worried about bringing them inside the mall, adding that the family was following all health and safety protocols to protect the children. “I feel that the end of the pandemic is near,” says Matic, who works at a public market. “We just wanted to let them feel that Christmas is coming. And for one day, it’s back to normal.”Ozlem Demirboga Carr is not really into all that woo‑woo stuff. “I’m definitely a full-science kind of person,” says the 41-year-old telecoms worker from Reading. She doesn’t believe in crystals, affirmations or salt lamps. But she did find herself unusually anxious during the UK’s Covid lockdown in March 2020 and, like many people, decided to practise yoga as a way to de-stress. “I tried to be open-minded and I was open to advice on trying to improve my wellbeing and mental health,” she says. So she followed a range of social media accounts, including the “somatic therapist and biz coach” Phoebe Greenacre, known for her yoga videos, and the “women’s empowerment and spiritual mentor” Kelly Vittengl. The Instagram algorithm did its work. “I suddenly found myself following so many wellness accounts,” she says. When the deployment of the Covid vaccine got under way, Carr began to see posts that troubled her, ranging from polite concern about the social consequences of mass vaccination, or the politics underpinning it, to full-blown rejection of the science. “The conversation and tone of their posts shifted,” she says. “At first it was all about self-care and being part of a community that is caring for each other. But then they started to speak more about how there should be a choice when it came to vaccines. They were saying things like: ‘My body, my choice.’” Carr watched as Greenacre posted an Instagram story describing vaccine passports as “medical apartheid”. Vittengl went further. In a post in July, Vittengl, who is unvaccinated, compared vaccine passports to the social polarisation witnessed during the Holocaust and spoke about the “mess” caused by the “ideology of the western medical system”. “We aren’t being shown the full picture,” Vittengl concluded, in a post that was liked by Greenacre. Greenacre subsequently invited Vittengl on to her podcast, where Vittengl discussed the pernicious influence of “big pharma” and celebrated the work of the controversial doctor Zach Bush, who has been called a “Covid denialist” by researchers at McGill University in Montreal. Such views are anything but exceptional in the wellness community. If anything, they are on the milder end of the spectrum. Anti-vaccine or vaccine-hesitant attitudes are as abundant in online wellness circles as pastel-coloured Instagram infographics and asana poses on the beach at sunset. “People are really confused by what is happening,” says Derek Beres, the co-host of Conspirituality, a podcast about the convergence of conspiracy theories and wellness. “Why is their yoga instructor sharing QAnon hashtags?” In May, the Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) found that just 12 influencers were responsible for nearly 65% of anti-vaccine content on Facebook and Twitter. “Many of these leading anti-vaxxers are alternative health entrepreneurs … They’re reaching millions of users every day,” says Callum Hood of the CCDH. “This is a serious problem. Vaccine hesitancy has become a difficult and entrenched obstacle to dealing with the Covid-19 pandemic.” Included within the CCDH’s “disinformation dozen” are Joseph Mercola, a US wellness entrepreneur called the “most influential spreader of Covid-19 misinformation online” by the New York Times; Dr Christiane Northrup, a wellness expert who helped popularise the notorious Covid pseudo-documentary Plandemic by sharing it with her 560,000 Facebook followers; and Kelly Brogan, a contributor to Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop wellness platform. Mikki Willis, the director of Plandemic, is well known in the California yoga scene, while David “Avocado” Wolfe, a conspiracy theorist and raw food advocate, is a regular figure at anti-vaccination protests across the US. Away from the CCDH’s list, other prominent figures include the yoga instructor Stephanie Birch, who has posted QAnon hashtags on her now-deleted Instagram account, and Krystal Tini, a wellness influencer with 169,000 Instagram followers, who has consistently posted anti-vaccine content, including one post that compared lockdowns to the horrors inflicted on Polish Jews in the Warsaw ghetto. Comparing vaccine deployment to historic atrocities such as slavery and the Holocaust is a routine trope in anti-vaccine wellness circles; the Los Angeles wellness and beauty guru Shiva Rose recently compared vaccines to McCarthyism, slavery, the Cultural Revolution, the Spanish Inquisition and the Holocaust, all in one post. Beres says many of these wellness influencers are “using cult leader techniques in digital spaces”, sowing fear and hesitancy about the Covid vaccine among their followers, one Instagram post at a time. They maintain, however, that they are misunderstood or misrepresented. When contacted by the Guardian, Greenacre distanced herself from Vittengl’s comments on her podcast. “It would be incorrect and misleading to your readers to suggest comments from a third party reflect my own,” she said. She also said that she used the term “medical apartheid” to refer to “the use of discrimination and segregation based on medical status, for example treating people negatively based on their medical status by use of Covid vaccine passports”, rather than anything relating to historical discrimination based on race. Vittengl, meanwhile, stated that she is “not against the western medical system … However, I do feel that the industry has been heavily taken over by big pharmaceutical companies who are primarily concerned with finances over health.” She defended the work of Bush. “He is compassionately trying to help find more answers,” she said. Carr, however, decided to unfollow both women. Now, when she wants to practise yoga, she watches the Sweaty Betty YouTube channel. *** We have had more than a decade of the modern iteration of wellness. A decade of vagina candles, chia bowls, coffee enemas and spirulina shots. A decade of burnt-out, anxious, unhappy women seeking to detoxify their bodies, rebalance their chakras and recentre their divine femininity, ideally while losing weight. The global wellness industry is worth about $1.5tn (£1.1tn) – and for every saintly Yoga With Adriene there are thousands of grifters pushing untested therapies on impressionable people. Although the modern iteration of wellness rose out of the primordial goop of the late 00s (Paltrow, the high priest of wellness, founded her lifestyle brand in 2008, originally as a newsletter), the origins of the movement go back to the hippy counterculture of the 70s. Then, as now, wellness presented itself as a remedy to the travails of modern life. It was structured around three tenets: robust individualism, distrust of western medicine and a commitment to self-optimisation, usually through restrictive diets and vigorous exercise regimens, designed to stave off disease and death for as long as possible. In her 2018 book Natural Causes: Life, Death and the Illusion of Control, Barbara Ehrenreich wrote: “Wellness is the means to remake oneself into an ever-more perfect self-correcting machine, capable of setting goals and moving toward them with smooth determination.” In the 70s and 80s, Ann Wigmore proselytised the ability of a raw-food diet to cure cancer, diabetes and Aids. “There is this belief that if you stay true to a certain lifestyle and only ingest a particular kind of food and drink, that guards you against disease,” says Carl Cederström, the co-author of Desperately Seeking Self-Improvement: A Year Inside the Optimization Movement. “You create a strong armour around yourself by living healthily.” By contrast, western medicine – in particular the pernicious influence of big pharma – conspires to keep the masses sick. “There’s this suspicion about science,” Cederström says. “You often hear the rhetoric that modern civilisation is poisoning our lives, poisoning our food, and we need to find ways of living clean again, by cutting ourselves loose from a society that is constraining us and forcing us to live an inauthentic, unnatural lifestyle.” The polluting tributary in wellness’s fresh, clear stream has always been its unwavering insistence that health is a choice rather than something genetically predetermined or socially ordained. Few wellness practitioners say outright that people who are morbidly obese, have type 2 diabetes or have a mental illness suffer by their own hand: they instead couch their judgment in euphemisms and misdirection. “Wellness has very strong ties to the self-help movement,” says Cederström. “And what you find at the core of these movements is the idea that you should be able to help yourself.” Rhonda Byrne, the author of the bestselling self-help book The Secret – which portrayed the power of positive thinking as a curative to all of life’s ills – once claimed that the victims of 9/11 were in the wrong place at the wrong time due to their own negative thoughts and outlook on the world. “A more general theory as to why people would happily tune into the ideology of wellness, and in particular this individualistic attitude, is that it is in some ways self-flattering,” says Cederström. “We live in a culture that connects morality to health. If you have a good, middle-class life, you’re encouraged to believe that you deserve it. If you’re poor and unhealthy – well, you didn’t work hard enough.” For nearly 50 years, the world of wellness has viewed health as something that can be shrugged on or off at will, like a cashmere sweater. Doctors are to be distrusted and individuals should take responsibility for their own “wellness journey”. Then the Covid vaccine programme began – and this anti‑scientific attitude metastasised into something far more harmful. “This is a very long-running thing,” says Hood. “We’re seeing that erosion of trust in mainstream medicine flowering now. And it’s very dangerous.” *** Before Catherine Gabitan, who is 31 and lives in northern California, became an “overcoming self-sabotage” coach, she worked in the service industry. Gabitan usually rose to manager roles easily, but despite the promotions she never felt that she was fulfilling her true potential, as an A-grade student with a college degree. She smoked cigarettes, drank coffee and alcohol and ate processed foods. Despite her best efforts, she could never kick these habits. “One of my initial inspirations for becoming really healthy was to make sure I had a really clean body, so that I could be the healthiest vessel I could be in order to have the healthiest baby,” Gabitan says. In early 2020, Gabitan bought a $199 lecture series from the self‑sabotage coach Jason Christoff. Christoff, who also styles himself as a nutrition and exercise expert, shares misinformation about the Covid vaccine on his public Facebook page and his Telegram channel. When contacted by the Guardian for comment, Christoff responded: “Maybe you should look into who sponsors your own newspaper, but that would get you sacked.” He subsequently wrote a blog linking the Guardian to a plot by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to reduce the global population by 10-15%. “Is the Guardian and their sponsors watching out for public health or are they colluding to decrease population and public health, in order to place the remaining population under firm tyrannical control?” Christoff wrote. Christoff helped Gabitan to realise that, for years, she had not believed herself to be worthy of “a higher level of health”. She explains: “My subconscious beliefs regarding why I didn’t feel worthy of having a business or learning to invest, or why I drank alcohol or smoked cigarettes – all these things were related to what I felt worthy of achieving.” Christoff’s lecture series had the invigorating quality of an ice bath after a sauna. Almost immediately, Gabitan embarked upon what she calls her “health journey”. She quit coffee, smoking, alcohol and gluten. She began exercising three times a week and eating only organic, locally produced food. She also quit the service industry, rebranding as a self-sabotage coach. When the Covid vaccine programme began, Gabitan, who is unvaccinated, began sharing anti-vaccine content on her Instagram page. “Injecting poison will never make you healthy,” she posted on 8 July. “We’re taught that ‘germs’ and genetics make us sick so we don’t have to take responsibility for our toxic lifestyles,” she wrote on 23 July. “Could other people’s need to micromanage what we put on or in our bodies be a projection of their poor health history and inability to take responsibility for their own health?” she asked on 16 August. Gabitan sees health through a hyperindividualistic moral frame. She takes control of her own health; if other people won’t help themselves, why should she? “I don’t smoke and I don’t drink,” she says. “I spend a lot of money investing in the highest-quality foods available to me. I believe in natural immunity and supporting my immune system. I’ve taken radical responsibility for that, especially over Covid. And there are other people out there who are still drinking alcohol and smoking cigarettes who want me to protect their health, but they won’t even protect their own health.” In this, Gabitan exhibits the logical fallacy of wellness: the idea that the human mind is a drill sergeant and the organs of our body obediently fall in line. “You may exercise diligently, eat a medically fashionable diet, and still die of a sting from an irritated bee,” Ehrenreich said in Natural Causes. “You may be a slim, toned paragon of wellness, and still a macrophage within your body may decide to throw in its lot with an incipient tumour.” Gabitan does not need the vaccine, because she is a shining paragon of health. The people dying from Covid are people with disabilities, or those who are already sick, obese or old. What happens to them is nothing for Gabitan to trouble herself about unduly, as an able-bodied member of the wellness community. “A lot of the people that are experiencing hospitalisations from Covid had a lot of other co-morbidities, right?” Gabitan says. “Or they are overweight. If our government had promoted a healthy lifestyle, healthy eating, from the beginning … that would have done a lot more to prevent some of these hospitalisations by actually encouraging people to become the healthiest versions of themselves. Right. So, for me, one premise is people taking responsibility for their own health.” It sounds, I respond, as if you are saying that, when people get sick, it is their fault; not bad luck, because anyone can get sick at any time. “See, I don’t think it’s just bad luck,” she says. “I think part of it is people taking responsibility for their own health, to make sure they’re not putting toxins in their body – and the other part of it is not being exposed to pollution.” Nobody close to her has died from Covid. Gabitan also believes the vaccine to be dangerous and ineffective. “The vaccine doesn’t stop transmission,” she says. (The vaccine is thought to reduce the risk of transmitting the virus to other people, although this protection wanes with time.) She is concerned about the impact of the vaccine on her fertility – this is a common fear among the vaccine-hesitant and is particularly prevalent in wellness circles, which are mostly female – and doesn’t trust data released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the US health agency. She prefers to get information about the vaccine from Telegram, the Children’s Health Defense (a group founded by Robert F Kennedy Jr that is a major source of vaccine disinformation) and Project Veritas, a far-right conspiracy theory site. As a result of the research she has conducted over the last year, Gabitan’s distrust of medical science now extends beyond the Covid vaccine. If she had children, she would not vaccinate them against any disease. She would reject modern medicine in virtually all cases, excepting broken bones. Modern medicine is “designed to deal with symptoms, not the reason the symptoms showed up in the first place”, she says. I ask Gabitan, who is affable and willing to answer all my questions, why she agreed to speak with me, given our dramatically different perspectives on the vaccine. “To have open dialogue, even with people with different opinions, is the only way that we can heal what’s going on in the world,” she says. I tell her that many people would find her attitude selfish and disturbing. “I don’t want to be callous,” Gabitan says. “Because my goal is to help other people live the healthiest life that they can. That’s my passion in the world.” I am certain that she believes it. *** Gabitan’s views are by no means a reflection of all wellness practitioners. Deepak Chopra, the famed yoga and meditation expert, has urged people to get vaccinated. “It’s mistaken and unfair to use a fringe group as the tar that stains everyone else,” Chopra wrote in a blog in June. But Gabitan’s attitude is an example, however extreme, of how the ideological structures of wellness may support anti-vaccine attitudes. Before Conspirituality’s Beres worked in technology, he was a yoga instructor. “Even though I’ve been involved in the yoga and wellness world since the 90s, I’ve always been sceptical of a lot of the claims,” he says. “When you get into yoga, there are a lot of health claims that sound OK if you’re at a nice yoga studio in a major city, but don’t reflect reality.” He sees people like Gabitan as the logical end point of 50 years of telling people that virtue is to be signalled with striated abs and a rippling musculature. “When you live in a country where even a relatively modest middle-class lifestyle is way above what the rest of the world can sustain, it’s very easy to get locked into anecdote and your circle of friends,” Beres says. “You think: I drink smoothies and go to yoga and work out seven days a week and eat organic food. Why can’t everyone else do it?” The US – the avocado stone of the global wellness community – is, and always has been, extremely individualistic. “Everything is about personal freedom and personal knowledge. What we see here is late-stage capitalism merging with hyperindividualism,” Beres says. The US is also a country without universal healthcare. “If you don’t have insurance, it’s incredibly expensive to get treated,” says Hood of the CCDH. “People develop an interest in looking into alternatives and that’s where wellness influencers step in. You don’t have to spend thousands on doctors. You can just take this supplement or follow this regimen and you will be fine.” Finally, it is a country where pharmaceutical companies have long behaved contemptibly. Last month, Purdue Pharma paid $4.5bn to settle its role in the opioid crisis, after overwhelming evidence emerged that the pharmaceutical company played down the addictive qualities of OxyContin for many years. Claims about the pernicious influence of big pharma are de rigueur in anti-vaccine circles; Plandemic’s central thesis is that big pharma is suppressing affordable cures for Covid to make money from patented medicines. “One thing alternate health entrepreneurs have in common with anti-vaxxers is that they talk about big pharma a lot,” says Hood. “It’s no coincidence that the organised anti-vaxx movement has its home in the US. Because there’s a greater profit motive in US healthcare, there’s a level of suspicion.” The irony, of course, is that many wellness practitioners are also motivated by profit. “It’s a business for them, but they’re not open about it,” says Beres. But to understand why some people may be driven to anti-vaccine attitudes is not to excuse their wider impact on community health, or the distressing implication that they regard the lives of those less fortunate than themselves as having scant value. “Some of the most strikingly nasty stuff I’ve seen with Covid misinformation has come from wellness influencers,” Hood says. On the subject of nastiness, he refers to a widely circulated meme (shared this year by the TV presenter Anthea Turner, to outrage) featuring a fat person on a mobility scooter asking a slim person to wear a mask. “The implication is that the person in the mobility scooter is somehow morally deficient and doesn’t have the authority to ask someone to wear a mask,” says Hood. There are similar attitudes where vaccines are concerned. “There is this nasty sense from some anti-vaxxer people that the people who have fallen ill with Covid are somehow deserving of it.” *** Social media companies, for their part, are reluctant to take down disinformation. “Social media is the wild west when it comes to health claims,” says Hood. “You can say whatever you want.” Research in 2020 by the CCDH found that platforms failed to act on 95% of Covid and vaccine misinformation reported to them. Wellness influencers – including members of the CCDH’s “disinformation dozen” – remain on social media platforms with a nudge and a wink. Often, they refer users to their Telegram channels, where they really let rip. (Telegram is unmoderated.) While Northrup has had her Instagram account disabled, her Facebook page links to her Telegram channel, in which she deluges 58,000 people with a flow of anti-vaccine disinformation. Likewise, Wolfe exhorts his Facebook fans to follow him on Telegram, where he unleashes. Technology companies are slow to take down anti-vaccine content, because it is lucrative. Mercola has 1.7m engaged followers on Facebook; Wolfe an astonishing 11.9m. Outrage fuels engagement, which drives revenue, for the influencer and the social media platform. In March, Mercola joined the newsletter platform Substack – his paid-for subscription costs $5 a month, of which Substack takes 10% as commission. It is already the 11th-most-read paid health newsletter on the platform. (While Substack’s terms of use ban plagiarism, pornography and intellectual property theft, there is no prohibition on disinformation.) Some of the people pushing anti-vaccine content do so in the sincere belief they are working for the public good. “They believe themselves to be martyrs,” Beres says. “They’re fully bought in. They think this is an apocalyptic-level battle they were made for, to be the champions.” But Beres believes others “are like: ‘Wow. I can make a bunch of money here.’” When wellness influencers start to post anti-vaccine content online, a calcifying effect takes place. Pro-vaccine people unfollow; a few push back in the comments, but ultimately also unfollow, whereas followers who were hesitant about vaccines waver towards anti-vaccine attitudes and committed anti-vaxxers congregate, with applause. Before Gabitan began posting anti-vaccine content on her Instagram account, an average post would get 20-30 likes; now, she can easily get more than 150 likes on a post about big pharma. “The more people get this social reinforcement, the more anti-vaxx they become,” says Hood. As a result, anti-vaccine wellness influencers get an influx of followers, many of them new to the community. “What happened after Plandemic is that QAnon infiltrated wellness circles,” says Beres. “Yoga instructors started using QAnon hashtags and watched their following grow by hundreds of thousands.” Online wellness is so closely affiliated with QAnon that the phenomenon has been called “pastel QAnon” by Marc-André Argentino, a researcher at Concordia University in Montreal. Carr is baffled by how QAnon, a rightwing movement, has infiltrated what was historically a hippy, countercultural space. “The similarities between rightwing groups and the wellness community scares me,” she says. This dopamine pull of likes and engagement encourages influencers to skew extreme, all the while positioning themselves as victims of so-called cancel culture or online hate mobs. In an Instagram story posted after Vittengl stated her views on vaccination, she portrayed herself as a victim. “The backlash is unbelievable,” she wrote. “As an energetically sensitive person [someone who feels emotions in a heightened way] it can sometimes be too much. But … not speaking up no longer feels like a choice.” She later tells me: “I understand how this may come off as ‘victim mentality’, but it is a very real and very intense phenomenon.” Carr finds this narrative maddening. “This community feels like they are being victimised, but they are not victims. They are privileged, well-off people with choices.” Carr is British-Turkish and takes umbrage with how the community co-opts the language of human rights to advocate against vaccines. “That makes me crazy,” says Carr. “To portray vaccines as against human rights ... I come from a country where human rights are constantly being diminished.” In the absence of action from the social media giants, all users like Carr can do is unfollow their former gurus. “In a passive way, that’s my solution,” she says. Many more users will no doubt replace them. “If you’re an ordinary person who’s having doubts about the vaccine and you start looking for answers, you’re far more likely to come across an anti-vaxx source than you are an authoritative source like the NHS or CDC,” says Hood. “These are effective and very intentional ways of radicalising people.” He hopes that this alignment of the wellness community with anti-vaxxers and conspiracy theorists will prompt a wider reappraisal of an industry that, for many years, has been replete with charlatans and quacks, profiting from that most fundamental of human desires – a desire for health. “I’m not saying the whole thing is rotten,” Hood says. “But there are broader questions to be asked about wellness and the alternative health industry. This is the end product of telling people they can control their health through willpower and diet. Most of the time, as a society, we don’t think that’s so harmful. But when it comes to the pandemic, it’s quite obvious that it is harmful. Probably the harms were there all the time. But the pandemic has exposed them.” • This article was amended on 11 November 2021. A previous version said CCDH research found that 95% of social media platforms failed to act on Covid and vaccine misinformation reported to them. In fact, the figure of 95% referred to the percentage of reported misinformation that was not removed by social media companies.Sort Of 9pm, Sky Comedy To Berlin – “the queerest city in the universe” – or not to Berlin? Sabi is a twentysomething, gender-fluid Pakistani Canadian, created and played by the comedian Bilal Baig, who’s got just days to decide if they want to leave Toronto for Europe. It’s tempting, what with recently being cheated on and fired from a nannying job. Baig’s self-aware, deadpan but soft-centred character makes for someone worth rooting for in zippy half-hour episodes. Hollie Richardson Nadiya’s Fast Flavours 8.30pm, BBC Two You always know what you’re getting with Nadiya – and that’s no bad thing. Here, the cheery cook serves yet more joyous, accessible and colourful recipes. First up, she puts her spin on comfort-food classics such as mac’n’cheese and french toast. HR Surgeons: At the Edge of Life 9pm, BBC Two The surgeons at Addenbrooke’s and Royal Papworth hospitals in Cambridge are some of the best in the UK – renowned for carrying out exceptionally challenging operations. We follow some of them here, such as Addenbrooke’s Ekpemi Irune, who must remove a cancerous face and neck tumour that’s growing so rapidly it may end a patient’s life. Ali Catterall The Trial of Louise Woodward 9pm, ITV It has been almost 25 years since the teenage British au pair Louise Woodward was found guilty of shaking eight-month-old baby Matthew Eappen to death while he was under her care in the US, a grim, hard-to-swallow case that stuck in many people’s minds. This documentary aims to illuminate each step of the trial and its aftermath, speaking to some of the key people involved. HR Beat the Devil 9pm, Sky Arts Ralph Fiennes performs David Hare’s “Covid monologue”, detailing his fury at the government’s ineptitude – and then his own experience of contracting the illness (on the day lockdown was announced), in an urgent and poignant polemic. “I don’t have survivor’s guilt,” says Fiennes/Hare, “I have survivor’s rage.” AC Unapologetic 11.05pm, Channel 4 Following its debut as part of the Black to Front initiative back in September, this topical discussion show – hosted by DJ and presenter Yinka Bokinni and social media star Zeze Millz – has been renewed. It will fill the vacancy for uncompromising late-night chats on cultural appropriation, sex, relationships and parenting from a Black perspective. Phil Harrison Live sport T20 World Cup Cricket Wed, 1.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Semi-final from Dubai.In May 2020, as the world was convulsed by the coronavirus pandemic and global infections topped 4 million, a strange video began appearing in the feeds of some Facebook users. “Climate alarm is reaching untold levels of exaggeration and hysteria,” said an unseen narrator, over a montage of environmental protests and clips of a tearful Greta Thunberg. “There is no doubt about it, climate change has become a cult,” it continued, to the kind of pounding beat you might hear on the soundtrack of a Hollywood blockbuster. “Carbon dioxide emissions have become the wages of sin.” The video’s reach was relatively small: according to Facebook data, it was viewed somewhere between 15,000 and 20,000 times. But over the following weeks more videos came, each one experimenting with slightly different scripts and visuals. All focused on the supposed irrationality and hypocrisy of climate campaigners, and the hardship they wanted to inflict upon society’s most impoverished communities. “Those who demand action on climate change continue to fly around in private jets from one virtue-signalling climate conference to the next,” stated one, against a backdrop of Leonardo DiCaprio and Prince Harry delivering speeches from lecterns. “Is this fair?” Another video took aim at the idea that countries should be transitioning towards “net zero” carbon dioxide emissions, calling it an “unnecessary and swingeing plan that hits the poor and costs the earth”. In total, between May and July, the advertiser spent less than £3,000 disseminating 10 videos. Collectively, they were viewed more than half a million times. At one stage, users hovering over the logo of that advertiser – a UK organisation called The Global Warming Policy Forum, or GWPF – were informed by Facebook that it was a “Science Site”. The GWPF is not a science website: it is the campaigning arm of a well-funded foundation accused by opponents of being one of Britain’s biggest sources of climate science denial. The videos being tested by the GWPF in the spring and summer of 2020 were part of a strategic pivot away from explicit climate crisis denialism, and towards something subtler – a move being pursued by similar campaigners across the world. Welcome to a new age of what the atmospheric scientist and environmental author Michael E Mann has labelled climate “inactivism”: an epic struggle to convince you not so much to doubt the reality of climate crisis, but rather to dampen your enthusiasm for any attempts at dealing with it. In mid-July, more than a year on from the GWPF’s video advertising campaign, the British government published its long-awaited plan to decarbonise the transport system, now the country’s biggest source of carbon emissions. As is increasingly common these days when it comes to big, set-piece environmental announcements, the proposals – phasing out sales of polluting vehicles and eliminating the aviation sector’s carbon footprint as part of the UK’s goal of becoming a net-zero nation by 2050 – were greeted with cautious approval from most quarters. The climate sector was broadly positive, but so too was the transport industry itself, as well as figures from across the mainstream political spectrum. When critics did speak out, it was nearly always to argue that the plan’s targets did not go far enough. There was, however, a dissenting voice: Craig Mackinlay MP, elected representative for South Thanet – a far-flung promontory on the eastern edge of Kent, which is now home to a bitter struggle over the future of a disused local airport. “Make no mistake, this requires a radical transformation of every part of the economy and our freedoms,” he warned in an article for Conservative Home. “As ever, it will be the poor who suffer most from these elite delusions.” Mackinlay, who has described Britain’s net-zero aspirations as a “social calamity” and insisted that “sooner or later, the public will rebel against this madness”, was not alone in framing decarbonisation through the lens of cultural division and class privilege. “This policy was wrong-headed from the start, dreamed up in the kitchen diners of Notting Hill, with no understanding of real people’s daily lives,” claimed Julian Knight, a fellow Tory MP, in a report published by an all-party parliamentary group chaired by Mackinlay that supports cheaper fuel for motorists. Steve Baker, another Conservative parliamentarian and a close ally of Mackinlay, has dismissed the Committee on Climate Change, which advises the government, as “unelected and unaccountable”. Earlier this year, Baker declared that “In net zero, as with Brexit, the political class has in a very, almost smug and self-satisfied way, built a consensus which is not going to survive contact with the public.” Instead, he predicted, “there’s going to be an enormous political explosion.” * * * Public debate over the environment once pitted people who believed in the reality of anthropogenic climate change against those who questioned it. At least two of the current cabinet, including Boris Johnson, used to count themselves among the sceptical camp. Today, with a firm majority of every demographic group in the UK in agreement with the fact that humans are warming the planet, and that this poses a serious danger, the battle lines have been redrawn. “The great underreported story is how normalised all this has become. Those who want to see action on climate change, in many ways, have won the argument,” says James Murray, editor of the website BusinessGreen and a leading environmental commentator. “That is now the consensus view: it has the nominal support of every government and science academy on the planet, and crucially it’s where the money is.” With outright climate science denial relegated to the fringes, opponents of urgent action on climate emergency have been forced to switch tack. Alongside pro forma acknowledgments that climate breakdown is happening and vague commitments to a greener future (“Of course I want to leave this planet in a better place than I found it, we all want that,” Mackinlay told the BBC recently), the inactivists – a loose coalition of fossil-fuel interests, conservative ideologues and supportive politicians and journalists – seek to redirect responsibility for the problem away from the fossil fuel industry and towards individual consumers, as well as developing nations in the global south. When solutions to the climate crisis are proposed by inactivists, they tend to be timid and unambitious, with faith in future (as yet unrealised) “green” technologies held up as a reason to shy away from serious structural changes now. But there is now an even more powerful weapon in the inactivist armoury. It comes in the form of an appeal to social justice: one that casts environmentalists as an aloof, out-of-touch establishment, and the inactivists as insurgents, defending the values and livelihoods of ordinary people. “The biggest single threat to the net zero transition is a culture war-style backlash that heavily politicises this agenda and spooks governments into moving more slowly,” says Murray. “At present, it’s on the periphery. But as the past few years have taught us, ideas that were on the periphery can become very influential, very quickly.” Attempts to mobilise anti-elite sentiments against climate activists are nothing new. Wealthy celebrities who lecture others on environmental sustainability have always been charged with inauthenticity. In the 00s, Republican attacks on Al Gore, the former US vice-president whose personal fortune tops $300m, were one of the main drivers of polarisation among the American public on green issues. What has altered in the decade and a half since the release of Gore’s seminal 2006 film, An Inconvenient Truth, is our political landscape. In many parts of the world, the financial crash and years of subsequent turmoil have shredded electoral support for parties and politicians associated with the old order and propelled new forces into power, from Trump in the US to Brexiters in the UK. Popular anger at the economic insecurities that are synonymous with 21st-century capitalism – which in the UK have included soaring housing costs, the casualisation of employment and sustained falls in wages – has provided an opening for any political forces presenting themselves as radical outsiders, fighting on behalf of the voiceless masses. On the right, these grievances have been fused with a cultural resentment towards highfalutin virtue-signalling and liberal elites. It is here that inactivists have spotted an opportunity to harness some of the antagonism towards prevailing power systems and use it to undermine support for what they see as unaffordable climate action. As decarbonisation efforts expand into the realm of our everyday lives, touching on the ways we heat our homes, for example, or the cars we own and the roads we are allowed to drive down, that task has become easier. Their efforts have been aided further by social media platforms, which have enabled the rapid spread of disinformation and helped fuel social division. The defining – and mutually reinforcing – phenomena of our age are political turbulence and technological disruption. It’s into this crucible that debates over climate breakdown are now being poured. * * * For the environmental sector, seemingly gaining ground in the fight for hearts and minds, this evolution of the climate wars has been a dislocating experience. Not only are progressive campaigners being forced to defend themselves against charges of elitism, but they’re having to do so within the confines of privately run “walled gardens” such as Facebook, where profit-seeking algorithms determine whose voices speak loudest, and those seeking to push culture-war narratives find fertile ground. As an example of what the new battleground looks like, climate activists point to the gilet jaunes (yellow vests) movement in France – which began as a protest against fuel tax rises but expanded into a broader critique of economic injustice imposed by haughty technocrats – and power outages in Texas last winter that were erroneously blamed by many American rightwing pundits on the failures of wind power. Over the course of just a few days in February, millions of internet users were subjected to disinformation about the blackouts, including a viral image of a helicopter supposedly being sent to de-ice a frozen Texas wind turbine, which was actually taken in Sweden many years earlier. The whole episode prompted MSNBC host Chris Hayes to rail against this “painful culture war idiocy”. “The implications of all this on our ability to campaign are huge,” says Michael Khoo, a communications specialist who works with Friends of the Earth. “We needed to master this new environment, and be able to understand and respond to what’s happening in real time.” That is exactly what Khoo and many of his colleagues are now attempting to do. In the run-up to Cop26, more than 30 leading organisations came together to develop a new set of tools capable both of monitoring the online spread of inactivist messaging, and anticipating the next Texas blackout campaign before it takes off. The ongoing project is being led by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, or ISD, a thinktank better known for its work tackling hate and extremism. So far it has yielded valuable insights into the shape of climate debates across Europe, such as the “national sovereignty” arguments being used to defend coal mining in Poland, and the entwining of anti-EU sentiments with inactivist climate messaging in Hungary. It has also led to a major report exploring the global spread of “climate lockdown” alarmism, in which hard-right activists and Covid denialists have found common cause in driving fear of pandemic-type lockdowns that they claim will soon be imposed by tyrannical governments at the behest of environmentalists. It was back in May this year that DeSmog – a journalism platform that aims to expose and eliminate the “PR pollution” around climate breakdown, and one of the project’s partners – first noticed a newly trending Twitter hashtag: #CostOfNetZero. It was being pushed by Steve Baker, the Tory MP for Wycombe and the former chair of the Brexit-supporting European Research Group, as well as a newly appointed GWPF trustee. Using ISD’s tools, researchers were able to map the sources of tweets containing the hashtag, and the relationships between them. “What we found at that stage was that it was basically just Baker and his allies continually retweeting it to create the impression of there being a lot of concern around this issue,” said Mat Hope, a former DeSmog editor. “We were able to show that it was a manufactured controversy, not some authentic insight from somebody with their finger on the country’s pulse.” (Steve Baker did not respond to a request for comment.) In the months that followed, however, disquiet over the net zero transition began ramping up in sections of the UK press – initially in outlets such as Spiked Online and GB News, but eventually creeping into the pages of major newspapers such as the Daily Telegraph and the Sun, too. In August, the Spectator magazine printed an image of banknotes tumbling into a void on its cover, with the headline “The cost of net zero”; by September, right-leaning media commentators were homing in on the government’s aim of gradually phasing out gas boilers as part of the decarbonisation plan, and replacing them with air- or ground-source heat pumps instead. The far greater economic costs of inaction on climate crisis were rarely mentioned in these reports, but again and again, efforts to reduce our collective carbon emissions were framed as an elitist power-grab. “People want a cleaner, greener planet,” wrote Andrew Neil for the Daily Mail in October. “But they will not tolerate a green strategy that involves posh folk telling plain folk what they must do. Especially when the posh folk are doing very nicely out of greenery and the plain folk are picking up the tab.” By the autumn – as a growing cost-of-living crisis began to dominate the news agenda – the GWPF had rebranded itself as Net Zero Watch, a new parliamentary grouping called the Net Zero Scrutiny Group led by Craig Mackinlay had been formed, and Westminster insiders were reporting on widening splits within the Conservative party over the entire net zero transition. “The fact is you don’t need a majority of the population behind you to create a myth-making frenzy like this; you can do it with a very small minority and a set of media outriders,” said James Murray. Members of the Net Zero Scrutiny group reject the suggestion that they are espousing a new form of climate science denial. “What I want this group to be is a clearing house, a balanced academic facility where we get all sides of the argument,” Mackinlay has claimed previously. The idea that decarbonisation is inherently elitist is a myth, peddled largely by political figures who have shown little concern for deprived communities in any other context, and who ignore the fact that without a net zero transition it is the very poorest – globally and domestically – who will suffer most severely. But like all effective myths, it is founded on a kernel of truth: namely that under successive governments, political decision-making has felt remote and unaccountable, the rich have got richer, and life for a great many of the rest of us has grown harder. “Of course we are jumping on this, but we are jumping on it because we think it’s a real issue,” said Benny Peiser, director of the GWPF, when I questioned him about the organisation’s shift in focus. He went on: “A year ago, if someone asked their MP, ‘Why are you not raising questions about the cost of net zero?’, they would say, ‘Well I don’t get any letters from constituents about this issue, so why should I stick my head above the parapet?’ And this has changed for the first time in recent months. Now MPs do get letters about that very issue.” The GWPF may have been working behind the scenes to encourage that change, but as Peiser implies, they are able to do so in part because people are experiencing very real anxieties. “When people like Mackinlay and Baker start talking about whether the costs and benefits of net zero are going to be distributed equitably, and you consider austerity and the impact of the pandemic, there’s something there that a lot of people might find plausible,” observed Adam Corner, an independent researcher who has helped lead studies of public attitudes on climate change. “They’re inviting people to ask themselves: can the same government that made the poorest pay for the banking crisis really be trusted to design a fair climate policy?” * * * The Isle of Thanet lies on the north-eastern edge of Kent, where a narrow channel once severed it from the mainland. Over the centuries it has been where saints, crusaders and adventurers first set foot in Britain. More recently, it has become better known as a place of deprivation, and as an electoral bastion for the nationalist right. In 2015, Thanet district council became the first in the country to fall under the control of Ukip, and in that same year Nigel Farage came close to winning the South Thanet parliamentary seat (he was narrowly beaten by Mackinlay, himself a former Ukip leader who later defected to the Conservatives). Today, it is also a microcosm of the climate culture wars, thanks to a fierce tussle over the fate of Manston airport – a former RAF base that played a pivotal role in the Battle of Britain. Manston went on to cater for commercial passengers, but by the early 2010s it was losing up to £10,000 a day, and the airport finally shut its doors in 2014. Since then, the mammoth site has been variously earmarked for housing, a manufacturing site, and even a film studio (it was “not beyond the realms of possibility” that the next James Bond production could be shot in Thanet, insisted the airport’s then owners in 2015). What some in Thanet really yearned for, though, was a functioning airport once again. “Manston is part of every local person’s DNA,” said Martin Sutton, an aviation engineer who was based at the airport for many years. “It was a community, and a massive asset to the area.” In 2019 that dream took a step closer to reality when the site was acquired by Riveroak Strategic Partners (RSP), a group of international investors ultimately controlled by an offshore company headquartered in the British Virgin Islands. RSP announced plans to spend £300m transforming Manston into a global air freight hub, “one which delivers economic prosperity and employment across Kent and protects a strategic aviation resource for the nation”. Craig Mackinlay, along with Thanet’s other Conservative MP, Roger Gale, welcomed the development wholeheartedly. But others in the area felt differently. With a runway approach route that lies directly over Ramsgate’s historical town centre, many residents opposed any resumption of flights – and argued that, in light of the country’s net-zero commitments, Britain should be urgently reducing its aviation emissions rather than expanding them. When RSP’s proposal was given the go-ahead by the national government last year, despite its own Planning Inspectorate recommending a rejection, the Green party described it as “a senseless act, which places the economic benefit of a small number of people ahead of the wellbeing of everybody else”. It was at that point that Jenny Dawes, a softly-spoken 74-year-old who moved to Thanet nine years ago, began crowdfunding to cover the legal costs of a judicial review that would challenge the government decision. With the support of a network of local anti-airport campaign groups, she raised more than £100,000 and – in an outcome that shocked almost everybody – succeeded. In February 2021, the Department for Transport formally withdrew its development consent order for the cargo hub and began its consideration process anew. Now, once again, Manston’s fate is uncertain. For campaigners on both sides of the Manston debate, the degree of animosity involved has been overwhelming. “I’ve been called a toxic wart, a KGB agent, and – my personal favourite – a contentious socialite,” Dawes told me. In interviews with dozens of people in Thanet for and against the airport, I heard allegations of cars being scratched and spat at, anonymous accounts hurling abuse online, boycotts of local shops and meetings having to take place in private living rooms rather than pubs or cafes for fear of sparking open confrontation. Part of the reason is that, far from being a straightforward planning dispute, conflict over Manston has become inflected by many other dynamics such as housing, poverty, regional inequality and political disillusionment – the same dynamics that Craig Mackinlay was tapping into when he described the government’s transport decarbonisation strategy as an elite delusion. “They are doing ok, thank you very much,” one member of the ‘Save Manston Airport Association’ Facebook page wrote recently, when describing the “vocal anti-Manston agitators” – many of whom, he suggested, had only recently arrived in the area from the capital, and still commuted there for work. “The London salary serves them well in poverty-stricken Thanet … Obviously they are also predominantly of the metropolitan, pseudo-intellectual, leftwing, liberal type who take themselves extremely seriously … I suppose their position as a self-appointed elite would be under threat if Thanet started to elevate itself in the world.” This charge – that Manston’s opponents are indifferent to the economic opportunities provided by a reopened airport because they themselves are financially comfortable – is a common one, though largely unjustified: in reality, locals from all walks of life are to be found on sides of the airport divide, and the amount of work that would be created by the cargo hub is hotly contested (RSP claim it would generate 23,000 jobs within two decades, while others point out that there were only 150 people employed at the airport when it closed). Drive around Thanet, though, and it’s easy to see why the quarrel lends itself to this kind of framing. For one thing, Thanet’s stunning coastal scenery, relatively cheap property prices and quick travel links to London have attracted a wave of arrivals from other parts of the country in recent years, which has helped drive a growing arts scene in seaside towns such as Broadstairs, Margate and Ramsgate, but also provoked resentment. Local unemployment rates, particularly among young people, are some of the highest in the country, and the jobs that do exist are often to be found in the seasonal or gig economy. Major local employers that once provided a steady career path for school-leavers have shut up shop, including the cross-channel hoverport at Pegwell Bay that ceased operations in the 80s, the old gasworks in Ramsgate now home to a branch of Aldi and the Pfizer plant in Sandwich that scaled back in 2011. East Kent’s coalfields, once famed for attracting miners who had been blacklisted for their trade union activities elsewhere, were abandoned under Thatcher; today, Thanet has the highest level of child poverty in the county, and is ranked among the most deprived 10% of all English regions. “When people talk about ‘levelling up’, they assume that when it comes to the south-east, everybody is doing fine,” said David Stevens, a retired teacher who is now vice-chair of the Save Manston Airport Association. “But believe me, Thanet is not doing fine.” After years of austerity – overseen by the governing party to which Mackinlay belongs – it looks to many here as if RSP are throwing Thanet a desperately needed lifeline. Last month Ramsgate football club, sponsored by the airport, held a half-term holiday camp for local children on free school meals – providing them with food, career advice and the chance to ride in a flight simulator. For supporters of the airport, a reopened Manston would not only provide future generations with some economic optimism, but also pride in a region that is too often overlooked in Whitehall and mocked in the national media; one Sunday Times columnist described Thanet as “bilious, forlorn, and desolate”, and dismissed it as a “little bit of throbbing gristle”. “Thanet is seen as a bit of a basket-case, a laughing stock on the news,” Deb Shotton, vice-chair of the Thanet Green party, told me. “The coastal towns have always attracted some wealth, and there’s always been a great deal of impoverishment, and because of that demographic divide it’s easy to stoke division. The rubbish that Mackinlay spouts is going to get an audience.” The Guardian requested interviews with Craig Mackinlay and RSP for this story; Mackinlay declined to answer any questions, and RSP did not respond at all. It would be easy to frame the Manston dispute as one that pits indulgent environmentalists – blissfully unaware of Thanet’s economic plight – against ecological vandals, divorced from the reality of our climate emergency. But the vast majority of airport supporters I spoke to insisted that tackling climate breakdown was a major priority for them, and that they were convinced that technological advances such as the advent of electric planes would enable Manston to reopen without threatening the country’s net zero transition. The airport’s owners have made repeated claims about the new hub being “environmentally friendly”. At the same time, opponents of Manston are painfully aware of Thanet’s urgent need for new jobs; they just don’t believe that these should come in the form of a carbon-belching project that, according to RSP’s own projections, will be responsible for nearly 2% of Britain’s aviation emissions by 2050. * * * Somewhere in all this, there is a glimmer of shared ground visible, which offers hope not only to Thanet, but to the very many communities around the world that are also navigating today’s interlocking crises of climate breakdown and economic insecurity. To reach it, net zero has to be part of a political project that addresses losses that have built up over a generation – such as the dwindling of secure jobs, affordable housing and a reliable welfare safety net – and provides a convincing vision of the future. At Manston, located close to a major offshore windfarm, some have suggested this could take the form of a state of the art green industrial hub built on the existing airport site. To those with power, Thanet might feel like a forgotten outcrop on the edge of things. But in reality, it is a window on to a set of arguments that are becoming part of the fabric of many places – from coalmines in Cumbria to cities in Germany which have banned older diesel cars – and which, as decarbonisation gathers pace, will increasingly concern us all. As Adam Corner argues, the fact that the mainstream climate debate is now an argument over the costs and fairness of climate breakdown mitigation, rather than the science, is itself a sign of progress. “This is the biggest show on earth,” he told me. “It’s changing everything. Of course you are going to have different and sometimes contradictory impulses in various places and among various communities as a result. At least we are now seeing these questions for what they are, and what they have always been really, which is political: a conversation about social choices and collective priorities, which is a conversation that on all kinds of levels we desperately need to have.” Ten miles south of Manston’s runway stands a collection of empty redbrick buildings pockmarked by shattered windows and missing roof tiles, which are gradually being enveloped by the surrounding woodland. This was Snowdown Colliery, the deepest coalmine in Kent, and at one point an employer of up to 2,000 people. Remnants of the community that once revolved around this place are still scattered on the floor – old newspapers, scraps of uniform, broken tools – but they are now disappearing under a carpet of moss, or floating in pools of muddy rainwater. The industry that Snowdown supported proved ruinous to the environment, but the manner in which that industry was dismantled ruined countless communities, too, carving scars that continue to hurt today. The colliery was connected by railway to Faversham and the port at Dover, both of which – if global temperature increases are not arrested – could be underwater by 2050, as sea levels rise and overtop coastal defences around the edge of Kent. Many of the Thanet’s most famous landmarks could be flooded, too, including Margate’s Dreamland theme park and Turner Contemporary gallery, the village of Reculver’s ancient towers on the region’s western border, and Ramsgate’s harbour to the east. Without rapid action on climate breakdown, in a few decades from now the whole of Thanet is projected to become an island once again. The new climate wars are making that outcome more likely. But although the inactivists cheering them on may be cynical, their root causes are real and cannot simply be ignored, insulted, or reduced solely to a problem of online disinformation. Thanet’s story so far – of long-term decline and uneven restoration – is familiar to great swathes of Britain, and beyond. If its next chapter is to prove more hopeful, it must be written collaboratively, and carry an entire community along with it. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021 to clarify that Pfizer scaled back its operations in Sandwich in 2011 but did not close down completely as an earlier version suggested. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Has Ian McKellen started a trend? To mark his 80th birthday in 2019, the theatrical knight undertook a mammoth tour of UK playhouses in an autobiographical show mixing personal reflections with reprised roles. Now the recently knighted David Suchet celebrates turning 75 with his own tour, looking back at half a century of acting, and half of that spent as Agatha Christie’s fastidious Belgian sleuth. He has brought Poirot’s cane and moustache with him, though the latter remains inside a frame, gifted to him by a makeup artist. The show itself is a little too neatly presented as Suchet’s longtime friend, the journalist Geoffrey Wansell, accompanies him onstage to tee up the anecdotes rather than throw curveball questions. Unlike McKellen’s show, the audience interaction is minimal and nothing feels unrehearsed. If you’ve read interviews with the star or seen him on chatshows, you’ll already know how Prince Philip’s tips on handling a mango made it into a Poirot episode or how Laurence Olivier’s penny-between-the-bum-cheeks trick influenced the detective’s walk. But Suchet is as clubbable as ever, from entering the stage waving both hands to the climactic vocal gymnastics showing how he settled on Poirot’s accent, a party piece you imagine has delighted many a dinner guest. The second half is a masterclass on Shakespeare, with speeches by Shylock, Caliban, Oberon and Macbeth used to demonstrate iambic pentameter and various literary devices. But the first role Suchet plays is his granny, a music-hall veteran, who he recreates doing a soft-shoe shuffle for her gobsmacked grandson. Her passion for the arts, and that of his mother who was a dancer, is juxtaposed with the disapproval (until Suchet joined the esteemed ranks of the RSC) of his gynaecologist father. There are two affecting thumbnail sketches: one of young David, dazed and lonely at boarding school at the time his brother is born, the other of his ageing father proudly watching the filming of Poirot. Several anecdotes have a familiar rise and fall as Suchet grandly sets the scene of an auspicious theatrical occasion only for our hapless hero to come a cropper centre-stage, whether tripping up as Tybalt or injuring himself wrestling in As You Like It. Or, years earlier, arriving at a drama-school movement lesson in full rugger clobber from his private school days. Gossipmongers may leave crestfallen – there are no juicy asides about his esteemed company at the National Youth Theatre or the RSC, though we are given the sweet image of Suchet and his wife, Sheila Ferris, eschewing digs to live for several years on a narrowboat, travelling between theatres by canals. There are few specific recollections of particular directors, either, although he answers Wansell’s question about what makes a good one with a neat analogy about asking for directions while driving and not expecting someone to push him away from the steering wheel. Directors, he ventures, are there to fill actors with courage. But it is a show mostly free from those Everest-scaling actor cliches lampooned by the spoof thesp Nicholas Craig, played by Nigel Planer. Suchet has some sound, straightforward advice for understanding the importance of a particular character or speech: omit them from a reading of the play to understand what they contribute. Known by fellow actors for his meticulous approach to the material, Suchet gives us plenty about craft but I wanted to hear more about theatre’s place in society and the role of faith in his life: he is a Christian convert who recorded the first ever full-length audio version of the New International Version of the Bible. Still, it’s an insightful couple of hours and leaves you keen to see Suchet back on stage, putting his own little grey cells to use on his next leading role. Touring the UK until 19 December then at the Harold Pinter theatre, London, 4-22 January.Q: What binds together such disparate souls as Noam Chomsky and Keir Starmer, Yanis Varoufakis and Joe Biden, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Caroline Lucas? A: They all want a green new deal. Rightwingers pretend that today’s left likes nothing better than to pull down statues for a laugh before disinviting speakers from student unions, but they are off by approximately 180 degrees. Only one project truly unifies the mainstream left across Europe and America today: trying to limit climate breakdown by overhauling a noxious economic model. Ask the individual parties how and a hundred flowers duly bloom, but all will be branded with those same three little words. Promising a green new deal helped clinch the Labour leadership for Starmer. It’s also how Biden keeps the Democrat base onside. It galvanises activists and anchors progressive conversation. Measured from the start of 2018 until this week, the phrase “Green New Deal” appeared in this newspaper and on our website almost as many times as “levelling up” and far more than “Narendra Modi”. Seeing as one of those is Boris Johnson’s signature policy and the other runs the world’s second-most populous country, that is quite the showing. Such dominance should spur serious interrogation, yet what the green new deal has received so far is mostly explanation or celebration. So aren’t I, as a gainfully employed Guardianista, coming to join the joyous party? Sorry, but no. I like and respect many of the people working on it, and a few I count as friends – at least until they read this. I certainly agree with their top-line argument that the planet cannot afford this kamikaze capitalism. I just don’t see the green new deal as the answer. The project itself – supposedly a stark, bold, urgent idea – is a conceptual fog. Like some kind of policy peasouper, it nestles densely around arguments of ecological limits, social justice and economic transformation, allowing only a glimpse of their outlines. That suits many on the left, as it serves to obscure all their disagreements and so keep the peace just a little longer. Rare is the bus that can keep on board both Sadiq Khan and John McDonnell, and take them to totally different destinations. But at some point the warm words and the broad coalitions lose their charm and you are left just as the delegates in Glasgow are: facing the grim reality of a planet on fire. Truth be told, the thing was born in a haze. In 2007, the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman took a break from cheering on the Iraq war and crowing about corporate globalisation to pen a demand for a green new deal. His gauntlet was picked up in London by a small group of environmentalists and economists (including Larry Elliott, of this parish), who spent the months after the collapse of Northern Rock writing a plan to tackle the “triple crunch of financial meltdown, climate change and ‘peak oil’”. No such radicalism was on Friedman’s menu when he wrote: “I am not proposing that we [Americans] radically alter our lifestyles. We are who we are – including a car culture. But if we want to continue to be who we are, enjoy the benefits and be able to pass them on to our children, we do need to fuel our future in a cleaner, greener way … The next president will have to rally us with a green patriotism. Hence my motto: ‘Green is the new red, white and blue.’” Depending on which specs you had on, the green new deal either looked all-American and utterly painless – or it was internationalist and out for bankers’ blood. And down the years, the contradictions have only multiplied. For AOC and today’s US left, it is about jobs (albeit “green” ones, a term far easier to deploy than to define) and infrastructure; for Lucas, Labour’s Clive Lewis and others currently pushing a green new deal through parliament, it includes citizens’ assemblies and a shorter working week. It is both “a green industrial revolution” in the north of England and debt cancellation for the global south; both low-carbon Keynesianism and nationalisation of the energy industry. It is, in other words, a big duffel bag stuffed with pent-up progressive demands and jumbled up with highly dubious history and tiresome war metaphors. Why hark back to FDR, who entered the White House nearly a century ago, if you want to be a contemporary global movement? Why lean on Keynes as your crutch, when he set out to save capitalism not to scrap it? Most of all, why talk about a “moonshot moment” (an oft-deployed metaphor by green new dealers, invoking the space race)? The next few decades will not be about inventing entirely new things but substituting for what we already have. Installing heat pumps and ripping out boilers, using renewables rather than fossil fuels, relying on battery power over the internal combustion engine: moving to a lower-carbon future is not going to be a great, dramatic transformation – it will be slow and chronic, and frankly more expensive to societies reared on cheap food, cheap energy and the idea that the rest of the bill for both those things will be picked up by someone else, perhaps yet to be born. This isn’t just a debate over words; it is a battle between rival visions of the future. When Ed Miliband enthuses in his recent (and good) book, Go Big, about moving to a wartime economy with a vast “carbon army” retrofitting draughty homes, he is talking about a green transition that is done to people rather than with them. And it turns voters off. Earlier this year, the polling firm Survation surveyed Britons on a scheme to employ a million people to insulate houses and asked: what should they call it? At the bottom of the list came green new deal. Almost as bad was green industrial revolution. Far and away the favourite was national recovery plan. A process not a product, common sense rather than radicalism. At some point, the post-2016 left, radicalised by Trump and Brexit, will have to surrender its notions of a radical programme executed through a vast state machinery. Zombie Johnsonism or revived Trumpism will see them off. I hope what comes next is a more focused, locally rooted and inclusive politics based around asking people what they actually need in their lives, and working out how to fit those things within an environmental framework. That can be done with universal desires such as housing and food, healthcare and education. This is not about green growth versus degrowth, and all those old dichotomies. It is about recognising that large swaths of Britain are now effectively post-growth, and that the proceeds of whatever growth we have had has been very unfairly divided. So let us stop haring after “British-owned turbine factories” and “dominating the industries of tomorrow” and all the other boilerplate of politics. Let’s get real. Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnistMonitoring of workers and setting performance targets through algorithms is damaging employees’ mental health and needs to be controlled by new legislation, according to a group of MPs and peers. An “accountability for algorithms act’” would ensure that companies evaluate the effect of performance-driven regimes such as queue monitoring in supermarkets or deliveries-per-hour guidelines for delivery drivers, said the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on the future of work. “Pervasive monitoring and target-setting technologies, in particular, are associated with pronounced negative impacts on mental and physical wellbeing as workers experience the extreme pressure of constant, real-time micro-management and automated assessment,” said the APPG members in their report, the New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work. The report recommends bringing in a new algorithms act, which it says would establish “a clear direction to ensure AI puts people first”. It warns that “use of algorithmic surveillance, management and monitoring technologies that undertake new advisory functions, as well as traditional ones, has significantly increased during the pandemic”. Under the act workers would be given the right to be involved in the design and use of algorithm-driven systems, where computers make and execute decisions about fundamental aspects of someone’s work – including in some cases allocation of shifts and pay, or whether they get a job in the first place. The report also recommended that corporations and public sector employers fill out algorithmic impact assessments, aimed at ironing out any problems caused by the systems, and expanding the new umbrella body for digital regulation, the Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum, to introduce certification and guidance for use of AI and algorithms at work. The MPs added that the use of AI and algorithms produced a sense of unfairness and lack of independence among workers, who also aren’t aware of the role of personal information in guiding decisions about how they go about their jobs. Regulation of social media and video platforms will also be included in the online safety bill, which will become law towards the end of next year. David Davis MP, the Conservative chair of the APPG on the future of work, said: “Our inquiry reveals how AI technologies have spread beyond the gig economy to control what, who and how work is done. It is clear that, if not properly regulated, algorithmic systems can have harmful effects on health and prosperity.” Clive Lewis, a Labour member of the APPG, added: “Our report shows why and how government must bring forward robust proposals for AI regulation. There are marked gaps in regulation at an individual and corporate level that are damaging people and communities right across the country.” The APPG inquiry was established after the publication of a report into the role of AI and algorithms in modern work in May this year by the Institute for the Future of Work, a research body, entitled the Amazonian Era. The report focused on retail workers and included testimony from delivery drivers and checkout workers who complained of monitoring systems and target-setting that produced high levels of anxiety. “A lot of professional drivers will sometimes jump a red light or brake too hard because they are under time constraints and often they have to use their mobile while driving,” one supermarket delivery driver said in the report. The IFoW study also included testimony from manufacturing workers who had to log 95% of their activity on shifts, so their working day could be planned more intensively.A new species of dinosaur with an extremely large nose has been identified by a retired GP who spent lockdown rummaging through boxes of ancient bones. Jeremy Lockwood, who is studying for a PhD at the University of Portsmouth, set himself the task of cataloguing every iguanodon bone discovered on the Isle of Wight. As he sorted the bones from the collections of the Natural History Museum in London and the Dinosaur Isle museum on the Isle of Wight, he discovered a specimen with a unique “bulbous” nasal bone. “For over 100 years, we’d only seen two types of dinosaur on the Isle of Wight – the plant-eating Iguanodon bernissartensis and Mantellisaurus atherfieldensis,” he said. “I was convinced that subtle differences between bones would reveal a new species, so I set out to measure, photograph and study the anatomy of each bone.” After four years of unpacking and studying boxes of bones, he began reconstructing the skull of a specimen that had been in storage since 1978 and found several striking features that set it apart. “The number of teeth was a sign,” Lockwood said. “Mantellisaurus has 23 or 24, but this has 28. It also had a bulbous nose, whereas the other species have very straight noses. Altogether, these and other small differences made it very obviously a new species.” He added: “This discovery made it one of the happiest days of lockdown.” The herbivorous dinosaur was about eight metres in length and weighed about 900kg. Lockwood, working with Prof David Martill from the University of Portsmouth, and Dr Susannah Maidment, from the Natural History Museum, has named the new species Brighstoneus simmondsi, for a study published in the Journal of Systematic Palaeontology. Brighstoneus is named after the village of Brighstone on the Isle of Wight, which is close to the excavation site, and the latter part of the name is in honour of Keith Simmonds, an amateur collector, who was involved in finding and excavating the specimen. The discovery of this new species suggests there were far more iguanodontian dinosaurs in the Early Cretaceous of the UK than previously thought and that a longstanding convention of assigning fossils found on the Isle of Wight to either the Iguanodon or Mantellisaurus species should be reconsidered. “It seems so unlikely to just have two animals being exactly the same for millions of years without change,” said Lockwood. Lockwood, who was involved in the discovery of another new species known as the “hell heron”, said the latest discoveries showed British dinosaurs were not “done and dusted”. “I think we could be on to a bit of a renaissance.”Atmospheric rivers are very aptly named, given that one can often carry a greater flux of water than the Amazon. They are responsible for 90% of the poleward transport of moisture on our planet. Thousands of miles long but only a few hundred miles wide, atmospheric rivers often appear on satellite imagery as elongated tendrils of moisture stretching from the tropics to the mid-latitudes. When an atmospheric river makes landfall, often through interactions with mid-latitude cyclones, extreme flooding events can occur. The features act as a conveyor belt feeding huge amounts of tropical moisture into weather systems, intensifying the rainfall. Perhaps the most famous example of atmospheric rivers is the “Pineapple Express”, which can deposit huge amounts of rainfall (and sometimes snow) to Pacific coastal regions of the US. The effects of atmospheric rivers are also felt in the UK. On 4 and 5 December 2015, interactions between an atmospheric river and Storm Desmond led to record-breaking rainfall across north-west England. With the enhanced moisture supply, orographic rainfall across Cumbria broke the 24-hour UK rainfall record, with 341.4mm (13.4in) falling in Honister Pass. Such huge rainfall totals led to the flooding of 5,200 properties in Lancashire and Cumbria, with a further 1,000 properties flooded in the Scottish Borders.When Anni Albers began weaving at the Bauhaus in the 1920s, little did she know that her geometric patterns would one day adorn the doors of a hospital in rural Senegal. Shadows play across the surface of the staggered wooden blocks set into the doors of Tambacounda’s new maternity and paediatric ward, creating a woven effect echoed by the pattern of dappled sunlight streaming in through the perforated brick walls. These are small details, but they go some way to lightening the ordeal of being here, poetic touches that make the clinical environment feel like a place of care. The art-world-philanthropy-complex works in mysterious ways. One hundred years since Anni and her husband Josef Albers met at the radical Weimar design school, the construction of a new hospital has been enabled, thousands of miles away, by the astonishing sums that their work now sells for, along with the fundraising power their name commands. Located in one of the hottest places on the planet, yet designed to function without air conditioning, the result is a building that aptly embodies the German duo’s philosophy of “minimal means, maximum effect”. And it happened almost by chance. “It’s thanks to my dermatologist in Paris,” says Nicholas Fox Weber, the energetic American art historian who has run the Albers Foundation since Josef’s death in 1976. “One day he told me that he had started a small non-profit organisation to help hospitals in Senegal. I asked if I could go with him on his next trip. Six weeks later we arrived in Tambacounda with supplies: a suitcase full of blood and hundreds of toothbrushes.” Fox Weber was appalled by what he found. In the maternity ward he was shown an “incubator” that consisted of a tray on a table, where three newborns were huddled beneath a desk lamp. Hypodermic needles were scattered on the floor, while an operating table was barely standing on three legs. Women lay crammed together at different stages of labour, or having just given birth, while others waited outside on bamboo mats on the floor. What he saw led him to found Le Korsa, a non-profit organisation funded by the Albers Foundation (which itself is mainly funded by selling Albers paintings), dedicated to improving healthcare and education in eastern Senegal. Since 2005 they have built rural clinics, a women’s refuge, an arts centre and the first secular school in the strictly Muslim region, the latter two designed by Japanese-American architect Toshiko Mori. There are also plans for a new museum, with the architect to be drawn from an all-African shortlist. Four years in the making, the €2m (£1.7m) hospital building is their most ambitious project so far. Winding its way for 125 metres in a serpentine curve, the two-storey structure is a surprisingly subtle addition to the 1970s hospital complex, creating the maximum number of rooms with the thinnest possible footprint. Rather than adding another doughnut shaped building to the campus of circular wards, it weaves between them instead, hugging the former paediatric ward on one side before curving the other way to enclose a new playground courtyard shaded by a mature acacia tree. “We tried to create a model that the hospital could use for future extensions,” says Manuel Herz, the Basel-based architect behind the design. He had never designed a healthcare facility before, but he was chosen in 2017 after being the only invited architect to refuse to come up with a design without first visiting the site to properly understand the context. His previous research into modernist architecture in Africa helped to tip the balance, too. “It was crucial to come here and talk to everyone involved and find out what they really needed,” says Herz. “Our solution was to make the building as narrow as possible to encourage cross-ventilation, while creating as much space as possible for hanging out.” Space for hanging out might not seem like an urgent hospital requirement, but, as Herz discovered on his research trips, a hospital stay in Tambacounda is very much a family affair. The campus sees people gathered on every possible surface, with patients’ relatives making food, washing clothes or resting on bamboo mats. It has the look of a chaotic campsite, with pots and buckets lying alongside stray cats, while newborn babies shelter under mosquito nets beneath the trees. “It’s a big problem,” says Dr Thérèse-Aida Ndiaye, director of the hospital since 2016. “Each patient comes with four or five family members, who bring their own habits. I recently found one relative having a shower here. We are a hospital, not a house.” They come out of necessity: there simply aren’t enough staff to provide every aspect of the patients’ care, so relatives are needed to pick up the slack, running errands and buying medication from the nearby pharmacy. Many have travelled miles to get here. Tambacounda hospital sees about 40,000 patients a year from all around the region, including from across the border from Mali, the Gambia and Guinea, with families often forced to travel together, unable to leave dependents behind. Herz’s design embraces the inevitable entourage. Along with space for 150 beds, tripling the previous capacity, there are plenty of social spaces, including semicircular balconies off the first-floor corridor, with curved seating overlooking the playground so parents can keep an eye on their kids. Two spiral staircases descend gracefully into the courtyards, offering an alternative processional route to the more functional steps inside. The playground was the idea of Herz’s wife, Xenia, who suggested there should be laughter audible from the wards (and the couple helped to fund its construction with donations from their wedding guests). Herz says it is the first and only playground in Tambacounda – a city of almost 180,000 people. The project’s most important lesson is in what it lacks: air-conditioning. Tambacounda gets swelteringly hot, reaching more than 40C (104F) in April, giving it the nickname Tangacounda, “house of heat” in the local Wolof language. It is located in the middle of the wide, flat, tropical savanna, where the air barely moves. But by using basic climate design principles – drawn from Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew’s 1956 book, Tropical Architecture in the Humid Zone – the wards can be kept cool with just ceiling fans (although air-conditioning is still required in the operating theatre). The first trick is the double-skin vaulted roof, with a corrugated metal layer suspended above a concrete one below, creating a thermal buffer that helps to draw air up through holes in the ceiling. The walls are built from hollow concrete bricks that allow air to pass through, while being deep enough to shade the interior from direct sunlight. Rammed earth was considered, but Herz says it was safer to use a technique that local builders were familiar with, given other logistical challenges. The 50,000 bricks were made on site using a single mould, and dyed a reddish colour with iron oxide. Echoing the patterned doors, the exposed concrete ceilings were given a woven texture by sticking bamboo mats to the formwork. “It’s important that everything was made locally,” says Herz. “The windows were all fabricated in a nearby metal workshop, and all the builders come from here. It means that all the money goes to the region, not to an international consortium, and they will be able to operate and fix everything themselves.” The more hi-tech foreign equipment that is imported, the more there is to go wrong – as the doctors have found, with a faulty new operating table and anaesthetics equipment that has delayed their move into the building. The local production process also allowed further experimentation, which led to an unexpected bonus. At one point, Herz asked for a mockup facade to be built on site to test the effects of different sized holes in the bricks. Leading the construction process was Dr Magueye Ba, a medical doctor-turned-builder, who has overseen a number of Le Korsa’s projects. Ba realised that a local village school was in need of a classroom, so rather than simply building a test wall that would be demolished, he made a little building for them, formed of several bays of the hospital. It stands proudly on the edge of the village, its jaunty roofline poking up from the grassy savanna, almost doubling the capacity of the school. Ba has since used the hollow bricks on another kindergarten project, their distinctive curved silhouette spawning something of a new local vernacular. “It’s the perfect outcome,” says Herz. “I’m not in control any more – the design has taken on a life of its own.” • For more information on the work of Le Korsa, see aflk.org.Jarvis Cocker has teamed up with the electronic DJ Riton to release what he calls “the world’s first sustainable banger” to encourage action to address the climate crisis. Let’s Stick Around, released on Thursday to coincide with Cop26, brings together one of the figureheads of Britpop with a powerhouse of electronic dance music. “Anybody with any sense is passionate about the climate emergency, it’s moving more into the centre of everybody’s consciousness,” Cocker said. The former Pulp frontman was approached to do the vocals last year by the Grammy-nominated Riton and Ben Rymer, who together make up Gucci Soundsystem. “It seemed appropriate to unleash it on an unsuspecting world during Cop26,” Cocker said. “A lot of debates in the modern world devolve into people shouting at each other from opposite corners of a room. The idea was that anybody could dance to this song and agree with it. That’s what music does so well. It brings people together.” Cocker has long been an advocate for climate action. His concerts have featured stalls for Extinction Rebellion, some of whose members joined him on the Q awards red carpet in 2019. He said it was “hard to get a sense of the stilted announcements” at Cop26, which involved a lot of “discussions behind closed doors … There’s still the idea that there’s an elite of people who are going to tell you how the world works.” An issue such as climate change that affects everyone also needed to include everyone, he said. Cocker, who is performing in Glasgow on Thursday with his solo band Jarv Is …, lamented the fact that air travel was cheaper than rail. “I’m getting the train to Glasgow, but while that’s the situation, nothing’s going to change that much.” He said climate solutions should not hinge on asking people to give things up, “because it’s never going to work. It’s about doing things differently, like the experimentation with hydrogen fuel. Aeroplanes aren’t going to disappear, it’s just daft to think that people aren’t going to go on holiday any more.” His song (Cunts Are Still) Running the World has become an epic singalong on his current tour, but Cocker said he had been in two minds over whether to include it in the setlist. The late Tony Benn had taken him to task over the track, warning against cynicism and nihilism. “He said you’ve got to believe in the democratic process. I took that to heart. But unfortunately, I still feel that the song is appropriate.” Earlier this year Cocker released an album of French music to accompany Wes Anderson’s latest film, The French Dispatch. But the Sheffield-born singer, who has spent much of his life in Paris, where his son is based, said it was dispiriting that musicians were still having trouble touring in Europe post-Brexit. “It’s still really complicated and expensive,” he said. “Normally we would be preparing after this tour to do some shows in Europe.” Cocker said Pulp’s Common People, one of the biggest-selling records of the 90s – with lyrics centred on a meeting at Central Saint Martins – might not have been written today if government plans to limit the number of arts students go ahead. “This idea that arts is not a proper job or a proper thing to study is stupid,” he said. “Creativity is the centre of the human experience. The first things that show you that people were alive are cave paintings or little bone carvings. It’s how humans say we exist. It’s not some kind of fringe pursuit. “My life would have been so different if I hadn’t had that opportunity to go to Saint Martins at the time that I did. But that kind of opportunity isn’t open to people from my kind of background any more. And that just makes me very angry and very sad.”In summer 2018, photographers Parker Hill and Isabel Bethencourt were at the tail-end of a road trip from Montana to Austin when they were diverted to a gas station in a small Texas military town. It was two in the morning, but the truck that pulled up next to them was thrumming with energy – music blasting, a group of barefoot teenage girls spilling out of the cab, charisma free-flowing and uncut. The groups hit it off, and soon Hill and Bethencourt were careening down a dirt road toward a high school party of about 15. Cameras out, they asked the teens about their lives: what’s it like to be you? What are you dealing with? What do you want to talk about? “They had so much to say”, Hill told the Guardian. “It really felt like they had been jones-ing to talk about what it was like to be them and no one had ever asked.” The boys talked about their jobs, the impending horizon of adulthood and the eclipsing window of carefree partying. But the girls were more forthright and circumspect about the negotiations they’d already made, the shit they’d already handled by 16. “They all felt like they had to grow up really early, and that they were more mature than they wanted to be at their age,” said Bethencourt. Few people had asked, and fewer had listened. The photographers returned to New York, with the feeling that there was more to hear and say. So they direct messaged some of the girls on Instagram and asked if they’d be interested in welcoming a camera into their lives for a bit. The answer was typical teenage casual: text us when you’re here. The resulting debut film, Cusp, captures the lives of three girls from that Texas night – best friends Brittney, Autumn and Aaloni, all 15 or 16 years old — during a pivotal mid-high school summer of their lives. Filmed mostly between March and August 2019, the 83-minute documentary, which premiered at Sundance this year and will air on Showtime after a theatrical release this month, lingers on the unvarnished treasures of a golden adolescent summer: purple twilight skies, fries in the McDonald’s parking lot, a tallboy of cheap beer at a field party, friends sardined in back seats and tangled up in bed. It also observes the casual festering of open emotional wounds: remnants of sexual trauma, powerlessness so normalized it fades in to the background, shapeless futures and adults who let them down again and again. Brittney, disaffected and impulsive, looks 12 or 20 depending on the weight of her eye makeup and avoids being alone through partying, alcohol and an older boyfriend who demands near-constant contact. Autumn, the most sardonic and wise of the three, finds her self-confidence cratered by a sudden breakup with the only boy she trusted. Aaloni, the youngest of the trio, is part older sister and part mother to her tight-knit family, rocked by the return of her father, a military man who struggles with PTSD; he never appears on camera, but his rage, often directed at the daughters he can’t control, terrifies from outside the frame. If there’s a plot to the film beyond the passage of time strung between parties and debriefs and couch hangs and one communal nipple piercing, it would be the film-makers’ dawning realization, and the girls’ burgeoning articulation, of just how much trauma lays about, and the toxic masculinity they’ve weathered. Hill and Bethencourt’s cameras catch an underlying power imbalance that pokes through all the house parties and car hangs. The girls were quieter around the boys, and younger. Many of the boys own and play with guns. The boys have the cars, the houses to party in, the alcohol, the drugs. They also have the leverage of physical strength, and their own terms of consent. “She was intoxicated and he was intoxicated, too. It’s not rape if they’re both intoxicated,” one boy says at a party when the girls bring up an incident with another friend. Autumn puts it bluntly: girls are scared to say no because “guys are powerful”, and they don’t listen anyway. It’s 2019, but the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements are distant, vague ideas to Autumn, Aaloni and Brittney, who often hold a phone in one hand and a Juul in the other, but whose social media is hyper-local (Facebook for garage sales, Snapchat for parties and hangouts). The social movements whose discourse, if not intent, have at least become the norm in mass media are absent here. Over the course of filming, each of the girls opened up about non-consensual sexual experiences, details of which are recounted in the second half of the film – ignored nos, gaslit “why didn’t you do anything to stop it?” defenses, wars of consent attrition they never felt they could win. Two of the girls were abused as children by friends of their parents, trauma they explain with steely, chagrined frankness. A vortex of shame, guilt, fury and confusion churns on-screen, as the girls start to process with their words. “A lot of them explained it with an asterisk – like ‘oh, that’s my fault,’ or ‘I should have said no,’” said Hill. “They kind of explained it away.” Brittney recalls losing her virginity, which she says she never intended to do: “I just couldn’t say no, I don’t really even know why, I was just so scared to say no.” Brittney, in particular, evinces what Bethencourt and Hill call “survival tactics” for their specific minefield of toxic masculinity and violence. It’s wrong that her boyfriend expects her to be with him every night, she tells Aaloni and Autumn, but complying is preferable than him being mad at her. I recalled how when I was in high school in the early 2010s, it was common knowledge, a joke, to avoid a certain popular guy at a party after 10pm, or how many of us followed through with bad sex because shutting down felt less risky than speaking up. Fucked up in retrospect, practical in the moment; it just made life easier to take it on yourself, as all three girls do throughout the film. “So many of them say, ‘just pick and choose your battles,’” said Hill. “And that like, they’d rather be ok with that, and swallow that kind of thing, or let someone talk to them a certain way because it’s better than that guy being angry, or it’s better than not knowing how you’re getting home tonight.” The guys are older, bigger, often armed; the girls have a good time, get plastered, but the threats of physical violence are looming traps to dance around and blitz through. The duality of the teenage girl experience – carefree and fragile, supreme confidence and consuming self-doubt, the joy and the threat of people you know – can be “easy to overlook”, said Bethencourt. “We really wanted people to reflect on their own teenage-hood experience and to see what is really going on today.” The phones, music and video games have changed, at least in the ten years since I graduated; the default power dynamics have not. Cusp ends as summers do: with the return to school, which Brittney and Autumn have since graduated (Aaloni is a senior). It’s a change of scenery, not stability. “We’re all confused, because there is no normal – there’s no normal in teenage years,” Autumn says at one point in the film. She may not be able to count on many around her to listen, but she demonstrates faith in putting words to it, validating the ride. Cusp is out in US cinemas on 12 November and will air on Showtime on 26 November with a UK date to be announcedAn unexpected agreement between the US and China to work together on cutting emissions has been broadly welcomed by leaders and climate experts. The world’s two biggest emitters appeared to put aside their differences at the Cop26 climate summit and on Wednesday unveiled a joint declaration that would see close cooperation on emissions cuts that scientists say are needed in the next 10 years to stay within 1.5C. The agreement calls for “concrete and pragmatic” regulations in decarbonisation, reducing methane emissions and fighting deforestation, Chinese climate envoy Xie Zhenhua said in Glasgow. The two countries will revive a working group that will “meet regularly to address the climate crisis and advance the multilateral process, focusing on enhancing concrete actions in this decade,” the joint declaration said. Global leaders and climate experts broadly welcomed the agreement, with UN secretary general Antonio Guterres calling the move “an important step in the right direction”. Genevieve Maricle, director of US climate policy action at WWF, said the world’s two largest economies “have the power to unlock vast financial flows from the public and private sectors that can speed the transition to a low carbon economy.” A US-China bilateral agreement in 2014 gave a huge push to the creation of the historic Paris accord the following year, but that cooperation stopped with the Trump administration, which pulled America out of the pact. “While this is not a gamechanger in the way the 2014 US-China climate deal was, in many ways it’s just as much of a step forward given the geopolitical state of the relationship,” said Thom Woodroofe, an expert in US-China climate talks. “It means the intense level of US-China dialogue on climate can now begin to translate into cooperation.” EU climate policy chief Frans Timmermans agreed the pact gave room for hope. “It shows … that the US and China know this subject transcends other issues. And it certainly helps us here at Cop26 to come to an agreement,” Timmermans told Reuters. The Climate Council head of research, Dr Simon Bradshaw, described the focus on accelerating action this decade as “significant”. Still, some experts noted the declaration was short on commitments that would significantly reduce heat-trapping gases. “It’s a good sign that the world’s two biggest emitters can actually work together to face the biggest crisis of humanity but there’s not a lot of meat there after the methane stuff,” said Byford Tsang a China policy analyst for the European think tank E3G. Bernice Lee, research director at Chatham House, said while cooperation between the US and China was positive “details remain patchy”. “The statement is not enough to close the deal. The real test of Washington and Beijing is how hard they push for a 1.5C-aligned deal here in Glasgow.” The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this reportTop story: Cox’s commitment to MP role questioned Morning everyone. This is Martin Farrer bringing you the day’s top stories. Sir Geoffrey Cox has earned at least £6m from his second job since he entered parliament, a Guardian analysis reveals, and records show that he skipped 12 recent votes on days when he was doing paid legal work. The revelations came as Boris Johnson tried to reassure the public that the UK was “not remotely a corrupt country” as the Conservative party continued to be engulfed in a slew of sleaze allegations. Johnson skipped a parliamentary debate on the sleaze row on Monday, but yesterday he said MPs who broke the rules “should be punished”. Cox insists he has acted within the rules. The prime minister did not defend Cox, the former attorney general who has been under fire after it emerged he spent a month in the British Virgin Islands this year doing paid legal work. Cox, who is a QC, has reported earnings for his second job of £930,588 in 2021 so far. In a statement he insisted that he “regularly works 70-hour weeks and always ensures that his casework on behalf of his constituents is given primary importance and fully carried out”. Here’s an explainer about the main controversies around his second job. * * * Cop breakthrough – In a remarkable turnaround at the Cop26 climate summit, China and the US announced a surprise plan to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions in the crucial next decade. Talks are still going on over a draft outcome in Glasgow but news that the world’s two biggest emitters will cooperate closely on the emissions cuts needed in the next 10 years to stay within 1.5C could galvanise negotiators towards a deal. World leaders and experts welcomed the agreement but some called for more details. Earlier, Chinese leader Xi Jinping warned against a return to cold war-era tensions in the Asia-Pacific, but urged greater cooperation on pandemic recovery and the climate crisis. * * * NHS ‘breaking point’ – Nine out of 10 NHS chief executives, chairs and directors say the service is under unsustainable pressure and patient safety is being put at risk. The health service has hit “breaking point”, the leaders say in a survey, with record numbers of patients seeking care. The use of whole genome sequencing could save the NHS millions of pounds, according to a study which found that a quarter of people with rare illnesses received a diagnosis for their condition through the technology. * * * Meghan apology – The Duchess of Sussex has apologised in court for failing to remember authorising a senior aide to brief the authors of her and Harry’s unofficial biography. Meghan submitted a statement in which she said she could not remember emails between her and her then press secretary about the unauthorised book. But the court of appeal heard that the royal couple’s former communications secretary provided information on a “routine basis” to the authors of Finding Freedom. The court is hearing an appeal by Associated Newspapers to force a trial over Meghan’s claims against the Mail on Sunday of breach of privacy and copyright. * * * Tesla selloff – Tesla boss Elon Musk has sold about $5bn worth of shares in the company, days after he polled Twitter users about selling 10% of his stake. In his first share sale since 2016, Musk’s trust sold nearly 3.6m shares in Tesla, worth around $4bn, while he also sold another 934,000 shares for $1.1bn. Musk polled Twitter users on Saturday about selling 10% of his stake, helping to push down Tesla’s share price. But filings show some of the stock sale was planned in September * * * Dino doctor – A new species of dinosaur with an extremely large nose has been identified by a retired doctor who spent lockdown rummaging through boxes of ancient bones. Jeremy Lockwood, who is studying for a PhD, decided to catalogue every iguanodon bone discovered on the Isle of Wight. He found a specimen with a unique “bulbous” nasal bone and eventually discovered that it was a new species, which has been named Brighstoneus simmondsi. Today in Focus podcast: a British betrayal During the second world war, Chinese sailors served alongside their British allies in the merchant navy, keeping supply lines open to the UK. But after the war hundreds of them who had settled in Liverpool suddenly disappeared. Now their children are piecing together the truth. Lunchtime read: how the wellness sector rejected Covid science Its gurus increasingly promote vaccine scepticism, conspiracy theories and the myth that ill people have themselves to blame. Sirin Kale investigates how the well-being industry turned so nasty. Sport Eoin Morgan said his England side were devastated after losing a thrilling and desperately close T20 World Cup semi-final to a New Zealand side turbo-boosted to glory by an innings of swashbuckling brilliance by Jimmy Neesham. Pakistan face underdogs Australia in the other semi-final today. Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall, praised the impact of the 500-strong away contingent present for their 5-1 win over the organised Danish champions HB Køge in the Women’s Champions League. Paris St-Germain women’s midfielder Aminata Diallo has been taken into custody for questioning by Versailles police after an attack on one of the club’s players last week. Aston Villa are confident of naming Steven Gerrard on a long-term deal as their new manager. World Rugby is being urged to help bridge the widening north-south financial divide by confirming Australia as the host nation of the 2027 men’s Rugby World Cup. Sam Underhill says England are dealing with Covid disruption before their match against Australia on Saturday by facing the problem head-on. UK Athletics’ controversial chief executive Jo Coates was earning a salary package of £226,163 before she resigned last month, making her one of the highest paid administrators in British Olympic sport, the Guardian can reveal. Tyson Fury was “very badly injured” going into his knockout victory over Deontay Wilder last month and has since undergone elbow surgery to correct the problem. And Gerald Sinstadt, one of the most recognisable sports commentators for BBC and ITV for more than 40 years, has died aged 91. Business Pressure on central banks to raise rates looks certain to increase after rising energy costs and supply shortages sent inflation surging in the US and China. The news sent the US dollar soaring, which means the pound is down to $1.340 and €1.168. The outlook for the FTSE100 is flat this morning. Monitoring of workers and setting performance targets through algorithms is damaging employees’ mental health and needs to be controlled by new legislation, according to MPs and peers. The papers There is a divide among the papers today with several leading on the sleaze latest, including the Guardian: “MP Cox made at least £6m from his second job”. The Mail sticks the boot into the government with “£5.5m MP with no shame” and the Mirror’s splash is “Exposed: Tory MP’s homes greed”.The i warns “Chief whip in peril over MP moonlighting in Caribbean”. Others make merry with the Duchess of Sussex’s court apology. “Little Miss Forgetful” says the Sun, while the Express declares “Explosive new evidence: Meghan says sorry”. The Telegraph has “Meghan admits she ‘misled’ court”. The Times has neither story on its front page and instead leads with “Fraud fears over firms’ furlough millions”. The FT has “US consumer prices increase at fastest pace in three decades”, while in Scotland the Record leads with the ambulance crisis latest: “Beyond breaking point”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Taliban’s announcement that it plans to ban the production of opium in Afghanistan does not faze seasoned dealer Ahmed Khan*. “They could not fund their war if there were no opium,” says Khan, who operates out of Baramcha, close to the border with Pakistan. He has traded in the drug for a quarter of a century and is confident that the group cannot really afford for trade to stop. “There would be a backlash from the poppy farmers, drug lords and the public if the Taliban bans the opium production. The Taliban has benefited the most from opium production over 20 years.” Afghanistan is the largest opium producer in the world, accounting for more than 80% of global production between 2015 and 2020, and generating millions of dollars annually. According to the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), an estimated 6,300 tonnes of opium was harvested in Afghanistan last year, an amount that can produce up to 290 tonnes of pure heroin. The amount of land given over to poppy production rose by more than a third between 2019 and 2020, to 224,000 hectares (553,516 acres). But in his first press conference after the Taliban swept to power in August, the group’s spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid, announced drug production would stop. “From now on, nobody’s going to get involved [in the heroin trade], nobody can be involved in drug smuggling,” he said. The announcement immediately saw prices of opium almost double, from 55,000 afghani (£445) for 4.5kg to 100,000 afghani (£810), says Khan. “But now the traders know it won’t be banned, the prices have come down to £510,” says Khan, who predicts “there will be a boom in the opium trade” now the Taliban is back in power. It’s not just Khan who doesn’t believe the Taliban can or will ban production. With the economy collapsing and a drought pushing millions into hunger, Taliban officials in the south are warning there is no viable alternative for farmers. “Farmers are faced with a looming threat of drought. Farmlands and orchards are badly affected and that will force many farmers to grow poppies because it remains the only lifeline,” Abdul Ahad, the governor of Helmand province, where the vast majority of opium is grown, told the Guardian. “If the international community does not accept our demands and the demands of civilians, farmers and the government, the farmers would go back to poppy cultivation because we have no other option. “The international community should help in making dams, provide seeds and help the farmers to grow other crops.” Attempts by the US to choke off the trade, spending $8bn over 15 years destroying crops and labs, made little headway. Although the previous leader of the Taliban, Mullah Omar, officially banned the cultivation and trafficking of opium in 2000, the trade continued. The past 30 years have seen Baramcha transform from a desolate southern town to the centre of Afghanistan’s opium industry – and in a region that remained under Taliban control throughout the US-led occupation. The Taliban taxed traders and traffickers before allowing them to pass through their checkpoints into Pakistan. In 2019, the latest year for which UNODC has data, the Taliban and other non-state actors collected up to $113m in opiate taxes. In 2017, which saw a record harvest, up to $350m was collected. Khan says he sells at least 50 tonnes of opium a year to buyers in Baramcha, who then smuggle the drug into Pakistan’s south-west province of Balochistan. Crossing mountainous and rugged terrain, the smugglers head west into Iran. Some Afghan farmers are now harvesting up to three poppy crops a year, instead of one, to meet demand. In Musa Qala, Mohammed Yaqoob stands amid a field of white and pink poppy blossoms that lies beyond a dried up riverbed. The roads in this region of Helmand province are full of potholes, the result of mines and bomb blasts from years of fighting. Yaqoob has farmed opium in these fields for more than 20 years. He grows other crops, but it is opium that puts food on the table. “We don’t have any other way to earn any money,” says Yaqoob, who can make about £2,000 in a good season. “If the Taliban would ban opium farming, it means they would want us to starve, which I don’t think they would do. We will resist it.” He adds: “I want the foreigners to leave us Afghans alone and only help us by providing us with seeds and other facilities for agriculture, then we may grow something else other than opium. Otherwise, there is no alternative for us.” Amrullah, who goes by one name, agrees. He has been farming opium in Musa Qala for four decades. He doesn’t own the land, but is responsible for farming and taking care of the crops. In return, he gets a quarter of the earnings, which brings in between £4,000 and £7,000 a year. “We don’t get anything from wheat and vegetables, which need a lot of water and can’t supplement our income,” Amrullah says. “I have earned good money [from opium] from 2015 to 2019, but due to the intense war and drought the crop was affected. As the Taliban are back in power, we are hopeful that we will cultivate poppy and work in peace.” * Name changed Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Law has a reputation for being a particularly demanding field of study. But the truth is getting a law degree doesn’t have to be a several year endeavour - in fact, it’s now possible to become a legal practitioner by the age of 21. A typical undergraduate law degree takes four years of full-time study, though many students opt for a double degree that adds another year or two at university. But to speed matters up, Curtin Law School offers an accelerated law degree that can be completed in just three years. For school leavers, that means you could be done by age 21. The idea behind the accelerated program is simple. “The best way to learn about legal practice is to do it,” says Professor Robert Cunningham, the Dean of Curtin Law School. “One of the things Curtin Law School prides itself on is being able to prepare students to move into the real world of legal practice. My view is that the sooner you start practising, the sooner you’re able to learn on the job.” “The best way to learn about legal practice is to do it,” says Professor Robert Cunningham. To get students into the workforce in just three years, Curtin Law School moves to a trimester system in the degree’s second and third years - meaning there are three study periods in a year, rather than the traditional two. The course has the same number of units as a four-year program, but runs over more weeks of the year. It’s about increasing the speed at which a student can undertake the course material, “not taking any shortcuts in terms of the actual content delivery”, Cunningham says. There is one small caveat. In order to become a legal practitioner, graduates also need to complete 20 weeks of what’s called practical legal training, or PLT, which takes an additional six months. At Curtin, however, moving from your degree to practical legal training is pretty simple. Curtin is the only university in WA that offers a complete pathway from high school to legal practice, as it also runs a PLT program approved by the Legal Practice Board of Western Australia. After completion of the PLT program you’ll be a legal practitioner ready to start work. And Cunningham believes a 25-year-old who has spent three or four years in the workforce would have the edge over someone the same age who’s only just completed their degree. To get students into the workforce in just three years, Curtin Law School moves to a trimester system in the degree’s second and third years. “I know that if I was looking to employ a 25-year-old ... and I had the choice between someone who is just beginning practice now or someone who had been practising for three or four years, personally I’d much prefer to engage the person that has had that significant practice under their belt,” he says. And there’s no shortage of job options for those with a law degree under their belt. Cunningham says about half of Curtin Law School LLB graduates enter legal practice. The other half do “a whole variety of things” - going into everything from journalism to politics to working in the international sphere, for the likes of the United Nations. His advice to graduates is to follow your interests. “Often when students begin their legal studies they’re doing so because they care about something,” Cunningham says. “They might have a calling in relation to social justice, or they might care about the environment, or they might care about human rights. Whatever it is, maintaining that interest, and then finding a way to be able to marry it to the law is really important.” “You’re running a marathon, not a sprint. You’ve got to make sure that what you’re doing will sustain you in the long term.” But first, when it comes to getting through the law degree, Cunningham doesn’t actually advocate for a tunnel vision focus on your studies. Instead, he says, you’re better off prioritising a work-life balance. “All the best lawyers that I know have interests outside of the law,” Cunningham says. “What can often happen in an intense area of study like law is that people can tend to give up their other interests. Someone might be interested in sport, or in playing musical instruments, or learning another language,” he says. “But I think given that a lot of what we do in the law is work that involves the mind, it’s very important for students to look after their state of mind as they move through their studies. So maintaining interests outside of the law, I think, is actually really important in being able to maintain perspective.” Starting a law degree shouldn’t have to feel daunting. Through an accelerated program, you can be done in three years - with plenty of time for pursuing your favourite hobbies on the weekend. “All the best lawyers that I know have interests outside of the law,” Cunningham says, “because it makes them a more well-rounded person and a more well-rounded professional.” Learn more about Law at Curtin University.All of the accommodation on this list had some availability between 27 December and 3 January at the time of publication Sherborne West Lodge, Cotswolds Pack walking boots and comfy slippers for a stay at this lovely semi-detached cottage, which forms half of the lodge house on the Sherborne Estate. Period touches – original fireplaces and traditional dark-wood furniture – give a classic, cosy feel, while outside the estate stretches for more than 115 hectares, with walks from the door. It’s a lovely, secluded base for two, with several of the Cotswolds’ most beautiful villages within a few miles, and a great pub, the Fox Inn, under 10 minutes’ drive. A week from 29 Dec costs £899, four-nights from £622, sleeps 2, nationaltrust.org.uk The Old Army Cinema, east Kent Gather up a group of friends for a unique stay in this cleverly converted former Church Hall in the small village of Ruckinge, overlooking the Romney Marsh. The huge, open-plan living space is ideal for a New Year’s Eve celebration, with a large, wooden kitchen island, dining table and lounge area – meaning that no one spends the evening slaving away in the kitchen on their own. Walk off any thick heads with the lovely one-mile amble to the White Horse in Bilsington, or a stroll along the Royal Military Canal, which passes just south of the village and extends from Hythe on the coast, past Rye in East Sussex to Cliff End. Port Lympne safari park is on the doorstep, too. A week from 29 Dec costs £3,110, three-nights from 29 Dec costs £2,492, sleeps nine, bramleyandteal.co.uk Kale Pot Cottage, North York Moors Walkers, nature-lovers or those craving a little post-Christmas quiet will enjoy this delightful converted barn, surrounded by miles of unspoilt countryside in the North York Moors national park. Sleeping up to five in two bedrooms, it has walking and cycling trails from the front door, the North Yorkshire Moors Railway runs nearby (Newtondale Halt is a mile away), while the ancient market town of Pickering is about 10 miles to the south and Whitby 18 miles to the north. Pick up supplies on the way in and hole up for the week; with no mobile signal, Kale Pot offers the perfect opportunity to really get away from it all. A week from 29 Dec costs £700, sleeps five, northyorkmoorscottage.co.uk Bwthyn Stabal, Llŷn Peninsula, Gwynedd Set in the grounds of an 18th-century manor house, this three-bedroom cottage has a cosy, home-from-home feel, with lovely views towards the sea (the beach is a five-minute walk away). A third, single bedroom makes it ideal for a family travelling with a grandparent – or a teenager who wants their own space. Snowdonia is on the doorstep and the charming town of Criccieth, overlooked by its ruined castle, is an easy walk from the house, with a clutch of excellent restaurants and its own butcher and fishmonger – perfect for cooking up a NYE feast. A week from 29 Dec costs from £1,134, sleeps five, quality cottages.co.uk Argaty Cottage, Stirlingshire A new year’s break for nature lovers, Argaty Cottage – a 15-minute drive north of Stirling – is on the eponymous estate, famous for its red squirrels and large numbers of red kites. The cottage itself is chic and comfortable, with three bedrooms, a gleaming new kitchen and a logburner in the sitting room. The nearby Deanston Distillery is the place to pick up a tipple or two for New Year’s Eve, and guests at the cottage receive a discount on ranger-led visits to see the kites and squirrels, and on ATV buggy tours of the estate. A week from 27 Dec costs £750, three nights £375, sleeps six, argatycottage.com Crow’s Nest, south Dorset Once you’re through the doors of this – from the outside – slightly unprepossessing house at Owermoigne, you’ll find a fantastic space for an extended family, or two families holidaying together, with a sociable, open-plan downstairs, that combines a kitchen with central island, a long dining table and cosy lounge area with logburner. Teenagers will love the separate snug, with its own TV and PlayStation, and the house’s proximity to Lulworth Cove and Durdle Door (six miles) means the New Year’s Day walk is easily sorted. A week from 29 Dec costs £3,523, four-nights from 29 Dec costs £3,168, sleeps 13, plus three dogs, holidaycottages.co.uk Stable Cottage at Draycott, Somerset Take the whole family – including the dog – for a week over the new year deep in the Somerset countryside, at this elegantly converted barn on a working farm. The original beams and woodburning stove make it a perfect winter retreat, and younger children will love exploring the surrounding farm – including the chance to spot barn owls, partridges and pheasants. Nearby Yeovil is perfect for stocking up on provisions for a New Year’s Eve dinner, and local footpaths encompass everything from gentle strolls to hangover-busting hikes. A week from 30 Dec costs £1,371, four nights £1,253, ruralretreats.co.uk The Old Presbytery, Devon Discover the glorious beaches of the north Devon coast – Croyde, Saunton Sands and Westward Ho! – free of summer crowds with a stay at this elegant house perched above the surf-obsessed town of Braunton. This is a real treat of a house, with a state-of-the-art kitchen, long oak dining table and a wooden-floored, firelit lounge that is ideal for chilly winter nights. The additional snug means no squabbling about what to watch on TV, and the large, wraparound garden is ideal for younger members to run off excess energy. A week from 29 Dec costs £2,706, sleeps 8, classic.co.uk Cheltenham Cottage, Cotswolds A great choice for a family that wants the facilities of a hotel with the independence of a cottage stay, Cheltenham Cottage is one of 12 traditional Cotswold-stone houses on the Bruern Etate, surrounded by a couple of hectares of delightful gardens. The two-bedroom cottage has a large, open-plan drawing room and kitchen, firelit lounge and a four-poster bed in the master bedroom. Beyond the house, there is a huge array of activities, including an adventure playground and two play areas, swimming pool, spa and gym, with bikes to borrow and an award-winning gastropub, the Kingham Plough, a short walk away. A week from 30 Dec costs £2,020, four nights from £1,861, sleeps four, , bruern-holiday-cottages.co.uk The Bolthole, Kendal, Lake District An ideal choice if you want a little buzz on New Year’s Eve but plenty of peaceful country walks on either side of the festivities, this charming cottage has a light and airy open-plan downstairs, with a stylish en suite bedroom above. The market town of Kendal has plenty of pubs and restaurants (including the Rifleman’s Arms, a minute’s walk from the cottage), all of which are easily walkable, and Windermere is a 20-minute drive away. A week from 30 Dec costs £734, sleeps two, sykescottages.comI am always honoured to make the acquaintance of servicemen and women, be they still serving or veterans. Listening to them is fascinating, like hearing an astronaut talk about what it’s like to walk on the moon, so alien is their experience to me. I learn so much, yet what I have come to know most surely is just how much is unknown. At the heart of Remembrance Day is our Cenotaph, a word I must confess I’ve only just learned is derived from the Greek κενός τάφος, kenos taphos, meaning “empty tomb”. Around the corner from the Cenotaph, the unknown soldier lies at rest in Westminster Abbey. But so much else is unknown, too. What was any of it, any war, any conflict, any exercise, really like? The rest of us can’t know, no matter how many books we read or films we watch or even how many recollections we listen to. We can never know viscerally how it felt in any theatre of war. The more you think about it, the more the unknowns pile up. In any given conflict, do we really know what happened? Can we ever be sure what was being fought for and why? The consequences may remain uncertain – and what of those who never knew what happened in the end? In country churchyards, I’m always troubled by the graves of anyone who died in, say, the early 1940s, for whom even the outcome of that war remained unknown. The answers often die with those who could have given them. My friend Paul Cook, drummer with the Sex Pistols, tells me his dad, Tom, whom I enjoyed the odd pint with, never spoke about his service in the second world war. And in turn his dad, Paul’s grandad, never talked about his record in the Great War. Neither was among the fallen, but the unknowns lived with them and then lived on without them. Today is well named because, in the end, remembering is not only something we have to do, it is the only thing we can do. Making sense of it all is impossible. Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistThroughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Manut Boonpayong, Samut Songkhram province, Thailand I have farmed all of my life. Since I was seven years old I’ve helped on my family’s farm, growing oranges. Farming itself is not hard, but the issues that I am facing are ones that I cannot manage, and which are unpredictable and uncontrollable. The main problem is lack of water. My farm, which is located in Bang Khonthi district in Samut Songkhram, near the coastline, needs fresh water for growing pomelo, coconuts and lychee. Global warming has caused the sea level to rise, but the amount of fresh water has reduced significantly. It doesn’t rain as much as before and the water level in the dam has decreased. There is not enough fresh water for the crops, or to push back the salty seawater, which makes the water in my area become brackish. This year has been worse than the previous years. For an entire month I could not get enough water. We dug into the canals to make them deeper. There is a network of about 366 canals in the province, which bring water to the farm. Digging into them has become a tradition. We do this for one or two days every month, but actually it’s not enough. The lack of water affects the quality and price of the fruit. The pomelo, which should contain a lot of water, turns out smaller and tastes different. Normally one pomelo would weigh 1.5kg-1.6kg, but when there is no water it shrinks to 1.2kg. Farmers would typically get 45 baht (£1) kilo, but because the quality is not as good, we would only get 20 baht per kilo instead. The lack of water in the dam means there isn’t enough freshwater to drive the salty water out to sea [which risks saltwater intrusion]. The coconut trees grow well in salty soil, and the coconut turns out sweeter, but the pomelo, my main crop, won’t grow. If the situation gets worse, farmers in my area will need to stop growing them. I have already changed the fruits I farm. I used to have over 100 lychee trees, but now I only have 28. Lychee is a local fruit in Samut Songkhram, but over the last 10 or 20 years it has become noticeably harder to grow. This change has coincided with the government building a lot of power plants in another nearby province. Local people can really tell that the heat in the atmosphere has increased a lot. Another problem we face is pests. These pests existed even in the past but now it’s like a pandemic of the pest. It is expanding at a severe rate. Pests such as coconut hispid [Plesispa reichei] and the coconut black-headed caterpillar [Opisina arenosella] have killed many of the coconut trees. Coconut isn’t my main crop, but I have already lost three or four trees and I’m waiting to burn 10 more. On top of this, we face storms. This year 24 homes were damaged and their roofs blown off. The storm has not been so strong in 10 years. I feel anxious about all these changes. Our children may not want to be farmers, because they have seen all the problems we have to face. Additional reporting by Navaon SiradapuvadolI am a British citizen who has had two doses of the Sinovac Covid vaccine while living in Chile, but it is not recognised by the UK government. My job requires me to travel often. As I’m not regarded as fully vaccinated, I am obliged to pay £136 for two Covid tests each time I return to the UK, quarantine for 10 days (the test-to-release scheme isn’t available in Wales where I live), and am barred from certain events. The NHS is only able to give me one dose of the Pfizer vaccine as I have already had two Sinovac jabs. MP, Wales Sinovac is manufactured in China and was validated for emergency use in June by the WHO. However, neither the UK nor the European Medicines Agency has yet approved it, although nine Schengen area countries have. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) told me it’s working to determine which of the international vaccines not currently licensed by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency can be recognised, which is of little consolation. According to the tourism trade association UKinbound, the issue is threatening livelihoods. “The UK’s lack of vaccine parity is detrimental to our recovery,” says Joss Croft, its chief executive. “International visitors sustain more than 500,000 jobs across the country, but many are choosing to visit alternative destinations where vaccines such as Sinovac are recognised.” Meanwhile, RWL of London and his wife have been struggling to get their Pfizer jabs recognised in the UK because they were administered while they were living in Israel. “We are being bugged by official reminders to get vaccinated. As far as the UK is concerned we have not been jabbed,” he writes. “The most we have managed to get is a note on our health record, but this does not translate into a Covid pass, so we are forced to take repeated tests.” The DHSC says: “We are urgently working to access the data for UK residents who have received their vaccinations abroad to ensure they can demonstrate their vaccination status via the NHS Covid pass.” An update is promised “shortly”. If the UK government’s Plan B is launched in England, they will become essential to access certain venues and services. In Scotland and Wales they already are. Last month, the UK government said it would recognise vaccine certificates issued by a large number of countries, provided they are written in English, French or Spanish, so you will no longer need to quarantine on arrival. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsRobin McLean’s first novel is set in the ranch country of the American west and centres on an episode of grotesque violence: the gang rape and near-murder of Ginny, who is thrown into a lime pit full of animal carcasses by her attackers and left to die. She survives and escapes, then steals a horse and flees into the mountains. A posse forms to follow her, intent on finishing her off. Around this plot, the book is extraordinarily capacious, often casually ranging in one paragraph through the experiences of all the animals in the scene. It travels back in geological time to the formation of the land on which the story takes place. It digresses to tell a folk tale about a bear husband, then later casually shows us a real bear painting stick figures of people on the walls of its cave as it awaits its human bride. It gives us a planned rebellion among a string of mules from the mules’ point of view, then from another point of view, then lets the rebellion’s echoes resound in a few science fictional sections set in the year 2179. The prose records not only the random thoughts but the pissing and shitting of its characters, and weaves them into a landscape where they coexist with “soil moving slow-constant, hawks slicing air, marmots digging, snakes winding in their holes with a soft slither sound that the wind drowned out”. It’s full of casually perfect writing, especially about animals and nature. “They unsaddled [the horse] and he skittered off and cantered a circus ring around the clearing, wide-eyed still.” “Hawks crisscrossed rim rock.” “The cliffs hung warm in last light. By morning the marmots would see their breath.” The crux of this review is that Pity the Beast is a work of crazy brilliance. It’s a worthy successor to William Faulkner and Toni Morrison, and the rare book that creates more space for later writers to work in. Everything McLean does is interesting. She writes dialogue in a way that’s truly ingenious, using it as a Greek chorus that often threatens to turn into music. Characters talk past each other, embroidering, digressing, quoting Shakespeare or the Bible, offering facts in illustration; and all speak rhythmically together as in a verse play. The prevailing impression is of many people singing in counterpoint. This is not a historical novel; if it’s taking place in any time at all, it’s the 21st century, but a 21st century that’s blundered out of history and become lost in the wilderness, where no one ever thinks of a television programme, video game, or a song, much less a social media platform. This makes it convincingly mythic, and the many biblical references feel integral – but so do the helicopters that occasionally fly over and the Milk Duds one character eats. McLean explodes the idea of human society in the first scene, explicitly equating people with beasts, then spends the rest of the novel exploring what it is to be a beast, what it is to be a mind, what it is to be alive. In a literary environment dominated by safe, simple, realist prose, it’s thrilling to see a novel with this much intellectual heft and aesthetic fearlessness. If I have any reservations, it’s that Pity the Beast is high gothic, and while it has the strengths of the form in spades, it also has its excesses. The novel is all grotesque images, gorgeous metaphors, scenery, portents and bloody deeds. The plot is a little incoherent, and the characters’ choices are motivated by metaphorical necessity, not by any recognisable psychology. When Ginny’s husband sews his own eye shut and covers it with a taffeta eye patch, we’re meant to understand what it symbolises, not ask ourselves if it’s plausible. Everyone has more or less the same personality – including the animals – and there’s a declamatory solemnity that persists even when the book is funny. Sometimes, in the midst of an action scene, it becomes impossible to tell what’s happening as everything disappears behind a cloud of great writing. The grandest, most hyper-significant passages have one foot in meaninglessness: “The universe was scented in her own sweat. Blackbruised-purple of prune skin, the pores broken open to disbelief and cold night air. Life was done. It was starting.” I do tend, though, to find the gothic ridiculous – and for me, this book was a reminder that, when you make it work, it’s absolutely glorious. Pity the Beast is hallucinatory and ribald and unaccountable, with serious things to say about society and the nature of mind. It reminds you that stream-of-consciousness is fascinating in the right hands, that tastelessness is a power, and that plot is not the only thing fiction knows how to do. Every time you try to resist its charms, it knocks you down again with careless beauty. Even when it stumbles, it stumbles more gracefully than most books dance. • Sandra Newman’s The Heavens is published by Granta. Pity the Beast is published by And Other Stories (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Britain’s recovery from its third Covid-19 lockdown slowed sharply over the summer as the economy’s growth was hit by rising infection rates, the pingdemic and global supply shortages. Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that national output expanded by 1.3% in the three months to September, leaving it still more 2.1% below its pre-crisis level in the fourth quarter of 2019. The third-quarter performance followed expansion of 5.5% in the three months to June – a period when restrictions on activity were being lifted. Staff shortages and supply constraints blunted the impact of the ending of remaining lockdown restrictions in July, with a poorer trade performance – influenced by more expensive imports of oil – also acting as a brake on growth. Of the three main parts of the economy, services recorded the fastest growth. A 30% jump in business for hotels and restaurants meant the sector – which accounts for about four-fifths of GDP – rose by 1.6% over the quarter. A 0.3% decline in manufacturing output restricted growth in the broader production sector to 0.8%, while construction recorded a 1.5% fall. The ONS figures show Britain’s economic recovery to have been slower than that of other developed nations, with the US 1.4% above its pre-pandemic peak and the eurozone 0.5% below. Of the three biggest economies in the single currency bloc, France is 0.1% below its pre-crisis level, Italy 1.4% down and Germany with 1.5% of GDP to catch up. Rishi Sunak said the economy was continuing to recover but the chancellor added: “As the world reopens we know that there are still challenges to overcome.” In September alone, gross domestic product grew by 0.6%, following a rise of 0.2% in August and a fall of 0.2% in July. Using monthly figures, which dates the pre-crisis peak in the economy to February 2020, GDP is 0.6% below the level before the global health crisis began. An increase of almost 5% in health output – caused by more face-to-face GP appointments – was largely responsible for September’s GDP figure beating expectations of a 0.4% increase. Paul Dales, a UK economist at Capital Economics, said that without the boost from health, the economy would have grown by just 0.1%. The ONS chief economist, Grant Fitzner, said: “Growth picked up in September and the UK economy is now only slightly below pre-pandemic levels. “This latest increase was led by the health sector, boosted by more visits to GP surgeries in England. Lawyers also had a busy month as house buyers rushed to complete purchases before the end of the stamp duty holiday. However, these were partially offset by falls in both the manufacture and sale of cars. “Notably, business investment remained well down on pre-pandemic levels in the three months to September. Meanwhile the trade deficit widened as goods exports to non-EU countries fell and imports – particularly of fuel – from non-EU countries increased.” Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “The latest data confirms that the UK’s economic recovery lost momentum in the third quarter as significant staff and supply shortages limited activity. “Although monthly output rebounded through the quarter from July’s contraction this is more likely to reflect a temporary boost from restrictions easing, rather than a meaningful improvement in the UK’s underlying growth trajectory.”A top adviser to Joe Biden has refused to say whether the US is comfortable with the way the Australian government handled talks with France ahead of the unveiling of the new Aukus submarines deal. Jake Sullivan, the US president’s national security adviser, said there was no point dwelling on the “challenges” surrounding the announcement of the new security partnership between the US, the UK and Australia, saying that “will be interesting for the historians to do at some point”. Sullivan also said on Thursday the Biden administration would engage in “stiff competition” with China but there was no reason that had to “turn into conflict or confrontation”. Addressing a webinar hosted by the Sydney-based Lowy Institute, Sullivan said the Biden administration had agreed to share sensitive nuclear submarine technology with Australia to send a signal to allies that “if you bet with us, we will bet with you”. France said in September it had been “stabbed in the back” by its friends and allies over the cancellation of Australia’s previous $90bn deal for French conventionally powered submarines in favour of the so-called Aukus partnership. In an attempt to mend ties, Biden told the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in Rome late last month that Aukus was handled clumsily and that he thought France had been informed earlier about the cancellation of the Australian submarine contract. It was unclear whether Biden was talking about the Australian government or his own staff or both. Sullivan was asked by the Lowy Institute executive director Michael Fullilove whether the Biden administration was comfortable with the way that Canberra had handled the Aukus announcement. He replied that he would “dodge” the question because “there’s no profit in revisiting how we got to where we are”. Sullivan acknowledged “that we have had to go through some challenges in dealing with the rollout” and the US had therefore sought to “engage intensively diplomatically with the French”. He said the US had put forward “a very strong and meaningful and substantive plan of action with the French on a range of issues, including relating to the Indo-Pacific” and it was time to get “digging in on the real work of Aukus”. “Where I sit today, the good news lies ahead, and we are going to redeem the vision our leaders laid out and it’s going to be an incredibly positive thing for our countries,” Sullivan said. “Going back through all the ins and outs of this will be interesting for the historians to do at some point, but as national security adviser I’ve got to keep sort of my eyes firmly fixed on the present and future.” Under the Aukus security partnership, announced in mid-September with much fanfare, the US, the UK and Australia will work together on issues including cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, and undersea capabilities. The first project is an 18-month joint study to find “the optimal pathway to deliver at least eight nuclear-powered submarines for Australia”. Apart from the immediate concerns about the diplomatic fallout with France, observers and politicians in Australia have raised concerns about Australia facing a “capability gap”, given the first submarines are not likely to be in the water until about 2040. The former Australian prime minister Paul Keating said on Wednesday the plan was “like throwing a handful of toothpicks at the mountain”. Sullivan said three countries were “deeply committed now to doing the actual work to make this happen in a way that delivers on the vision that our leaders laid out when they did the virtual event together back in September”. He said the US had agreed to share nuclear propulsion technology with Australia – more than 60 years after it shared it with the UK – to boost “our collective, combined capacity to produce greater stability, security and deterrence in the Indo-Pacific region”. “It’s about a statement of putting your money where your mouth is, when it comes to the rhetoric around alliances.” In broader remarks, Sullivan attempted to allay concerns about the Biden administration’s approach amid increasing tensions with China. He said the US would “compete vigorously” with China in a number of areas, including economics and technology, and would “stand up for our values”. But he said the US understood the need to “responsibly and collectively” manage the relationship. China and the US announced on Wednesday a surprise plan to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. “All of this talk of the United States and China going into a new cold war, or that we’re on our way to conflict, or the Thucydides Trap – we have the choice not to do that,” Sullivan said. Years after the Trump administration pulled the US out of what was then called the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, Sullivan said the Biden administration wanted to develop “a full, robust, attractive economic agenda to go along with our security and geopolitical agenda in the Indo-Pacific”. Sullivan said that strategy would address the kinds of modern challenges that Covid-19 exposed, “whether it’s in the realm of supply chains, or the intersection of climate and trade, or digital, or investment screening and export controls, across a number of areas that have not traditionally been part of trade agreements”. He said the US wanted to get “a whole bunch of countries aligned around that” vision. The US trade representative, Katherine Tai, and the US commerce secretary, Gina Raimondo, would visit Australia, New Zealand, south-east Asia and north-east Asia in the weeks ahead.The allocation of a $4bn fund that the Morrison government used for a controversial commuter car parks program would “amount to corruption” if a federal integrity commission existed, a former New South Wales auditor general has told a Senate inquiry. Despite the strong criticism, the Senate hearing on Thursday also heard from officials that the government can spend the remaining $890m in the urban congestion fund (UCF) wherever it likes, raising the prospect of a similar cash splash ahead of the next federal election. Tony Harris, the former NSW auditor general, said that under NSW law using public funds for electoral advantage would amount to corrupt conduct and applied this label to the car park fund, but the federal government lacks an integrity body to make such findings. Harris said the car park program appeared to be “motivated by electoral matters” and was therefore an “improper use of power” that could be challenged in the federal court. Chair of the Centre for Public Integrity, Anthony Whealy, told Thursday’s hearing of the finance and public administration references committee, that pork barrelling is “very serious” and a “misuse of public money”. On Thursday infrastructure department officials conceded it was “unusual”, but the government was entitled to select project sites without departmental input, in part, because the $4.8bn fund was not a competitive grants program. The comments raise concerns of further commitments being made regardless of merit, with Labor complaining the Coalition created 22 discretionary funds in the last budget from which to deliver money. In June the Australian National Audit Office released a scathing report on the $660m commuter car park element of the UCF, finding not one of the 47 sites promised by the Coalition at the 2019 election was selected by the department. Rather, sites were handpicked by the government on advice from its MPs and candidates. The ANAO has said projects were approved by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, after then-urban infrastructure minister, Alan Tudge, instructed staff to first consult marginal seat MPs, leading to a list of top 20 marginals being drawn up. Tudge has claimed he was “not aware” of the document, denied any wrongdoing and insisted projects were merit-based. On Thursday the ANAO’s executive director, Brian Boyd, said he had seen evidence of similar canvassing of MPs and candidates for the entire $4.8bn UCF, but the ANAO had not concluded whether that led to certain decisions being made. It is considering a further audit of the UCF next year. The infrastructure department deputy secretary, David Hallinan, told the hearing there was “usually” a role for the department in project selection and consultation “usually” occurs with a delivery partner first, such as a council or state government. But with respect to the car parks the department “largely wasn’t involved in the project selection”, he said, which was “unusual”. The first assistant secretary, Philip Smith, said the program was not a competitive grants program, but this did not mean it wasn’t merit-based. Projects were selected by the government, some of which were announced as election commitments, and then funded after the 2019 election through the National Land Transport Act and national partnership agreements. Asked if the decisions were appropriate, Smith responded that the government was entitled to select projects to be funded. Of the total $4.8bn UCF, $890m remains unallocated. Smith said it was a “matter for government” how that money was spent, and officials could not guarantee they would have any role in its allocation. Just four of the 47 car parks have been completed, with five under construction and a further seven to start construction this financial year. Asked about the Doncaster project, which the ANAO assessed was ineligible for funding, Hallinan conceded the process had been “untidy” but the government is “looking how best to deliver that commitment”. Hallinan said the project was only at the scoping and planning stage, and changes may be needed to authorise funding at the construction stage. Despite that claim, Boyd said the project had already been approved for its full $6m cost in May 2020. The deputy auditor general, Rona Mellor, said she couldn’t think of another example of a government retrospectively authorising such spending. Boyd said the car park fund was driven not by “investment principles” such as departmental analysis about commuter needs but from an electoral analysis of the seats in which projects were located. Earlier, Hallinan revealed the department sought legal advice about the ANAO’s powers, after a “request to access the minister’s records” with advice “not to inform the minister”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Hallinan said this caused him to “wonder whether it was appropriate” because he thought “natural justice” would require the person whose records were accessed to be informed. Hallinan refused to say what the legal advice said, but Labor senator Tim Ayres observed that the fact the ANAO report extensively discussed the canvassing process within Tudge’s office suggested access was granted. Mellor said the ANAO was consulted when the department sought to clarify its powers. Although she wouldn’t reveal the content of the advice, Mellor said “we’re confident our access powers are sufficient”. The urban infrastructure minister, Paul Fletcher, said the Australian government had authority to make the infrastructure investments in the UCF. “The [ANAO] report also found that there were no instances where the minister at the time had approved funding for a commuter car park project that had been recommended for rejection by the department,” he said. “Our Liberal National government is getting on with delivering on our promises under the Urban Congestion Fund: of 182 individual packages of work, 75 have completed or under way, and this is expected to rise to 97 by the end of this year.”Trinidad &amp; Tobago 1-2 Wales, May 2006 (friendly). Cap: one My first impressions were of a young, very skinny kid who was a bit shy. But you could see that smooth left foot, that speed, that composure and little flash of brilliance. As soon as he had his first touch, coming from a left-back position, he looked up and dribbled and it was almost like: ‘This is where I’m supposed to be.’ In the game he had zero fear. He ended up pulling the ball back for me for his first assist. Robert Earnshaw Wales 1-5 Slovakia, Oct 2006 (Euro 2008 qualifying). Cap: three The month before we had played Brazil – Ronaldinho, Kaká, Marcelo and everybody – at White Hart Lane. Ryan Giggs gets a free-kick in the first half in a shooting position and is stood over the ball and Gareth goes over. He wanted it but he also knew: ‘I can’t take this free-kick ahead of Ryan Giggs!’ He conceded Giggs was going to take it and Giggs had a little chuckle just before he took it. Ryan revealed at half-time that Gareth said: ‘Yeah, just don’t hit it too hard.’ We all burst out laughing because he was such a young kid, but that’s him. By now he wasn’t naive any more. He was starting to get a reputation for being really, really good at free-kicks. Every free-kick he was always saying: ‘Can I have it?’ This was his first Wales goal – that it was from a free-kick was fitting. RE Wales 2-1 Scotland, Oct 2012 (World Cup 2014 qualifying). Cap: 37 That game, definitely, was the shift to the superhero. He did his thing that he did in the [Copa del Rey] final [against Barcelona], where he ran off the pitch and back on, dribbling and collecting the ball on the other side, and in the end they were just trying to wrestle him down. But he was too strong, too fast, could jump higher than everyone else and could do things that no one else could do. We’d known Gaz for years and he was a good player but just another one of us – but at that moment he started to turn into something completely different. It was like seeing someone grow into their superpowers. Ashley Williams Andorra 1-2 Wales, Sept 2014 (Euro 2016 qualifying). Cap: 45 It was the first game of the campaign and we thought it was a great fixture. But we were on that artificial pitch, which is terrible, and conceded a penalty. Gaz equalised before half-time but we struggled and then we got the free-kick with 10 minutes to go. Gaz hit the wall but got to retake it and I knew he would score. The celebrations were amazing; the fans spilled on to the pitch. There was great relief. It was the first time we felt that we could qualify, really and truthfully. AW Israel 0-3 Wales, Mar 2015 (Euro 2016 qualifying). Cap: 49 Aaron Ramsey scored a looping header and Bale made it 2-0 with a free-kick from the right. He whipped it and one of the Israel players [Bibars Natcho] was scrambling to block it, trying, as you would do on Fifa, to get on the line. It was literally like a video game. There were so many big moments building up to the Euros where Gaz won games singlehandedly. He has changed Wales. The respect we have gained as a nation is thoroughly down to him being an unbelievable talent. Jonny Williams Wales 1-0 Belgium, June 2015 (Euro 2016 qualifying). Cap: 50 That one is the one for me, a huge moment in qualifying for the Euros. Belgium arrived with their superstars and if there was a man to pop up with a goal for the occasion … the stadium erupted. It was a great finish, through [Thibaut] Courtois’s legs from a tight angle. That was the game where we thought we were going to achieve something special. That team we had for those two or three years, the back of [Gary] Speed’s [tenure] and through to Coleman, was an unbelievable group. I had to up my game because I knew I was playing with Bale and Ramsey. They made you believe in yourself as well. JW Bosnia-Herzegovina 2-0 Wales, Oct 2015 (Euro 2016 qualifying). Cap: 53 I remember walking off and the manager [Coleman] was storming down the tunnel raging. It was not until one of the staff went over and said, ‘We’ve actually qualified’ that he did a U-turn and we went and celebrated with the fans. Gareth leads by example. We would finish training and in a squad of 23 he would have 22 lads behind him watching him take free-kicks for 10 or 15 minutes. I remember training alongside him in France and sometimes it was like he was training with schoolkids and we were taking part in his session. Sam Vokes Wales 2-1 Slovakia, June 2016 (Euro 2016). Cap: 56 Any time we had a free-kick in the opposition half it was near enough a penalty; we felt it was like a 75% chance we were going to score. We devised a plan that James Chester and myself would be on the end of the wall to block the keeper a bit. Gaz would aim at us, we would move and it worked perfectly here, as it did so many times. Once you’ve got that first goal in the tournament, that first win, that’s off your back. What a strike it was. AW China 0-6 Wales, Mar 2018 (China Cup). Cap: 69 He broke Ian Rush’s [goalscoring] record. We were used to being around him but they are mad for it in China so there were roadblocks everywhere in Nanning and the hotel reception was rammed at all times. We couldn’t go anywhere with him without it being completely choc-a-bloc. It was a fun trip actually. There was nothing to do so we’d sit and play Uno for hours. Gaz was involved. I think I was the champ, Sam Vokes second and Chris Gunter bottom. AW Wales 2-0 Hungary, Nov 2019 (Euro 2020 qualifying). Cap: 83 Gareth does not necessarily need to score to contribute. His passing is unbelievable and this game was a case of having nine players supporting two world-class players in Bale and Ramsey. When you need it most, they turn up and produce the goods. That night they were on a different planet. Gareth has an aura because of what he has achieved but he is very down to earth, humble and is almost like a little kid in terms of his banter – he is always messing about. One of my first camps, I went out of the hotel door and him and Wayne Hennessey are putting golf balls in the corridor. It reminds you that every footballer is human, whether you’re a millionaire superstar or further down the ladder. Gareth genuinely enjoys coming to play for Wales. He just enjoys his life without getting too hung up on the serious aspect of it. Joe Morrell Belarus 2-3 Wales, Sep 2021 (World Cup 2022 qualifying). Cap: 98 For someone who has achieved so much, you could still see what it meant to him to score a hat-trick for his country and, more importantly for him, to get the three points. If he does not score or assist, he is just as happy if the team win. Some players aren’t like that and that’s what makes him extra special. He goes round and gets his ball signed by the whole team, whether that person has played for Wales before or not – he makes sure everyone is involved. JWI’m used to consuming jokes and sketches as part of shows, as components of a bigger whole. But that experience leaves me rudderless on TikTok, where comedy is often conveyed in free-floating skits and blink-and-you’ll-miss-them stings. YouTube sketches are Infinite Jests by comparison. Ah, but “the shorter the video, the more you can condense your comedy into bite-size, shareable chunks”, according to one guide to TikTok comedy, suggesting that humour on the platform is as often about brand development as it is about making people laugh. Undaunted, I plunged into comedy on the platform, armed only with my daughter’s top tips, some online guides and the app’s own algorithms. All three steered me directly to Khabane Lame. A TikToker only since March 2020, when he lost his job in a Turin factory, Lame is quite the Mr Bean of social media, wooing his 116m followers with wordless videos of himself responding to other people’s life-hacks. The joke – performing an obviously more simple solution to the problem, then staring down the viewer with a “What was all the fuss about?” expression – is an effective one, which is just as well given Lame delivers it over and over again. Wordlessness is a virtue on TikTok, where the default routine comprises a caption set-up (“When white moms don’t like each other”) and a visual, musical or lip-synced punchline. Sarah Cooper made the leap from TikTok to Netflix last year after the success of her potted Donald Trump lip-sync videos. The very likable Anglo-Somali TikToker Akafi Ali uses lip-sync in his skits, including many filmed in his Sainsbury’s uniform, acting up about customer behaviour. He no longer works in a supermarket, having been poached by the BBC. If TikTok is notable for these rags-to-riches trajectories, it differs in other eye-catching ways from live, or even TV, comedy. There’s a preponderance of beautiful performers, or performers who beautify themselves – perhaps because there’s slippage between the roles of comedian, influencer and salesperson. But it’s also a more diverse landscape. With 11m followers, Ehiz Ufuah is one of UK TikTok’s biggest comic stars, regularly (over)reacting to other people’s videos for lolz. He also built that profile while living with his mum in emergency accommodation for homeless people. Southampton’s Kyron Hamilton, 23, has racked up truckloads of views for his shrewdly observed classroom caricatures: “Them teachers who think they are funny” or “Teachers when Ofsted are in”. His is a recognisable character comedy talent, transferable beyond TikTok’s rigid confines. You could say the same of Bristol’s Abi Clarke, who already works as a standup, and made a TikTok splash with DIY, Catherine Tate-alike sketches about office workers Jill and Tracey. The onward comedy career of Chinese-American pranksters the Stokes Twins is less easy to guarantee. A stunt bank robbery video of theirs in 2019 led to criminal charges. Having now watched clips of the twins amplifying their farts through steel piping, I think they got off lightly with 160 hours of community service. There’s plenty of such first-base humour on TikTok: that’s comedy democracy in action. But there’s plenty to get excited about, too. Singer-songwriter Nina Nesbitt’s comedy songs about Scottishness, including a neat take on Olivia Rodrigo’s Driver’s License, might have been made for me. There are terrific sketches on Egyptian-American Adam Waheed’s TikTok, like the visual gags about the endless spaghetti and (the same gag, amusingly repurposed) the endless queue for the shop, or the one about the hoops you have to jump through to enter an Arab household. They’re as funny as anything I’ve seen on the great sketch shows of yore. And – what do you know? – they’ve secured Waheed deals with T-Mobile, Lyft and Adidas.There’s nothing to harvest any more, nothing that can be taken from the land, that’s why people are starving in Madagascar. The rainy season was always special, an important time when everyone planted food – key crops such as cassava. But for the past three years we’ve had very little rain. The climate has changed in Madagascar, maybe because of the global climate crisis. We used to have distinct seasons but no more, it has been a bit troubled. The landscape looks really dry, the trees have no more leaves. It is hard to find green areas, most have turned arid and grey. This year was even worse because the rainy season came so late that most people could not plant as usual. This is why we see hunger, especially in children, and maybe worse is still to come. I see this hunger where I work, giving medical care to pregnant women and newborns. You can see when they talk to us how hungry they are, that they have come without eating anything. Some cannot even wait for us to get around to seeing them, they go home to search for something to eat. Many do not come at all – if you haven’t eaten, you can’t walk 20km to the health centre. Some are afraid they will walk all this way but the health centre will not have anything for them to eat. We try to help: sometimes I buy cactus fruit and give it to the women while they wait. This is only a small thing but I feel it’s important. Hunger is everywhere in southern Madagascar. Those who have livestock or land will sell it to buy food but they are taken advantage of because they are so desperate. Then there are others who have nothing. They eat cactus leaves mixed with ashes, just to not be hungry, to get rid of that empty feeling. Some people run away, hoping to find a better life somewhere else. I once met a man who had walked 200km from his home with his wife and children. But there are others who won’t do that – they don’t want to leave their land, that’s their home. The problem here is water. There are places where there is no water at all. People might have to walk 20km to find water from the dried-up river – you have to dig one or two metres down into the sand to find water, which is dirty. I don’t see it getting better, I’m not positive at all. We hear about plans to bring water to this part of the country but so far there is nothing. There are some organisations working here but only in a few places, so many rural areas are forgotten. More help is needed. • The author is a doctor in Madagascar who wishes to remain anonymous Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:As scientists wrestle to predict the true impact and legacy of Cop26, one speech, given at a rally organised by Global Justice Now, insisted upon a perspective not data-driven but moral. Lumumba Di-Aping, a South Sudanese diplomat and former chief negotiator for the G77, said: “The first resolution that should be agreed in Glasgow is for annex I polluters to grant the citizens of small island developing states the right to immigration.” It was a tactful way of putting it: annex I nations are those with special financial responsibilities in tackling the climate crisis. They have these special responsibilities because their early industrialisation created so much of the carbon burden. A more pugilistic diplomat might have said “the people who created this disaster have to offer sanctuary to those displaced by it”, but then, he wouldn’t be a diplomat. Di-Aping went on to note article 3 of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights: “Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.” “Small island states,” he concluded, “should not be drowned alive like Zealandia.” This is where what Greta Thunberg calls the “blah blah blah” of international treaty-making – its high-flown and occasionally inspiring rhetoric – meets reality. It is established, year after year, that no nation can fight climate change alone. Cooperation across the globe is summoned and celebrated, and it is often explicit, whether in imperialist-paternalistic terms (“those with the broadest shoulders must bear the most weight”) or liberal postcolonial ones (“those who made this mess must clear it up”), that such cooperation is not possible unless industrialised nations accept their responsibility towards industrialising ones. Yet there is an enduring coyness and a lot of needless sophistry around the nature of that responsibility. The impact of the climate emergency will make human life impossible. Whether through floods, bushfires, unliveable temperatures, crop failures, all of the above or something unforeseen, the end result will be that swathes of land can no longer support human life. So the first and arguably only point of mutuality is, where are those displaced people going to live? Nations, in the end, can devise net-zero targets on their own. Cooperation may be helpful, from a trade or research perspective, in the development of new technologies, but only in the matter of climate refugees is it actually essential. As old debates around the climate crisis and whether or not it is anthropogenic give way to consensus, new ambiguities and uncertainties are constructed around refugees: can they really be called the victims of environmental degradation? We will grapple with any other explanation – they’re actually economic migrants, or they’re the victims of civil strife, or they fell foul of a dictatorship, the one-bad-man theory of geopolitics – rather than trace these proximal causes back to their roots. Most political efforts, currently, are geared towards building a positive picture of a sustainable future; the alternative is despair or denial, neither of which are generative forces for change. A coherent, practical plan detailing the probable scale of displacement and figuring out a just distribution of the climate diaspora will look radical and unsettling. One group is extremely comfortable on that territory, however: the far right. Steve Bannon sent a chill down the spine in 2015 when he talked about a “Camp of the Saints-type invasion into … Europe”. He made the reference again and again, until finally onlookers were forced to read the source: Jean Raspail’s racist novel of 1973, which one contemporary reviewer called “a major event … in much the same sense that Mein Kampf was a major event”. The title comes from a passage in the Book of Revelation about the coming apocalypse – civilisation collapses when the hordes arrive from the four corners of the Earth to “surround the camp of the saints and the beloved city” – and Raspail took up the idea; it was inevitable, he said, that “numberless disinherited people of the south would set sail one day for this opulent shore”. Through Bannon and others, this idea has replicated, mutated and engulfed others, to become the “great replacement theory” of white supremacists, which Paul Mason describes in his recent book How to Stop Fascism as the toxic political view that “immigration constitutes a ‘genocide’ of the white race”. Feminists help it along by depressing the birth-rate, and cultural Marxists bring the mood music, by supporting both migrants and feminists. Other far-right movements are sucked into the vortex of this wild but coherent theory, and yet more are spawned or shaped by it: the cosmic right (embodied in Jake Angeli, the QAnon figure in the animal-skin cap who stormed the Capitol in January, then went on hunger strike in prison because the food wasn’t organic), or the eco-minded white supremacists who make this explicit – you can be a humanitarian or an environmentalist. Choose one. As fanciful and irrational as many far-right arguments are, they have a rat-like cunning. They find these spaces that are untenanted by mainstream debate – there will be climate refugees and they must be accommodated – and they run riot in them. Nations who ignore Lumumba Di-Aping aren’t doing anything to avert the consequences he describes: their silence merely creates an open goal for the professed enemies of a peaceful and prosperous future. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistLin-Manuel Miranda gives us an unashamed sugar rush of showbiz rapture and showbiz solemnity in this heartfelt tribute to Broadway talent Jonathan Larson, played here by Andrew Garfield. Larson was the composer who created the smash-hit 90s show Rent but died at 35 of an aortic failure, just before opening night, an almost unbearable metaphor for the backstage heartbreak of musical theatre. (Miranda himself has a cameo as a short-order cook in the diner where Larson had to work as a waiter in his early years.) This movie has been adapted by screenwriter Steven Levenson from tick, tick … BOOM!, Larson’s autobiographical piece that came just before Rent, and told the story of his first major musical project: a wildly ambitious futurist fantasy called Superbia that almost no one seemed to get. The film is about an irony that was to afflict Larson in ways he couldn’t have conceived: the ordeal of the quarter-life crisis, the first glimmers of approaching mortality and the realisation that options are closing down, something that particularly afflicts those approaching their 30s in the creative arts who don’t seem to be making it. When do you cut your losses and bail out for a straight, boring job in, say, advertising? The world is ticking like a time bomb and soon your career will blow up, and not in a good way. But Larson has someone who believes in him: Stephen Sondheim (played in cameo by Bradley Whitford) who gives him gentle advice, crucially about the lack of a decent song to close act two of Superbia, a song which will encapsulate the all-important concept of choice. Larson has a block about writing this song, because of his commitment issues with girlfriend Susan (Alexandra Shipp). Garfield is good at portraying the needy, borderline-desperate world of the theatrical writer: always charming, always on, always looking for creative inspiration, always on the verge of exhaustion, and now trying to absorb the new possibility of disillusion. It is a rather Sondheimian theme and Larson himself was a devotedly Sondheimian composer. This is not a movie which gives its hero a happy ending: there is no opening night for Larson, just a belief that the unending slog will one day be worth it. • tick, tick … BOOM! is released on 12 November in cinemas, and on 19 November on Netflix.In late September, on one of the last good days of the summer, a 15-year-old girl called Rhia Sedha scored a 50 at Lord’s. Sedha was captaining the Bradford Girls under-15s in the final of a tournament run by the MCC Foundation for state school cricketers. She and her team made 135 from their 20 overs, then bowled out their opposition from the Cotswolds for 24. In Bradford cricket, they already knew all about Sedha. The Asian Express has been following her for years, from playing in the back garden with her father, Deepak, through school, club and district cricket, the seven for none she took for Shadwell, her hat-trick for Bradford Academy, her debut for Yorkshire, her dream of playing for the England Women’s team. In 2013, Yorkshire celebrated their 150th anniversary. To mark it, the Guardian published a short editorial that consisted entirely of one long list of great Yorkshire players. They were all men. Martyn Moxon is on the list, so is Michael Vaughan. If the club makes it through another 50 years maybe Sedha will be too. Yorkshire cricket belongs to her, just as much as it does to Vaughan; she has a claim on its future, he has a claim on its past. The Guardian has reported on several cases of discrimination in cricket in the past few years. The Yorkshire story is depressingly familiar, but the sport it describes still feels utterly unrecognisable. It is not the game Sedha was playing at Lord’s. It is not the game we saw during the World Cup in 2019, won by an England team led by an Irish-born captain and included first- and second- and third-generation immigrants from Barbados, South Africa, New Zealand and Pakistan, and when almost every other ticket was brought by a member of the south Asian diaspora. It’s not the sport I recognise from all the work I’ve done reporting on English cricket in the past 10 years, at schools in Hartlepool and leisure centres in Wolverhampton, village greens in Suffolk and Hampshire, and city pitches in Burnley and London. I don’t believe English cricket has “gone backwards”. It’s not what I’ve seen in the work of the MCC Foundation, the Lord’s Taverners, the ACE programme, Chance to Shine or, indeed, the Yorkshire Cricket Foundation, which last week were at the Infinity Centre in Harehills, putting on football and cricket workshops for a group of 140 Afghan refugees who have just arrived in Leeds. The YCF were recently shortlisted for the Yorkshire Post’s excellence in business awards because of their work delivering cricket coaching to underprivileged children across the county. And it’s not what I’ve heard in off-the-record conversations with staff at Yorkshire and on-the-record conversations with people across the game in the past few days. In Yorkshire, there is genuine fury that the progress made has been so badly undermined by the stubborn refusal of senior management at the club, and at the ECB, to deal with this situation head-on until now. The problem at Yorkshire isn’t just that players discriminated against players from Asian backgrounds, it’s that the management oversaw a culture that allowed that behaviour to pass and made such a mess of their opportunity to address it when it first arose. There are plenty of people in cricket, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, who share that anger and who are sick of the institutional failures we’ve seen laid bare, again, in the past week, sick of the managerial class who have known about these problems for 25 years and more and are saying the same old things about how something needs to be done. Truth is, English cricket, and Yorkshire cricket, is already full of people who have been getting on and doing it. Kamlesh Patel mentioned one of them on Monday, in his first press conference as Yorkshire chairman, when he was asked about Azeem Rafiq’s sister, Amna, who works as a community and development manager for the Yorkshire Cricket Board and is on sick leave because of the stress she’s been put under while her brother has been pursuing his case against the club. Lord Patel already knows her. “She’s dynamic, and from my knowledge, what she did at Leicestershire, going out there, and working with the Asian women, that’s what it’s all about,” he said. Maybe you know her. We ran a short film about her work in 2017. I’ve met dozens of people like her in just the past year. Ebony Rainford-Brent, who got so fed up at listening to all the talk about the lack of black British players that she decided to set up the ACE programme, is one. Sarah Fane, who spent years building school pitches in Afghanistan and now runs the MCC Foundation, is another. Will Gaffney, who has set up his own charity distributing cricket kit to underprivileged kids, is another. John Claughton, a former headmaster who is now running a programme that opens up private school facilities to local state-run junior schools, is another. There are countless more. The ECB announced this week that it is launching a call for evidence about experiences of discrimination in the game. It is necessary, but it is not sufficient. What it needs to be doing is talking to the people – and there are plenty of them working in their own headquarters – who love the sport, who believe in its ability to bring communities together and who are out there, every day, working to make it better. Find them, listen to them, give them more attention, more resources and more responsibility. Because the game they play moved on from all this a long time ago.OK team Guardian, let’s wrap up the blog for today. Thank you so much for going through the news of the day with me. Here were the big ones: Scott Morrison started the day off with misleading comments about Labor’s electric vehicle policy at the 2019 election, telling Sunrise the ALP wanted to force people to drive electric vehicles (false: there was no mandate). Severe weather warnings were issued for NSW, South Australia and Queensland as most of the country gets set for a wet few days. Remembrance Day ceremonies were conducted across the country. Victoria recorded 1,313 new Covid-19 cases and four deaths. NSW recorded 261 new Covid-19 cases and one death. Queensland recorded two new Covid cases. We got some job figures that showed in October the unemployment rate jumped to 5.2%, from 4.6% in September, with 46,300 jobs lost. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, then addressed the jobs figures, saying it was driven by the NSW and Victorian lockdowns. “Lockdowns are detrimental to the labour market,” he said. Australia hit the 90% vaccine milestone. And Dylan Alcott said acting and politics could be next after tennis. The blog will be back with the biggest yarns again tomorrow and I will be with you again from around 11am. Until then, everyone stay safe and please – don’t drive through flood waters. The prime minister with the shortest planning horizon in living memory is a laggard, not a leader, Richard Denniss writes. Scott Morrison thrives in the empty space between three-year terms and 30-year plans. Whether it is climate change, nuclear submarines or budget repair – it is no accident the prime minister with the shortest planning horizon in living memory is our greatest announcer of long-run plans. Two Australian cities – Launceston in Tasmania and Bendigo in Victoria – have been recognised by Unesco as Creative Cities of Gastronomy. It means the two cities are among the world’s best food destinations. The Launceston mayor, Albert van Zetten, said the decision cemented the city’s identity as a foodie heaven. “The Unesco brand is recognised worldwide and is a marker of the very highest quality,” he said. In NSW there have already been 250 calls for help to the SES as emergency services respond to severe weather events in multiple parts of the state. The northern rivers is expected to see flash flooding overnight. If you are in an impacted area please be alert and do not drive through flood waters. If you need help call the SES on 132 500. And here’s our story on the wild weather: A big match is about to get under way tonight in Sydney. The Socceroos will play Saudi Arabia at Parramatta’s CommBank stadium at 8.10pm. A win would see Australia pass Saudi Arabia to sit at the top of Group B in Asian qualifying, giving them a good shot at reaching the World Cup in Qatar next year. The Socceroos had won 11 of 12 their games until they lost to Japan in their most recent game. Here’s our preview by Emma Kemp: We have a yarn on the $38m payout to injured workers by NSW public insurer icare here for those who want a bit more information: Scott Morrison says governments need to make sure digital platforms and social media are “not being used as a tool for people to harass people, to exploit people, to intimidate people”. The prime minister made the comments in a virtual session of a CEO summit being held in conjunction with the Apec summit in New Zealand. When asked by Brad Smith, the Microsoft president, about his outlook on post-pandemic technology challenges, Morrison said: We’re seeing this more and more, the impact on the mental health of our young people, through cyberbullying and cyber-abuse. And there are two key issues here, I think. The first one is to recognise that, you know, digital platforms are publishers. And the second one is free speech only works in a free society where there isn’t anonymity. Free speech isn’t about to say whatever you want and not be accountable for it. That’s the whole point of free speech. Say whatever you like in our country, but you’re accountable for what you say. We can’t have digital platforms providing a shield for people to engage in online abuse, because if we allow that to happen, digital platforms will not be a safe space for consumers, for our children – we won’t get the right outcomes on education and skills development and the broader, you know, commercial opportunities that are there. So we all have to work, I think, even more closely together to make the digital world safe. And that’s not just about hacking and cybersecurity. That’s about the interactions of people online. And we don’t think those rules are tough enough and we are moving forward on that. Asked about trade, Morrison said at the moment the rare earths and critical minerals supply chains were “very dependent on largely one supplier, which has the ability to apply a lot of monopolistic power to prevent other supply chains being developed”. The prime minister did not directly mention China. But he said he agreed with India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, that supply chains were no longer just about cost and efficiency but also about trust. Morrison said: That trust is about who you’re doing business with and we’ve learned that during this pandemic. Trusted supply chains are frankly more valuable to you than some, that might actually be a bit cheaper, because you know they’ll always be there. Morrison said Australia was working with the other Quad countries – the US, India and Japan – on developing alternative supply chains around rare earths and critical minerals, which would play “a huge role, obviously, in the new energy technologies as well”. Victoria is on track to hit the 90% vaccination milestone for people aged 12+ sooner than 24 November. Across the state, 92.9% of Victorians (aged 12+) have now had one dose of the vaccine and 85.5% have had two doses. The good news comes a day after the number of cases officially passed 100,000 on Wednesday. The NSW government-owned state insurer icare will pay out more than 53,000 underpaid injured workers $38m after historic miscalculation errors. Icare announced the payout on Thursday afternoon. “Icare is working closely with the NSW government, [State Insurance Regulatory Authority] and employers to ensure it doesn’t happen again,” the CEO, Richard Harding, said. “We have proactively reviewed those that were the most vulnerable and likely to have had a financial impact. “Our focus has been on remediating these people as quickly as possible.” A fire broke out at Victoria’s Yallourn power station around midday today, with Energy Australia confirming that there was a “small fire” at the coal distribution facility. A spokesperson confirmed the fire was extinguished within 40 minutes due to “the automatic fire deluge system and support provided by fire services teams and the CFA”. They said the fire had not resulted in any risk to energy security. They also confirmed nobody was injured, saying that all employees in the immediate area were evacuated to a “safe location” while the fire was being extinguished. The spokesperson also said one of the four generating units at Yallourn was offline, with the three others reduced to minimum load out of precaution: Yallourn has four generating units. One unit is currently offline because of the major outage maintenance program. As a precaution, the three other units have been reduced to absolute minimum load while the conveyor system is being reinstated. Their estimated return to service is this evening in line with the advice and the consent of WorkSafe Victoria, ensuring the equipment is safe to operate. The way all parties managed the situation demonstrates that our emergency services training and technical systems work as intended. Let’s go back to reporter Nino Bucci, who is following the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission happening in Victoria: A report into the Tasmanian government’s handling of allegations of child sexual abuse in the education department and other government institutions was tabled in the state’s parliament today. The inquiry found the department’s response to claims of childhood abuse was to move teachers, disbelieve students and protect itself. The ABC reports there is still “some record of concern” about more than 40 current employees, at least three of which are principals. The inquiry says half will potentially require further investigation. The premier, Peter Gutwein, spoke about the report for the first time in parliament today. “We can’t change the past but we can shape the future,” he said. “And I am absolutely committed ... and determined to ensure that we shape that future in a way that is positive for the children in the state, both now and importantly into the future.” And we’ve got flood warnings still in place for parts of South Australia, Queensland and the Northern Territory. Please stay safe and keep an eye on the BoM. We’ve got a yarn here: And a video from the BOM here: Dylan Alcott is currently being interviewed by Patricia Karvelas on ABC, who asked him what he was going to do when he resigns from tennis. And look what bomb he just dropped: “You know, I want to do a bit of acting, maybe a bit of politics one day.” Karvelas asked why politics was on the cards, to which Alcott replied: “You can actually influence a lot of change in there, you know what I mean? There hasn’t been many people with disability who’ve had the opportunity to do that. “Obviously Jordon Steele-John’s in there and a few others across the journey. That’d be awesome. “And secondly, as I said, if you want to speak about somebody at a table, they need a seat at that table.” Out the back of a suburban home on a leafy Shepparton street, a humble tree bearing 10 different fruits has just claimed a Guinness world record for most types of fruit on a single tree. The tree is the result of a decade of Hussam Saraf’s hard work, transforming his modest stretch of grass in regional Victoria into a tropical oasis bearing rare fruit trees and edible natives. Labor has accused the Morrison government of an “extraordinary power grab” over its latest proposed changes to the national disability insurance scheme. Guardian Australia this morning reported concerns from the disability community, as well as the former NDIA chairman, Bruce Bonyhady, that the government’s “participant service guarantee” will hand new powers to the agency boss. The government insists these changes are benign and the broader bill will make the agency more accountable to participants. But Labor’s NDIS spokesman, Bill Shorten, joined calls on Thursday for the government should back away from the changes. He said: The Morrison government’s new legislation that will give the NDIS chief executive unprecedented powers must be stopped. The “participant service guarantee” bill will give NDIS chief executive Martin Hoffman the authority to cut any participants plan with no notice and no explanation. The extraordinary power grab could also extend to NDIS Minister Linda Reynolds. Shorten’s also concerns echo comments from the NSW, WA and ACT governments. Linda Reynolds, the NDIS minister, insists the concerns are unfounded. A Senate inquiry will examine the bill at a hearing tomorrow. Two people have just been arrested in Victoria over an alleged hit-run crash that claimed the life of a Carrum Downs father of four earlier this week. A 30-year-old of no fixed address was arrested in Carrum Downs and a 25-year-old Carrum Downs man was arrested after attending Frankston police station, police said. The wine dealers Vinomofo have been forced to apologise after offering up a Remembrance Day special this morning. The 11th of the 11th is a big sales day in Singapore and the international company thought they would try to expand it to Australia. But after sending out the original sales email, they were forced to retract it. “We got swept up in the retail frenzy of November, pushing out a sales idea from Singapore which was insensitive to the very special day that is Remembrance Day,” the wine store wrote. “Like you, we are very grateful for the nation that we live in, the freedoms that we share and the service men and women who have so bravely defended both. We got it wrong today.” Anthony Albanese says China has become “far more forward-leaning” and that is what is driving Australia to change its foreign policy, implicitly pushing back at criticism from the former prime minister Paul Keating. The opposition leader on Thursday avoided directly criticising Keating – a Labor elder who said both major parties had lost their way – but made it plain that he did not share the assessment of the strategic circumstances Australia now faces. Read our story here: Let’s go back to reporter Nino Bucci, who is following the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission happening in Victoria: Senator Jacqui Lambie has called for a ban on mainland investors buying up property in Tasmania, Hobart’s Mercury newspaper reports. Relocate or forget it! “We don’t have the infrastructure (to build new houses), our health system is in turmoil and mainlanders are pushing our own people out of the market,” Lambie said. “They are coming in paying way over the asking price, you hear some are paying $100,000 over, and they are turning them into Airbnbs and making a profit.” The Victorian government says elective surgery will resume in Melbourne and Geelong from Monday. “Private hospitals and day procedure centres in Melbourne and Geelong will be able to scale up to 50% of their normal elective surgery lists, including non-urgent surgeries, provided enough capacity is kept aside to assist with the Covid response,” a government statement says. “... These changes will bring Melbourne and Geelong into line with private hospitals in Ballarat, Bendigo, Shepparton and the Latrobe Valley, which are already on the 50% cap.” The acclaimed Vietnamese American poet Ocean Vuong has hit back with humour after perplexed Australian year 12 students bombarded him on social media complaining about his “confusing” text in their final English exam. Read our story here: The NSW sexual consent legislation has passed the lower house of parliament and is expected to come before the upper house in the coming days, AAP reports: The rules around sexual consent in NSW are closer to being overhauled after a bill to introduce a requirement for “affirmative consent” passed the lower house. The legislation is expected to come before the upper house in the coming days where it will likely garner enough support to become law. If it passes, the Crimes Act will be changed to specify that consent to sexual activity must be communicated by words or action, rather than assumed. If consent isn’t communicated, the other person could be guilty of sexual assault. The bill also spells out that just because someone doesn’t physically or verbally resist a sexual activity, it does not mean they’ve consented. The NSW attorney general, Mark Speakman, described the reforms as “a basic matter of respect” as he introduced the bill to the lower house last month. “No one should assume someone is saying ‘yes’ just because they do not say ‘no’ or do not resist physically,” he said. “People are entitled to expect that if someone wants to have sex with them, then that other person will ask – and that if the first person has not said something or done something to communicate consent, then the other person will take further steps to ascertain consent.” The bill passed the lower house on Wednesday evening after several amendments moved by the Greens and Labor were defeated. Clearly the announcement the US and China will be working more closely together on climate change hasn’t been lost on the media pack. The Australian treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, was asked about what it could mean for Australia and its exports of fossil fuels – namely coal. To clear up any confusion, the full text of the US-China Joint Glasgow Declaration on Enhancing Climate Action in the 2020s is now online. On coal, the declaration mentions the fossil fuel only twice and repeats previous commitments that both countries have made on building coal plants in other countries. The first mention has China declaring it will “phase down coal consumption” during its next five-year plan, which will run from 2026 until 2030. A phase down is, of course, good, but it’s not a phase out. China made this pledge at the Biden climate summit in April. The second mention of coal in the pact says China and the US “recall their respective commitments regarding the elimination of support for unabated international thermal coal power generation”. This section reflects China’s major announcement in September at the UN general assembly that it would stop supporting the building of coal-fired power around the world this year. The US has backed an OECD agreement not to finance “unabated” coal-fired power in other countries. Unabated means any coal-fired power that doesn’t have carbon capture and storage attached, and there are almost no coal plants that have managed to do that anywhere in the world (one reason being it increases the cost of electricity). And Mostafa Baluch is on the move ... Victoria police has launched a landmark policy for dealing with perpetrators of family violence within its ranks. It is the first policy of its kind in Australia. It’s designed to stop abusive officers from being given special treatment and to prioritise victims’ safety. Victoria, much like many of Australia’s police forces, has been criticised recently for failing to reprimand abusers within its ranks. The policy outlines that police officers will be treated the same as alleged abusers within the community and all cases will be investigated. So to recap the jobless figures, as reported here, the unemployment rate bounced back up to 5.2% last month, from 4.6% in September. That’s not really so bad, as it masked an increase in people looking for work, particularly in NSW. The story was less promising in Victoria, but November’s data should see that state back on the recovery train. A hint of the economy’s gathering momentum comes from CoreLogic, the property consultancy. Today it said 3,643 homes are scheduled to be auctioned this week, a rate matched only once this year, back in March. Melbourne’s 1,588 scheduled auctions are up 13.6% from last week, and well more than double the 604 auctions this time last year. Sydney, at 1,332 auctions, is also the busiest since late March, while Brisbane’s 290 auctions haven’t been exceeded in a single week since November 2014. Adelaide and Canberra are also on track for their busiest week of auctions since CoreLogic began tracking the data in 2008. Perhaps with the added supply will come a further slowing in the growth rate of house prices. Speaking of prices, US consumer prices jumped in October by 6.2%, the most since 1990. Even excluding food and energy prices, the underlying rate was 4.6%, or enough to stir investors worried about what the ANZ Bank described as “the risk of a policy error on inflation”. We have similar issues, if not as intense, in Australia. Our economy is juiced up by government spending, households and businesses are sitting on mountains of money, and supply shortages are lifting the cost of everything from coffee to fertiliser to newsprint. And how confident are we in the nous of our policymakers? The federal government has outlined a detailed plan to reform Australia’s whistleblowing laws, as new research shows the current scheme is failing to protect those who speak out about wrongdoing. Read the full story here: And here we go folks – the wild weather has started in New South Wales. If you are in regional NSW please remember to check the Bureau of Meteorology and stay safe. The outlook for tomorrow is showers in every major capital except Perth. I want to take you now to Sydney’s Taronga Wildlife hospital where something way too cute is happening. An orphaned short-beaked echidna puggle (gender unknown), who was abandoned on a property in Weja, NSW, is being hand-raised. The Taronga veterinary nurse Liz McConnell has become the puggle’s dedicated surrogate mum. She takes the little echidna home at night and to work each morning in a makeshift burrow, fashioned from a climate-controlled esky. “A puggle of this age would normally be in a burrow where it is relatively cool, probably no more than 23C,” McConnell says. And we’ve got some pics that will absolutely warm your heart. Please look at how good this shot is from this morning in Melbourne. Frydenberg is asked again if it makes us vulnerable because he didn’t really address the question. He says Australia will continue to have strong export markets for its commodities. We’re also investing in new technologies like hydrogen, looking at low-emission production processes for steel, for aluminium, recognising that that will be not only in the interests of the environment but also in Australia’s economic interests longer term. That’s all from Frydenberg folks. Frydenberg was asked about the US and China’s joint climate change pact. With respect to China, [it is] the world’s largest emitter, and their emissions have been going up quite dramatically. So, it’s important that China makes a commitment, a tangible one, to reduce its carbon footprint. Frydenberg is asked if Australia is trying to water down the draft for Cop26. He says: We went to Cop26 with a target to reduce our emissions down to net zero by 2050. That was a substantial commitment that we have made and it was one that we had a plan to meet. Frydenberg is asked about the federal government ending Covid payments: We also allowed for a two-week transition period where the payments stepped down. That is appropriate because the labour force needs to find its level. When you speak to a lot of businesses today in Melbourne or in Sydney, whether it is hospitality, construction, mining, in Western Australia and elsewhere, labour force shortages are around. Frydenberg says there are jobs out there, with job ads up 30% on where they were at the start of the pandemic. Frydenberg says since the data was collated the economy has “turned the corner”. Business and consumer confidence are both up – our business confidence back to where it was in April. Consumer confidence up now up eight out of the last nine weeks. Job ads are more than 30% higher than they were at the start of the pandemic and at a 12 year high. $340bn is now accumulated in household and business balance sheets. Frydenberg says it is important to note that when the data was taken there were 13 million Australians in lockdown. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is talking about the job numbers: The unemployment rate increased to 5.2%, confirming what we already know, that lockdown hits jobs. Lockdowns are detrimental to the labour market. When you drill down into today’s numbers, it is very much a tale of two cities. New South Wales and Victoria. In Victoria, in the month, around 50,000 jobs were lost and an additional 20,000 people were stood down on zero hours. In NSW, in the month of October, more than 21,000 new jobs were created and more than 60,000 people who were stood down on zero hours went back to work. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, was asked about Mostafa Baluch today. This is what he had to say: I’m sure Queensland police did the best that they could. But ultimately, what’s more important is the outcome, and the outcome is he’s caught. So that’s the focus. That’s where it’s at. I’m sure the Queensland police did the best that they could. It’s not for me to comment on the interstate jurisdictions in relation to their operations and their procedures, but ultimately the outcome is what matters. Let’s catch up with Nino Bucci, who is following the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission happening in Victoria. We’ve also got some extra numbers from New South Wales, where 261 new cases have been recorded. That’s up on yesterday’s figures. One person has died with Covid and 228 patients are in hospital, with 40 in intensive care. Looking at the vaccination data, the state continues to smash it – 94% of over-16s have had one vaccine dose, more than 90% have had two doses. We’ve got a better breakdown of today’s Covid numbers from Victoria: In Victoria 1,313 new cases have been recorded, up from yesterday. Four people have died with Covid and 457 people are in hospital, with 79 in intensive care. More than 92% of the state’s over-16 population has had one vaccine dose and almost 86% are fully vaccinated. My colleague Peter Hannam has written about today’s unemployment figures in a little more detail: The former Australian cricketer Michael Slater is seeking to have his domestic violence-related charges dealt with under the Mental Health Act, a Sydney court has heard. AAP reports: Former Australian Test cricketer Michael Slater remains in hospital as he seeks to have domestic violence charges dealt with under the Mental Health Act, a Sydney court has been told. The 51-year-old was arrested in October at a Manly home and charged with stalking and using a carriage service to harass. He allegedly used his mobile phone between March and October this year “to menace or harass” while the intimidation allegedly occurred between 12-13 October in Randwick, according to court documents. Slater’s lawyer, James McLoughlin, told Waverley local court on Thursday his client was in hospital for “related treatment” and had been assessed by a forensic psychiatrist. McLoughlin said he would be applying to have the matter dealt with under section 14 of the Mental Health Act on 23 December and indicated a plea would be entered on that occasion. Magistrate Carolyn Huntsman at first baulked at the request, saying “are you kidding me?” The magistrate explained the busy court workload was “terrible” and it would be inundated with bail reviews just before Christmas. If successful, Slater could be released into the care of another person and ordered to undergo a medical treatment plan. The ex-cricketer turned commentator, who was previously granted conditional bail, was excused from appearing in court on Thursday. And more from Nino Bucci: Let’s go to reporter Nino Bucci, who is following the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission happening in Victoria. A Queensland court has approved the extradition of Mostafa Baluch to New South Wales to face drug charges. This from AAP: Accused drug lord Mostafa Baluch is on his way back to Sydney after a Queensland court approved his extradition to NSW. Baluch’s alleged attempt to flee to freedom ended on Wednesday morning when he was found hiding in a grey Mercedes concealed in a shipping container being transported on the back of a truck. The fugitive had been on the run from police when he was nabbed during a botched bid to cross the Queensland border. Sixteen days earlier, he allegedly cut off his ankle monitor while on bail sparking “one of the largest fugitive hunts in the country”. Police allege he was planning to flee overseas from Queensland. Queensland officers searched dozens of trucks over the past few days, before zeroing in on the shipping container after noticing it wasn’t properly secured. After a night in the Southport watch house, Baluch’s extradition hearing was held on Thursday. Baluch listened to the proceedings by phone. His lawyer, Nicholas Andrews, consented to the extradition application without objection, with Baluch expected to return to Sydney later in the day. He is charged with a string of drug offences related to a 900kg shipment of cocaine into Australia that had a street value of $270m. Baluch will now also face charges over his alleged breach of bail. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s popularity has plummeted in two new polls, as New Zealand struggles to contain a Delta outbreak and transitions to a new era of endemic Covid. Palaszczuk also said residents in Beaudesert and Warwick also needed to be on alert and get tested if they have symptoms but that health authorities weren’t concerned because the case is linked. “It is a young woman in her teens from Beaudesert. She is a close contact of a confirmed case from that Moree cluster that we talked about the other day. “And she was tested in home quarantine, so she spent a couple of days infectious in the community in Warwick and half a day infectious in Beaudesert.“ Palaszczuk said residents on the Gold Coast needed to get tested if they have symptoms. “If we see more unlinked community transmission the Gold Coast in the next 24 to 48 hours, we may have to put in place some further restrictions. “Therefore, people should consider on public transport on the Gold Coast, they should consider about wearing a mask, but also too if they are in crowded situations.” In Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has said the government will decide further measures in the coming days after two new cases were found in the community. Health Minister Greg Hunt has spoken about the 90% milestone: “In a country general practice, Indigenous medical clinic, in a suburban pharmacy, someone will be the Australian who ticks us over 90% of 16-plus who have a vaccination. “And what that has meant is that we have been protecting Australians and that’s an extraordinary achievement and I want to thank and honour all of those who have contributed. “So today is a milestone day in protecting Australia and reaching a 90% vaccination rate during the course of today.” In really good news - Australia will reach another vaccination milestone today. The country is on track to surpass the 90% first-dose target for 16s and over. Infrastructure department officials have revealed at a Senate inquiry into car park funding that the Australian National Audit Office asked for the department to access the minister’s records without informing him. Under questioning from Labor’s Tim Ayres, the deputy secretary David Hallinan confirmed that mid-audit the department sought legal advice about the Anao’s powers, after a “request to access the minister’s records” with advice “not to inform the minister”. Hallinan said the way the request came in “made us wonder whether it was appropriate” because he thought “natural justice” should apply and the person whose records were accessed should be informed. Hallinan refused to say what the legal advice said - but Ayres observed that the fact the Anao report extensively discusses the canvassing process within then minister Alan Tudge’s office, it suggests access was granted. Earlier, the first assistant secretary Philip Smith said the urban congestion fund was not a “competitive grants” process but that didn’t mean it wasn’t merit based. Hallinan conceded it was “unusual” for the government to submit a list of projects to the department, rather than for the department to have a role in site selection. The driver of the truck has been charged with intending to pervert the course of justice. He owns the trucking company that has been raided. In NSW police have raided a trucking company allegedly linked to a failed attempt by Mostafa Baluch to cross the border between NSW and QLD. The alleged drug smuggler and fugitive was found in the back of a Mercedes SUV, which was inside a shipping container travelling towards the border on Wednesday morning. Baluch allegedly cut his ankle tracking device off on October 25 and left his luxury home in Sydney’s northern beaches after receiving bail on drug import charges. Preparations are in place to extradite him from the Gold Coast to Sydney this afternoon. Albanese has been asked about the government’s climate change policy. He is attacking the PM for doing a 180 on electric vehicles. “He wants to pretend what he said yesterday doesn’t matter. “Australians shouldn’t have regard for what he says today because it’s all about the 24-hour news cycle. “You need a government that can have the consistency of policy and look at what the future will look like and shape that future in the interests of the people.” In NSW the federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese is being asked if he supports the phase-out of coal. He says the market has already decided to phase out coal. “There hasn’t been in Australia a new coal-fired power station built on this government’s watch in nine years. “That’s because the market is saying the cheapest form is renewables. “The market is speaking.” In NSW the BOM is asking residents to have “heightened alert” today and tomorrow as thunderstorms and floods are expected over large parts of the state. The QLD border, north-west slopes, heading down to the ACT are the regions of most concern. Residents are being asked to keep an eye on the BOM website, and social media channels. The latest jobs figures have landed from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. They show that in October, the unemployment rate jumped to 5.2% in October from 4.6% in September, with 46,300 jobs lost. That doesn’t sound that good, compared with forecasts that the economy would have added 50,000 jobs for the month, according to the ANZ and CBA economists’ predictions. But economists will likely “look through” these figures because the ABS survey period bridged the end of September and the start of October. And so it took in a stanza when the NSW and Victorian economies were still in a Covid lockdown, and we know there’s been a scramble for staff as these restrictions have been lifted. Another factor is the participation rate, which edged up to 64.7% for the month, from 64.5% in September. That means there were more people looking for work, which is a positive thing. Still, there’s a reminder that the measure of hours worked also edged lower and remains 2.1% lower than in March 2020 when the pandemic really kicked off in Australia. The Australian dollar, meanwhile, edged lower after the figures, trading recently at 73.17 US cents, according to Reuters. That indicates that investors at least are viewing these figures as on the weak side and not likely to bring forward the timing of when the RBA lifts interest rates. In Canberra, the national remembrance commemoration has come to a close with the national anthem. Today was the 103rd anniversary of the end of fighting in the Western Front on Nov 11, 1918. There are 185 new cases of Covid-19 in New Zealand, across three different regions. Of Thursday’s cases, 152 are in Auckland, 25 are in Waikato and 8 are in Northland. Eighty-one of these cases are yet to be epidemiologically linked to the outbreak, bringing the total number of unlinked cases in the past fortnight up to 713. The ministry of health said a person who died in Auckland today has been added to the national figures for Covid-19 deaths. The person tested positive for the virus, but their death is under police investigation. Thirty-three people with Covid-19 have died in New Zealand since the pandemic began. There are now 84 people in hospital and 10 in intensive care, with just 12% of those fully vaccinated. The country is on track to reach a 90% vaccination rate for the population aged 12 and over, with the number of first doses hitting 86% and more than 76% of the population now fully inoculated. We’re just going to jump to Victoria for a second where the BOM has issued severe weather warnings for two parts of the state. Good morning team Guardian and thank-you Matilda, for steering the good ship through this morning’s news. In Canberra, the wreath-laying has started with the governor general of the commonwealth of Australia, His Excellency General the Honourable David Hurley. Because of Covid restrictions, members of the diplomatic community laid wreaths yesterday on behalf of their countries. With that, I shall hand you over to the fantastic Cait Kelly to take you through the rest of the ceremony and the rest of the afternoon. Matt Anderson, director of the Australian War Memorial and the former ambassador for Afghanistan, is giving the opening address in Canberra. Your Excellency, veterans, widows, families, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. In 1993 on the 75th anniversary of the Armistice, then prime minister Keating delivered the eulogy of the unknown Australian soldier. In intering a soldier from the Great War, the so-called war to end all wars, of which we know now sow the seeds of a second more terrible war, Paul Keating said you might think this Australian soldier died in vain. But in honouring our war dead, as we always have and as we do today, we declare this is not true. Today, 28 years on, we declare still that this is not true. And as we say every evening at the Last Post ceremony, we also note all of those who have served, those who are still serving and the families that love and support them. We do not gather today to glorify war. Indeed, 80 years ago today the then governor general said that when people leave this place they must utter, never again, never again. People are now preparing for the minute’s silence. The official Remembrance Day ceremony is beginning in Canberra. Journalist Scott Bevan has begun the commemorations: We are grateful to be able to gather today, for Australia’s National Ceremony of commemoration, here at the Australian War Memorial in front of the Stone of Remembrance, which has been temporarily relocated from the Parade Ground while the modernisation and expansion works of a number of the Memorial’s buildings and galleries are undertaken. A significant milestone in the Memorial’s built story also occurred eighty years ago today, with the inauguration and opening of the building by the then Governor-General Lord Gowrie. In his opening remarks, Lord Gowrie said: “When we read the names inscribed on the walls of this memorial let us ask ourselves: what can we do for those who did so much. what can we give to those who gave all?” Mask wearing in more indoor settings is no longer mandatory anywhere in Queensland. This came into effect yesterday afternoon. Palaszczuk: We now have reached the 80.1% in Queensland, of people [aged 16 and over] who have had their first dose. That is a tremendous milestone we have hit. 68.31% are fully vaccinated. We need to continue to drive up the vaccination rates and, as I said, in Brisbane they are heading towards 90%. But in some of our communities in regional Queensland, we do need to continue to lift those vaccination rates. To that end, yesterday afternoon, to the relief of many people living in those 11 LGA’s, [mandatory] masks were removed. The Gold Coast could lock down if more unlinked community Covid-19 cases are discovered, the Queensland premier says. Palaszczuk: If we see more unlinked community transmission on the Gold Coast in the next 24 to 48 hours, we may have to put in place some further restrictions. Therefore, people should consider, on public transport on the Gold Coast, they should consider wearing a mask, and also if they are in crowded situations. We want to protect people on the Gold Coast but we also now have two unlinked cases on the Gold Coast. So please, the Gold Coast is not at 80% [vaccination] yet, you are doing a great job but we just don’t know where these cases have come from. Let’s hear now from the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palasczcuk, confirming the state has recorded two new Covid-19 cases. We have two new local community cases. The first one is a man in his 50s and he lives on the Gold Coast. He is an Uber driver. He is fully vaccinated, which is good news. We have to contact the people that were in his Uber. This one is unlinked. So I am saying to the residents of Gold Coast, if you have any symptoms, please come forward and get tested ... The second case, we are not as concerned about. It is a young woman in her teens from Beaudesert. She is a close contact of another case from the Mulberry cluster that we talked about the other day. She was tested in home quarantine. She spent a couple days infectious in the community in Warwick and half a day infectious and Beaudesert. We are just standing by now to hear from the Queensland premier after the state recorded two new cases yesterday, both infectious in the community. We should soon learn today’s case tally for the sunshine state. Well isn’t this a very ambitious cross-over! The Morrison government wants to put more taxpayer money into carbon capture and storage (CCS) projects, with a new $500m fund that could include the technology alongside other new projects. The emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, told the ABC on Wednesday “there’s 60 [CCS] projects around the world, 30 in operation. It’s working in large quantities now.” There’s certainly growth in carbon capture and storage around the world, but do they work? Find out below: Here is a little blog treat for you this morning. You have earned it! We’ll get some jobs data out later this morning (11.30am Canberra time), with the Australian Bureau of Statistics due to release October labour force figures. As reported this morning, there are emerging signs of a shortage of staff in a range of industries, such as hospitality. But it also extends to engineers and others employed in the construction binge, which is probably going to step up into a higher gear next year once all those “save the economy from the pandemic” calls get going. As my esteemed colleague Greg Jericho writes in his column today, there a few indicators suggesting the jobs and wages picture remains mixed, as you might expect given NSW, Victoria and the ACT were in a lockdown for much of the recent survey period: So much about the economy hinges on expectations, and these point to people being increasingly confident about their ability to keep their jobs or get a new one if needed. As my article mentioned, the Westpac-Melbourne Institute survey of unemployment expectations has dropped to the lowest level since the mid-1990s when Australia was crawling out of the Recession We Had to Have. For female respondents, the confidence levels are near their highest levels in a survey dating to 1975. (Speaking of joblessness, today also marks the 46th anniversary of the Whitlam Dismissal.) Anyway, those October jobs figures should give us the latest indication on how strong the employment market is, and whether you should pause a bit longer over signing that new enterprise bargaining agreement and hold out for a better one. Feel free to drop us a line to tell us whether the tables have really turned for you. Taiwan has hit back at the former Australian prime minister Paul Keating after he said Taiwan was “not a vital Australian interest” and labelled it a “civil matter” for China. In an appearance at the National Press Club on Wednesday, Keating dismissed global concerns about China’s aggression towards Taiwan and criticised Australia’s growing bipartisan pushback. “Taiwan is not a vital Australian interest,” he said. “We have no alliance with Taipei. There is no piece of paper sitting in Canberra which has an alliance with Taipei.” He urged Australia not to be drawn into a military engagement over Taiwan, “US-sponsored or otherwise”, and said Taiwan was “fundamentally a civil matter” for China. He also referred to Taiwan as China’s “front doorstep”. You can read the full report from Helen Davidson in Taipei and Daniel Hurst in Canberra below: Fijian prime minister Frank Bainimarama has been speaking out this morning about Pacific Island nations’ attempts to have their voices heard at the UN climate conference. More Labor MPs have come out to slam Morrison’s claims that Labor’s proposed EV policies in the lead-up to the 2019 election would have resulted in a hike in petrol prices. Here is shadow energy minister Chris Bowen bringing out the Guardian Australia live blog screen shots: Detectives from the NSW organised crime squad detectives have travelled to Queensland to seek the extradition of alleged drug smuggler Mostafa Baluch this morning after he was found in a container on the back of a truck after crossing the state border. The sausages are sizzling in Melbourne this morning: A Geraldton woman has been charged with attempted fraud after allegedly attempting to offer money to a pharmacist in exchange for incorrectly recording that she had received a Covid-19 vaccination. Here is what WA police had to say about the incident: Geraldton Police have charged a 34-year-old woman after an incident that occurred at a pharmacy on Monday ... At about 3.25pm, the woman attended a scheduled appointment at a pharmacy in Geraldton to receive a Covid-19 vaccine. Upon attending, the woman was escorted by a pharmacist to a consult room, where she [allegedly] requested the pharmacist fraudulently administer the vaccine in exchange for an unspecified amount of money. The pharmacist refused and the woman left the premises. The 34-year-old woman from Kalbarri has been charged with one count of attempted fraud. She received bail and will appear before the Geraldton magistrates court on Thursday 18 November 2021. During his appearance on the Today show, Anthony Albanese was asked if Labor plans to support Morrison’s newly announced billion-dollar clean energy fund, which would require amending the Clean Energy Finance Corporation legislation to allow investment into the controversial technology. But the oposition leader doesn’t sound too keen: He can’t even get the support of his own side at this stage! That’s what the reports in the papers say. Look, we haven’t seen any legislation but this is an announcement in search of policy. Once again. This is a government which yesterday was announcing half a billion dollars of new government money which today is saying, “we want less government”. Which is it? This is a government that says they support carbon capture and storage and they need funds for it but they abolish more than $500 million for that when they came into office. This is a government that doesn’t trust business and markets, that keeps intervening. You’ve had a $600 million intervention to build a gas-fired power plant in Currie Currie. Interventions from the government to have studies for the people who are building a coal-fired power plant, or want to in North Queensland. The contradictions are there from day-to-day. By the time we get back to parliament, this policy will have changed five or six times. NSW also slightly higher than usual, with 261 new Covid-19 cases recorded in the last reporting period. Sadly, one person infected with Covid-19 has died. The Victorian numbers are in and we are once again seeing that slight Thursday bump. They have recorded 1,313 cases overnight and sadly four people with Covid-19 have died. While we have a second why don’t we jump back and have a look at what Anthony Albanese has been saying during his media appearances this morning? On the Today Show he was asked when he reckons the federal election will be held. We’re ready still for December but if it goes until May, that’s really the government changing the whole cycle. They’d have to bring the budget forward. It’s because they think that they see a window to just keep clinging on without an election. I think that Australians deserve to determine their own future which is why, under normal schedules, there should be an election in March and we should, whoever wins government, be allowed to bring down a budget in May. Torrential rain lashing much of NSW is threatening widespread flooding as the State Emergency Service prepares for the fallout from days of wild weather and expected flooding, reports AAP. The Bureau of Meteorology says central NSW received more than 44mm of rain on Wednesday as thunderstorms and pelting rain hit much of the state, with the deluge predicted to last another two days. Some areas are tipped to receive a month’s worth of rain by the end of the week. SES assistant commissioner Dean Storey says units are in a heightened state of readiness with extra support and resources already deployed to at-risk areas, including flood-risk strike teams and aviation support. After a wet winter, catchments are very wet and dams are full, so any heavy and sustained rain can quickly lead to flooding. The SES is urging people to be aware of the risks and make evacuation plans. The Riverina is already flooding. Widespread flash flooding is predicted and the SES is asking people living in flood-prone communities to prepare now. Storey told Nine news this morning: Know what you will do and where you will go in the unfortunate event that you have to leave your home due to flooding. He warned roads will be cut in many areas and advised people to avoid unnecessary travel and never drive through floodwaters. Time and time again we see poor results with poor decision making with people driving through floodwaters, often with tragic results and our emergency responders are at high risk as well. The northwest slopes and plains, Northern Tablelands, central west, south-west slopes are all in the firing line, with the communities of Moree, Armidale, Tamworth and Parkes singled out to be on high alert for flooding. They are particularly the focus but this weather event is going to impact a large proportion of the state. There are 18 flood watches in place and three flood warnings that will likely increase is at the day goes on. If social media is anything to go by, the 2022 federal election campaign will be overwhelmingly negative, with disputed claims about Medicare and tax policy featuring in early major party ads. Although Clive Palmer’s United Australia party is the biggest spender so far, ad trackers for Google (including YouTube) and Facebook show the Coalition and Labor have also been active. The UAP has spent $2.5m with Google in the last year, with Labor’s national secretariat a distant second on $55,800. Whereas the UAP ads blanket the country, Labor has produced more ads and targeted marginal seats, particularly in New South Wales and regional Queensland. You can read the full report from Paul Karp and Nick Evershed below: A man has died in custody at a police station in Melbourne’s west, AAP reports. Police say the 43-year-old Sunshine man was arrested on Tuesday and remanded to appear in court on Thursday. But he was found unresponsive during routine checks about 11pm on Wednesday, with police officers and paramedics unable to revive him. Detectives from the homicide squad will investigate the death, with oversight from Professional Standards Command, as is procedure when a person dies in police custody. Australia is trying to block a UN recommendation that countries should try to keep global heating to 1.5C to protect world heritage sites from the impacts of the climate crisis. The Morrison government has also told Unesco major decisions about world heritage-listed places being damaged by climate change – which would include the Great Barrier Reef – should be put on hold. The government’s lobbying efforts are revealed in amendments sent to Unesco on a new climate change policy for world heritage sites scheduled for discussion at a meeting in Paris in two weeks A draft version of the policy recommends countries take a precautionary approach “that pursues pathways limiting global heating to 1.5C, with no or limited overshoot”. You can read the full report below: The Australian Border Force says it will continue to work closely with Indonesia, days after Jakarta announced the suspension of a joint maritime patrol to seek an explanation about the recent burning of illegal fishing vessels. Indonesia raised concerns after the ABF posted on Facebook last week about how Maritime Border Command – which also includes the Australian defence force – had intercepted “16 foreign vessels fishing illegally in the vicinity of Rowley Shoals” off the WA coast in October. Three of those vessels were then destroyed. The ABF’s post included a photo of one of those vessels that had been set alight. On Monday Indonesia’s Maritime Affairs and Fisheries ministry said it was postponing a joint patrol with Australia that was scheduled to start this week. According to news site tempo.co, Indonesia was seeking an explanation from the ABF “to prevent inaccurate information from spreading, especially about the identities of the three burned fishing vessels and 13 others that were ousted from the country’s water border”. The timing of the suspension wasn’t ideal for the Australian foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, who was in Jakarta for meetings yesterday [Wednesday], with concerns about the Aukus nuclear-powered submarine plan also on the agenda. But it now seems the Jawline-Arafura patrols with Australia, aimed at stamping out illegal fishing, are likely to resume soon. A spokesperson for the Indonesian agency told the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age late yesterday they had now “received the information we need related to the incident” and were discussing a resumption date. When contacted for comment, the ABF said it was “committed to protecting Australia’s sovereign waters and our economically important marine environment from illegal fishing”. The ABF spokesperson told Guardian Australia: Our approach to dealing with illegal foreign fishing is longstanding and well understood. ABF works closely with partners across the region on this and other important maritime issues. The ABF continues to enjoy an excellent relationship with its Indonesian counterparts and looks forward to continued collaboration on this issue. Federal trade minister Dan Tehan has been speaking to ABC radio this morning after China announced in a statement that they intend to “phase down” coal consumption. This is a big deal for us as China is Australia’s largest coal market. Here is what he had to say in response: If China is looking to replace its coal imports, they’re going to need new energy alternatives to be able to replace that with. We want to be part of that picture. That’s why we’re putting money into the research and development of hydrogen. Tehan also noted he was hopeful that Australia could surpass our (extremely unambitious) midterm emission reduction targets. We’ve made very clear that we will meet our commitment, which is the 26-28% reduction over the 2010 figure. We also think we will be able to get to a level of about 35%. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued several minor flood warnings across the country after heavy rains pummelled the east coast and even inland cities like Alice Springs yesterday. So now that Scott Morrison has appeared back to back on Sunrise and Today, I can only assume that he will appear on ABC News Breakfast next to be grilled by Michael Rowland or Lisa Millar. What? He’s not? Hmmm, wonder why. Scott Morrison has done a round of morning interviews, preparing the ground for an election by talking up the economy and lying about Labor’s electric vehicle policy. Asked about his backflip on electric vehicles, Morrison told Channel Seven’s Sunrise: Labor wanted to force people to do this and I still don’t want to do that. You don’t get people to do something else by pushing up the price that they are currently doing that is still what Labor wants to do. They want to put up your petrol prices, increase your cost of living to force you to make other choice. Labor’s electric vehicle policy did not include a mandate, so it didn’t want to “force” anyone to do anything. When this was pointed out to Morrison, he then repeated the false claim that Labor wanted to put up petrol prices. There was no element of its policy imposing a tax or price on petrol vehicles. In fact, at the 2019 election Morrison just speculated that maybe petrol excise would go up because electric vehicle drivers don’t pay petrol excise. Over on Channel Nine’s Today, Morrison committed to release net zero modelling “before we get back to parliament” – so we’re talking weeks not months. Morrison also touched up Labor for opposing attempts to allow the Clean Energy Finance Corporation and Australian Renewable Energy Agency from investing in carbon capture and storage. That much was true! Well done, Scott. Morrison also accused Anthony Albanese of “backing in the Chinese government and a number of others having a crack at me as well” over submarines. Which is odd, because I seem to remember it was French president, Emmanuel Macron who accused Morrison of lying and the US president, Joe Biden, who said the handling of the contract cancellation was “clumsy”. So despite the fact Labor was complaining Morrison managed to piss off allied nations, Morrison wants to characterise that as backing in the Chinese government. Hmm. Good morning everyone, Matilda Boseley here and I have two questions: How is it only Thursday? And how is it already Thursday? While we all ponder those philosophical questions, let me tell you about the news of the morning. Scott Morrison is out and about, speaking to Sunrise, partially to talk about Remembrance Day, and partially to defend his climate change funding announcements: I’m here at the Doncaster RSL and people will be coming together and giving thanks for the tremendous sacrifice of our diggers. We think of them today and my job is to focus on securing this economic recovery, that’s what matters to Australians. The prime minister was questioned by Sunrise host Natalie Barr when he repeatedly claimed Labor’s previous electric vehicle plan would have forced up petrol prices. Barr: The Labor party were not forcing people. It was not a mandate at the last election that they were introducing, it was a non-binding target of 50% [of new cars to be electric by 2030]. Wasn’t that the same as yours? Morrison: No, they were going to put up the price of oil. That’s not going to help anybody commuting on their way to work from the outer suburbs today, they were going to put up the cost of fuel to try to force people to switch over. That’s not how we do things. We are not a government that goes around trying to tell people what to do. I think Australians have had a gut full of government trying to tell them what to do in their lives. Speaking of the prime minister, he announced this morning that Australia will share an extra 7.5m Covid-19 vaccine doses with Indonesia. (The prime minister’s press release doesn’t seem to mention which brand of vaccine we are sending.) This will bring Australia’s total commitment to 10m doses to the country: These commitments, together with a $107 million vaccine procurement through UNICEF will deliver over 20 million doses to Indonesia under our health partnership to support Indonesia’s national vaccine rollout. Supporting equitable access to Covid-19 vaccines for our region and ensuring their safe roll out are the highest priorities for Australia. Australia has committed to supply up to 60 million doses to the Indo-Pacific by the end of 2022. Nearly 7.2 million of these doses will have been delivered to countries across the Indo-Pacific by the end of this week. OK, with that, why don’t we jump into the rest of the day’s news?The NSW police and the state government are under mounting pressure to provide “quick and transparent” answers to the family of an Aboriginal man shot and killed by police this week. NSW police shot 46-year-old Gomeroi man, Stanley Russell inside his aunt’s house in north-west Sydney on Tuesday. Police later said there had been a “physical confrontation” at the house, where they had gone to execute a warrant. NSW shadow minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Treaty, David Harris, said Labor supported calls from the family for “for a quick and transparent coronial inquest”. “This is essential so that those impacted by this death may be able to understand the circumstances of it and have some closure,” he said. Police alleged Stanley Russell had a knife and an axe and “confronted” four officers, who “let out a number of shots” inside the home. Stanley’s grief-stricken parents, Ted and Helen Russell, have demanded answers about what happened. They have questioned police reports that their son was holding a knife and an axe. They want to see the police body-worn camera footage of the incident. Both of their biological sons have died in custody. Stanley’s older brother Edward died in Long Bay jail in 1999. “We have already been to hell and back during the investigation into Edward’s very avoidable death in custody,” the Russells said. “Now we have to go through the same pain and trauma all over again. Given what we know currently about how Stanley died, we have questions about whether police failed in their duty of care to him too. “For 30 years we have struggled to help stop Aboriginal deaths in custody. We have now lost both our sons in NSW custody. The royal commission’s key point about ensuring an active duty of care has been repeatedly ignored.” Russell’s death was the second in a NSW custodial setting this week alone, after an Aboriginal man died in prison on Sunday. Harris said the deaths, “and the subsequent grief caused by them, should not have occurred”. Incarceration rates for Aboriginal people are a “historic and ongoing systemic failure which requires urgent action”, Harris said. Outside NSW parliament on Thursday, the family of another Gomeroi man shot dead by police in his own home, gathered to mark the 11th anniversary of his death. Mark Mason, 44, was capsicum sprayed, tasered and then shot dead by police in his home in Collarenebri in 2010. A police investigation later cleared the four officers involved and the coroner found they had acted in self-defence. “Today it’s been 11 years since the police shot and killed our father and we still got no justice,” his daughter Darlene Mason told the rally. “When is it gonna stop for our people? It never stops. We are still fighting today.” Mason’s family called for independent investigations into Aboriginal deaths in police and prison custody. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Later inside the house, Greens MP David Shoebridge told parliament the constant deaths of other First Nations peoples re-traumatises bereaved families. “But it doesn’t happen once a year. It happens repeatedly, month in, month out,” Shoebridge said. “For First Nations peoples, we don’t have a criminal justice system in this state. “For First Nations peoples, you don’t call the police to come and help, because some of the most dangerous people in their lives … are the New South Wales police. “And it’s about time we saw that and it’s about time we recognise and address this fundamental racial bias in our criminal justice system,” he said. So far this year, 11 Aboriginal people have died in custody or in a police operation in NSW alone. Chief executive of the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander legal service said the news of two more deaths this week is “gut wrenching”. “If this is not proof that we are in the midst of a national emergency – I don’t know what is,” NATSILS Executive Officer, Jamie McConnachie said. “How many more of our people will lose their lives before we see change?” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to correct quotes wrongly attributed to NSW Labor leader Chris Minns. They were in fact from NSW shadow minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Treaty, David Harris.Victoria’s anti-corruption commissioner has suggested a former Andrews government minister at the centre of an investigation into the alleged rorting of taxpayer funds is “living proof” of the consequences of an unethical culture within the Labor party. The Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (Ibac) is investigating what counsel assisting, Chris Carr SC, has described as the “premeditated and systematic rorting of taxpayer resources” for political purposes. Ibac is using branch stacking within the moderate Labor faction as a case study to examine broader issues about the use of public resources. Branch stacking is not illegal but is a breach of party rules. The upper house MP Adem Somyurek, who denies he led the moderates during the period being investigated despite the evidence of multiple witnesses to the contrary, has been giving evidence to the commission this week. He was dumped from Andrews’ ministry and resigned from the party after a 60 Minutes/Age investigation last year outlined alleged wholesale branch stacking within the faction. Somyurek agreed on Thursday he was more concerned with the value of people to his political faction – rather than the value for money to the taxpayer – when he employed them. He also agreed with a suggestion from the Ibac commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, that there had been “countless” examples given before the hearing of Somyurek placing higher value in what was best for the faction than what was best for the taxpayer. Redlich said Somyurek had “inverted” his requirements under the Members of Parliament (Standards) Act to act “ethically, reasonably and in good faith when using, and accounting for the use of, public resources”. “For you, value for money is how much use they will be to you as a factional operative,” Redlich said. “It’s consistent with how I was introduced to politics, yep,” Somyurek responded. Redlich went on to say he considered it a tragedy that young people who wished to be involved in Labor party politics, and may have had much to offer Victoria, had to start their career doing factional work. He said it was part of the “human condition” that it would erode that person’s moral compass to be exposed to that factional work, and would impact their behaviour in future. “You are living proof of the consequences of being brought up over decades in this unethical culture,” Redlich said. “I am, yes, that’s true,” Somyurek responded. “The trick is not to just think it’s me, and I’m an aberration, and I’m an outlier. I’m not.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Somyurek also agreed during the hearing that he wanted extra taxpayer-funded work for his son so Somyurek could use the money to buy party memberships, but denied ever actually making the request. In a recorded telephone conversation early last year between himself and an unidentified staffer that was played before the commission on Thursday, Somyurek said he had wanted an extra day of work for his son in the office of the federal MP Anthony Byrne. Somyurek said in the same phone call that he had to organise payment for memberships by City of Greater Dandenong councillor Loi Truong, who had provided members for the Moderate Labor faction. Truong’s “fixing up” of the members was “indexed” to employment, Somyurek said in the call, in reference to an associate of Truong who he employed as an electorate officer the previous year. Branch stacking relies on the large-scale recruitment of members who Carr dubbed as “non-genuine”, given they have no interest in actually joining the party, and usually the payment of their membership fees. Somyurek agreed with Carr that it was common for deals relating to employment within electorate or ministerial offices to be linked to the payment of memberships, but denied he asked Byrne to give his son, who was already employed in the office, an extra day of work. “I had some bad thoughts at that time, I was desperate, and I crossed multiple lines, but it didn’t happen,” Somyurek said. Carr earlier told Somyurek that former staffer Nick McLennan had given evidence in a private hearing that the MP had authorised the diversion of taxpayer-funded stamps to the faction to be used for political purposes. A previous public hearing heard from another former staffer, Adam Sullivan, that he had performed this task after a request from McLennan, and sent $14,000 worth of stamps in batches out of Somyurek’s electorate office in 2018. Somyurek told Carr he had no recollection of this occurring. Carr found this answer surprising, as “a conniving theft of public property is the kind of thing that someone would normally remember being involved in, or would say ‘I absolutely was not involved in that outrageous conduct’, rather than saying, I don’t remember.” Somyurek repeated he had no recollection of it occurring. Somyurek also strongly denied the evidence of two former staffers who said he knew and encouraged the widespread forgery of signatures, including using signatures on outdated membership renewal forms to copy signatures onto new forms. This was despite Carr showing Somyurek an undated text message Somyurek had allegedly deleted from his phone prior to it being seized by Ibac that counsel assisting said suggested Somyurek knew a signature had been forged on a membership form. “That’s just a coincidence they’re accusing the man who sent that message, that’s correct?” Carr asked. “That’s correct,” Somyurek responded. Intercepted phone conversations between Somyurek and multiple people that were made in the days before the 60 Minutes episode was broadcast were also unveiled during Thursday’s hearing. Somyurek spoke to Marlene Kairouz and Robin Scott, who were also both Andrews government ministers at the time, about what could be in the show. Kairouz and Scott both stood down after the program was broadcast, but have denied any involvement in branch stacking. In a call just before midnight two days before the program was broadcast, Kairouz told Somyurek: “Branch stacking ... that’s not corruption.” “It’s serious misconduct,” he replied. Carr showed Somyurek charts on Thursday that detailed the familial relationships of people employed in the ministerial and electoral offices of MPs within his faction. Kairouz hired her mother and sister, and the husband of the upper house MP Kaushaliya Vaghela, as electorate officers, and the daughter and nephew of the MP Nazih Elasmar as an executive assistant and ministerial adviser respectively. Somyurek hired three of the same people as Kairouz, and also hired his father as a cleaner, and his sister as an electorate officer. Vaghela employed the son of the MP Cesar Melhem as an electorate officer, and Scott hired her daughter as an electorate officer. Carr said these nepotistic practices were part of a culture of patronage that underpinned branch stacking. Somyurek largely agreed, clarifying it was not uncommon in parliament, but said he had never been told it was improper under regulations relating to the use of public resources. Somyurek’s evidence continues on Friday.A train driver in Japan is suing his employer after it docked ¥43 (28p) from his wages over a one-minute delay that he claims was not his fault. West Japan Railway Company (JR West) said it withheld the tiny sum by applying its strict “no work, no pay” principle over the incident, which occurred in June last year. The driver, who has not been named by Japanese media, is seeking the ¥43 plus ¥13 overtime, as well as ¥2.2m damages for the mental anguish caused by his employer’s decision, according to the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper. The case is a reminder of the Japanese railway network’s enviable record on punctuality, with even very brief delays prompting repeated apologies to passengers. The dispute arose after the driver, who had been scheduled to move an empty train to a depot at Okayama station in western Japan, realised he was waiting at the wrong platform. His mistake held up the driver transfer at the correct platform by one minute and caused a further one-minute delay to the train’s arrival at the depot, the newspaper said. JR West said it was entitled to dock the driver’s pay as he had not been working during the mix-up. The plaintiff, however, told Okayama district court that the delay was caused by “human error” and that he should not have been considered absent from work, adding that there was no disruption to train timetables. The firm initially withheld ¥85 for the two-minute delay but reduced the penalty to correspond with a one-minute delay after the driver complained to the local labour standards office. The driver refused to accept the lower fine, however, and took his damages claim to court in March. A JR West spokesperson told Agence France-Presse the dispute had arisen due to disagreements over how to interpret the cause of the delay, adding that the company had applied its no work, no pay rule in docking the driver’s wages. Online reaction appeared to side with the out-of-pocket driver. “So you can reduce someone’s salary by one minute, but you can’t pay overtime in one-minute increments as well?” one commenter said, according to the Sora News 24 website. Another wrote: “I would go crazy if I was in charge of the payroll, having to deduct minutes from people’s salaries for every mistake they make.” Japan’s vast rail network rarely experiences significant delays, with the exception of disruption caused by earthquakes and typhoons. Commuters and students using trains that are five or more minutes behind schedule are offered certificates to prove to bosses and teachers that they were not at fault for being late. In 2017 the operator of a private railway firm that serves the Tokyo suburbs issued an apology for the “severe inconvenience” it had caused after one of its trains departed 20 seconds ahead of schedule.Janine Beckie has a biblical verse tattooed on the inside of her left wrist. “Those who hope in the Lord will renew their strength,” declares Isaiah 40:31. “They will soar on wings like eagles; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not be faint.” The Manchester City and Canada forward is a committed Christian whose faith has helped shape a career which has carried her from a childhood in Highlands Ranch, Colorado, to Texas, New Jersey and, most recently, north-west England. “It’s a really, really important part of my life,” says the 27-year-old, who helped Canada secure Olympic gold in Japan last summer. “I was raised as a Christian and it’s about how I operate, how I treat other people and even how I feel about myself. It’s something incredibly important to me and influences everything I do, how I react to things. I’m learning from it, all the time.” Beckie’s faith helped her cope with the disappointment of exclusion from Canada’s 2015 World Cup squad before she established herself in a side that beat Sweden on penalties in August to secure much-cherished gold. That victory represented a considerable triumph for Bev Priestman, Canada’s English manager. “Bev had that belief we could go and win a gold medal,” says Beckie. “She understands our group and what we’re capable of. I think Bev’s biggest strength is her ability to use the full squad and she did that really well. She gives us so much belief. “Tactically, she’s got a great football brain and knows what brings the best out in us. We already had a really strong defensive foundation but Bev’s really pushed us forward on the attacking side while still keeping us tidy at the back.” As a dual citizen of the United States and Canada, Beckie played for the country of her birth until Under-20 level. Although she grew up 20 minutes south of downtown Denver, in the shadow of the Rockies, her parents and three older brothers were born in Canada and retain family ties with their former home on the Saskatchewan prairie. “I’ve got a special way of feeling both American and Canadian,” says Beckie, who excelled at not merely football but athletics and basketball in Highlands Ranch. “I was born in Colorado but I definitely feel more Canadian. Growing up, I had a lot of Canadian principles and ethics instilled in me. My roots are Canadian.” Not that an element of American social conditioning has hurt her. “America’s such a cut-throat culture,” she explains. “It’s all about winning, which has its benefits for sure, but Canadians are looser; they want to grow up with a solid, balanced, foundation. Sport’s important but it’s not everything. “So maybe I bring a difference to my teams because I grew up in that kind of cut-throat, win or die, culture which has really shaped me as an athlete. It’s given me my competitiveness.” If America can be a sharp-elbowed place, Beckie believes England, and, specifically, Manchester, to be somewhat less diplomatic. “I’ve found British people are a bit more straightforward, more direct,” she says. “I’ve needed a bit thicker skin living over here. “There’s lots of lovely things about British people but I found the transition to Manchester difficult. It took me a long time to get acclimatised to this culture – and the weather! – but I really love living here now. What’s really great is that you can drive 15 or 20 minutes outside the city centre and you’re in beautiful, amazing, countryside. “I also enjoy being engulfed in Manchester’s football atmosphere; people are so passionate about the game in this city.” Intense passions breed often high expectations. City finished second in the WSL last season, two points behind Chelsea, but their haul of seven points from six games this term has dismayed fans before Sunday’s home game against the champions. If a raft of serious injuries to key players including Lucy Bronze, Steph Houghton and Ellie Roebuck has hardly helped Gareth Taylor’s cause, the presence of 12 senior professionals at the Olympics wrecked the manager’s pre-season. Beckie, who studied journalism at university in Texas while playing for Houston Dash, is not surprised that, despite last Sunday’s convincing 4-1 win at Leicester, Taylor remains “under the gun”. Yet, without forfeiting her hallmark honesty and openness, she points reporters to the wider context. “Gareth, like all managers, needs results so he’s under the gun a little bit right now but, as players, we all feel he’s a great guy and a great manager,” she says. “I don’t think he’s lost anyone – we’re all behind him. “I don’t like excuses and we can’t use the injuries as one; we’ve got more than enough good players to win games but Gareth was put in a difficult position because we literally didn’t have a pre-season. I think anyone in that situation is going to be a little behind.” It seems Taylor could do worse than reflect on the message contained in Isaiah 40:31. “The wins will come, no doubt about that,” says Beckie. “We’ve done a really good job of sticking together and there’s still a lot of games to go. “Things can change really quickly. If this happens to us this early in the season, it can easily happen to another team later on. If we get a few consecutive wins things will look really different.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.He was the French adventurer who plumbed the depths of the world’s oceans to introduce us to a magical and previously unseen universe under the sea. Commander Jacques-Yves Cousteau, the former naval officer turned inventor of the Aqualung and scuba equipment and then television explorer, became a hero to generations of children who were mesmerised by his adventures and groundbreaking films. Now a new documentary explores his life and legacy, showing how more than half a century ago Cousteau sounded the alarm over the destruction of the oceans, which he saw as vital to the future of the human race. While a young David Attenborough captivated viewers fascinated by nature on land, Cousteau, with his red beanie and weatherworn profile at the helm of the Calypso, was the old man of the sea, co-star to shoals of colourful fish, sharks and coral reefs in The Undersea World of Jacques Cousteau. “Undersea film-making was extraordinarily rudimentary before Cousteau came along and revolutionised it. It’s hard to remember now, but this was a totally new world he showed us,” said Liz Garbus, the award-winning director of the new film about the oceanographer, Becoming Cousteau. In the 1970s, after decades diving and exploring and at the height of his fame, Cousteau changed tack: instead of simply showing and sharing his exploits, he began worrying about and warning of the damage humanity was doing to the planet. Today, as world leaders gather in Glasgow to discuss the climate emergency, Cousteau’s fears for the future of the marine environment seem prescient but ignored. At the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio, the oceanographer – nicknamed “Captain Planet” – was received as a hero and was the only non-politician in the official portrait. “Cousteau was warning about the dangers of climate change even before those two words were used together in a sentences, before we had this notion of global warming,” Garbus said. “He became an ardent environmentalist well before his time.” Cousteau, who died at 87 in 1997, began his career in the navy training to be a pilot, an ambition cut short by a serious car accident when he was in his mid-20s. Part of his physical rehabilitation was swimming and Cousteau developed a love of diving, developing the first Aqualung, and after the second world war setting off to explore the world’s seas and oceans in the Calypso, a converted minesweeper. The 90-minute National Geographic Documentary film, released in UK cinemas from 12 November, reveals how Cousteau aimed to become the John Ford or John Huston of the marine world, developing the first underwater cameras and inventing new ways of filming. For many it was the first time they had ever seen the wonders of the deep. But, short of money in the 1950s and wishing to keep the Calypso and his research afloat, Cousteau accepted funding from British Petroleum to help look for oil in the Gulf. Reflecting later on the environmental damage wreaked by offshore oil exploration, he would come to regret the decision. “I think I was naive … but we didn’t have a penny,” he says in the film. Cousteau and his band of adventurers’ early interactions with marine life would be considered unacceptable today: footage shows them setting off dynamite charges to kill fish, “riding” turtles and, in the Oscar-winning 1956 documentary The Silent World, revelling in the killing of a shark that fought to the death. Nor does the film gloss over his personal failings. Cousteau had many talents; being a family man, attentive father and faithful husband were not among them. His two sons, Jean-Michel and Philippe – the latter who worked with his father and who died in a plane crash in 1979 – were sent to boarding school while the workaholic Cousteau and his wife Simone sailed the oceans. He married his second wife, Francine, shortly after Simone died of cancer, by which time he already had two children with her. After the death of his son, Cousteau’s films became darker, more pessimistic about the fate of humans, which he saw as inextricably linked to a disappearing underwater world. The Oscar-nominated Garbus, who has been responsible for portraits of Nina Simone and Marilyn Monroe among others, said she had grown up on Cousteau’s extraordinary documentaries but realised when reading a story about him to her son that he had “receded into the woodwork, disappeared completely” from the public domain. “I went online and I couldn’t find anything much about him there either,” she said. “I wanted to explore how he moved from his early start as a conquering adventurer to someone who was an ardent environmentalist ahead of his time,” Garbus said. “He changed from not just showing and sharing but protecting. In the 1970s he starts talking about having been diving for decades and observing reefs dying and species of fish that were plentiful disappearing. He was the most popular voice for conservation in the 1970s and then he just disappeared.” Garbus said Cousteau’s enduring importance was as a “non-partisan figure uniting us around this issue”, a powerful role she believes nobody can fill today. “His legacy is up to us. Is it a Cassandra story of someone warning of impending doom and the world not listening, or a story that we take action, but too late, but still some action? “As Cousteau says, you will only protect what you love. He brought us closer to the undersea world and its creatures, and now we do love it and want to protect it and that’s thanks to him. That’s his legacy.”Punting is one of those things non-punters rarely think about. It’s like the post office. It’s there. It does a job. But it’s rarely important unless someone makes a mistake. There has never been a rockstar of the profession. Punting is punting, its own individual craft, left to the side, away from the real players. Pat McAfee has morphed into the sport’s most popular, mainstream entertainer post-career. Marquette King gave it a good go for a while with the Raiders, before his flamboyance saw him exiled from the starchy world of the professional game. Enter: Matt Araiza, the Elvis of punters, and college football’s most intriguing one-man show. Araiza is a punter by positional designation only – he also kicks field goals and takes San Diego State’s kickoffs. In reality, he is an offensive weapon, the kind that ra-ra football coaches have been waiting for their entire coaching lives. Through nine games, the Aztecs are 8-1. Asked who was the team’s Most Valuable Player through an unbeaten seven-game stretch in late October, Brady Hoke, the Aztecs’ head coach, didn’t miss a beat. “It’s Matt,” Hoke said. “What he does in terms of field position. It has to be Matt.” It’s not that Araiza is the best at what he does, although he is. It’s that he’s charting a new course for punters altogether. At the time of writing, Araiza leads the country in average punt yards. He has 15(!) punts this season of 60-yards or more, breaking the all-time record with weeks to spare. He has hit two 80-plus yard punts this season. There have only been two punts that have traveled 80 or more yards in the NFL over the last eight years. Punters are not supposed to have highlights. They’re supposed to be a non-factor, a net-neutral player who doesn’t necessarily tip the scales in your favor but doesn’t cost you the game, either. Not Araiza. At San Diego State, he is the star attraction; has a fan-base ever rooted for its offense to go three-and-out just to see how far the punter can boom his kick? Against Hawaii, he hit a 90-yard punt. That’s not a typo: Araiza has boomed 56 punts this season for a net average of 51.9 yards per punt. The NCAA record is 50.3 yards. The NFL record is 51.4 yards, set by Sammy Baugh in 1940. Araiza is on pace to easily beat both. More important than the distance itself is Araiza’s control: He has hit 26 punts inside the opponent’s 20, often from bewildering distances. There are plenty of college punters with booming kicks, but smashing them out of the endzone doesn’t always help a defense. Dropping the ball from your own team’s 30-yard line to inside the opponent’s five, though? That’s a game-changer. Araiza has become such a potent weapon, with returners struggling to track the ball so far downfield, that opponents have taken to sticking two returners on the play: One for where the ball would typically land from a punter with a big leg; one for when Araiza decides to do some Dumbledore stuff. How high will he go in the 2022 draft? That’s the question Araiza-oligists continue to debate. Listen hard enough, and you will hear the sound of 32 NFL head coaches cajoling their team’s chief decision-maker to take Araiza as early as possible. Were Al Davis still alive, we could have a real, honest discussion about whether the Raiders would take Arazia in the first round (the team have drafted a punter in the first-round before: they took future hall of famer Ray Guy with the 23rd pick in 1973). Conservative, fuddy-duddy coaches love nothing more than to harp on about the field position battle; young, innovative coaches understand the unique advantage of having a singular player who can work as a get-out-of-jail-free card on offense, and who can shift the odds at a position that rarely features a true difference-maker. Still: the NFL is a conservative league by nature. It can take a decade or more for the conventional wisdom to shift. Few want to be the first off the ledge. Cornerbacks and receivers bust all the time. But if you take one in the first or second round and he flames out, the player draws the bulk of the attention. Take a punter or kicker that high, however, and it shines a light on the organization. Never underestimate the number of decision-makers in sport whose main goal is not to get fired. Punters have gone early before. Bryan Anger was selected by the Jaguars with the 70th overall pick in 2012. Back in the late 70s, punters going in the first round was commonplace. Now, even the best of the best have to wait until the third and final day of the draft to hear their name called. Teams would rather spend their precious draft capital on a maybe-possibly offensive lineman and then wade into the undrafted waters to find a punter. Over the past half-decade, 12 punters have been drafted. The earliest a punter has been selected over that period was the fourth round, the Niners selecting Mitch Wishnowsky. No other punter was selected before the fifth round. In the modern era, teams have been more willing to take a gamble on kickers. Sebastian Janikowski was infamously selected by the Raiders 17th overall in 2000. It was a decision that was mocked at the time and subsequently, not least because Tom Brady was selected 182 picks later. Nobody wants to be the GM that passed up the GOAT to select a kicker. But Janikowski did play 17 years with the Raiders, which when you compare him to the team’s recent first-round selections is not too shabby. The point is not that you cannot draft a kicker or punter high, but that if you do so, they must be a paradigm-shifting player that you can pencil into the lineup for the next 10 or so years – and then hope an all-time quarterback was not selected behind them. Araiza might be better at his craft than Janikowski was at his. He’s probably the best human being to ever punt a ball. In a league that spends sleepless nights trying to move the ball five yards at a time, Araiza represents a cheat code, someone who can turn a bad offensive drive into a healthy defensive position with a swing of his left leg. In the era of [shudders] marginal gains, that has value – though the margins are finer at the pro-level than in college because most punters are good. Some team will select Arazia before the close of the second day of the draft. A fan base will lose its collective mind, thinking about the could-of, should-ofs of some pass-rusher. And then they’ll sit back in awe as Araiza sends his latest, greatest hit barreling through the sky.1) England meet Albania for only the sixth time on Friday, at Wembley. Their first encounter, in Tirana in 1989 shortly before the fall of Albania’s particularly hardline Stalinist government, attracted a good deal of curiosity. Here are Barry Davies and Des Lynam providing a little bit of background to tee up the BBC’s live coverage of England’s 2-0 victory. The return fixture, a routine 5-0 England win, was notable for Paul Gascoigne’s first international goal. Elsewhere this weekend, the Republic of Ireland, long out of the World Cup qualification running, face another tough test against Portugal, so here’s a reminder of their 1-0 Euro 96 qualifying win over the Portuguese in April 1995, the closing stages of Jack Charlton’s reign. 2) England and Australia lock horns at Twickenham on Saturday, the 28th time the two rivals have met in TW2. Here’s silent footage of the first, an 18-11 England win in 1928, though strictly speaking Australia were represented by the New South Wales Waratahs, and Australia’s first win at the ground, in 1948. The rivals have met rather more regularly in the modern era, treating us to classics such as England’s hard-fought 22-19 victory in 2000, their famous 32-31 comeback win in 2002, and Australia’s most famous Twickenham triumph, in the 1991 World Cup final. Meanwhile Ireland and New Zealand meet for the first time since the All Blacks romped to victory in the 2019 World Cup quarter-finals, though the Irish were famously victorious the last time they hosted them. The first two times they did, in 1905 and 1924, Ireland didn’t manage a point at Lansdowne Road. 3) Last Saturday in Las Vegas, the unstoppable Canelo Álvarez defeated Caleb Plant to become the undisputed super-middleweight champion of the world. Here are the two fighters having a nice little chat during the bout: “You’re pretty good … I respect your skills …” For good measure, here’s a ringside view of the 11th-round stoppage that unified the belts at 168lb. “As ferocious as it was clinical,” Donald McRae wrote of the fight’s finish. 4) Comedy own goals always offer easy pickings, but even so, the force with which this is struck is worth admiring. Pick that one out. Meanwhile, the Bulgarian league avoids the sublime altogether, and sticks determinedly with the ridiculous. 5) There was an unhelpful mid-match firework display as Shamrock Rovers faced Waterford in Ireland on Friday. 6) Connor McDavid, of the Edmonton Oilers, slaloms through the New York Rangers defence before tucking away a finish for one of the more memorable ice hockey goals we’ve seen. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) Ten out of 10 for these unorthodox 10-pin bowling styles. 2) Miss of the week? Wolfsburg’s Jill Roord will be disappointed with this. 3) A young Arnold Schwarzenegger has a go at track and field, in 1969 flick Hercules in New York. 4) Revel in 10 of Francesco Totti’s best. 5) The story of how Landon Donavan stoked the US’s rivalry with Mexico. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, Graham Clayton, ELGwero, denothemeno, germit Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise. Any suggestions for next week? Add your links in the comments belowArmed forces are among the biggest polluters on the planet but are avoiding scrutiny because countries do not have to include their emissions in their targets, scientists say. The world’s militaries combined, and the industries that provide their equipment, are estimated to create 6% of all global emissions, according to Scientists for Global Responsibility (SGR). Owing to what they describe as a “large loophole” in the Paris agreement, governments are not required to provide full data on greenhouse gases being emitted by armed forces. Previously, under the Kyoto protocol, militaries were given an automatic exemption from CO2 targets, after lobbying from the US government. Campaigners say the current situation, whereby it is only voluntary for states to include armed forces in their carbon-cutting obligations, is undermining efforts to tackle the climate crisis. SGR’s executive director, Dr Stuart Parkinson, said that as military spending increased, the loophole continued to grow. “Military carbon emissions matter because they are a potentially large loophole in the Paris targets – especially for the high military spenders like the US, China, UK, Russia, India, Saudi Arabia and France,” he said. “With military spending rapidly rising, this loophole is set to grow at a time when other emissions are falling. The seriousness with how these nations deal with this issue will affect action in other sectors and in other nations.” The Ministry of Defence says the UK military’s total annual carbon footprint is 3 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e), but SGR estimates the true figure to be 11m tonnes. That is roughly the amount 6m average cars would emit annually. The UK-based company with the largest carbon emissions is BAE Systems, whose emissions account for about 30% of the UK arms industry’s total output. A recent report from SGR and the Conflict and Environment Observatory estimated the carbon footprint of EU armed forces in 2019 to total 24.8m tonnes of CO2e, with France accounting for about a third of that. Meanwhile, the US government says its armed forces emit 56m tonnes of CO2e but, while there are bigger gaps in the data, SGR estimates it to be significantly higher at 205m tonnes. The stark figures are supported by Brown University’s Costs of War project, which in 2019 said the US military was “the largest single source of greenhouse gas emissions in the world”. SGR said the estimates were conservative and did not include the environmental impact of fighting wars. For example, the Iraq war was responsible for 141m tonnes of carbon releases in its first four years, according to an Oil Change International report. Parkinson added: “Many nations don’t specifically report any military carbon data. Those that do often report partial figures. So figures for military aircraft could be hidden under ‘aviation’, military tech industry under ‘industry’, military bases under ‘public buildings’, etc. Indeed, it’s not just the public who are unaware, the policymakers are also unaware, and even the researchers.” While the issue is not on the agenda at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, demonstrations have called for the UK to focus its spending on fighting climate change ahead of the armed forces. Anya Nanning Ramamurthy, a campaigner for the Peace Pledge Union pacifist group, said: “I don’t think many people realise that military emissions aren’t included in the data. We have seen a massive increase in military spending in the UK, the largest in nearly 70 years, while we are in this climate crisis – they promise one thing, then go off and do another.” This week a website was launched to monitor military emissions data. The Military Emissions Gap says it is dedicated to “tracking, analysing and closing the military emissions gap”.Water companies in England and Wales will be forced to repay a net £67m to customers after the regulator penalised them for missing performance targets. Thames Water, the supplier to London and the Thames Valley, will have to pay back £53m to its customers, the biggest charge under the regulator Ofwat’s system of rewards and penalties. Southern Water, which runs services from Kent to Hampshire, will repay £46m, while South West Water will repay £15m. Water companies hold a monopoly on supply in their areas, meaning customers are unable to switch to a competitor if they are dissatisfied with the service provided. Instead, the regulator has devised the system of penalties to ensure the companies, many of which are privately owned, have an incentive to invest rather than maximising dividend payments. For instance, Thames Water was penalised for failing to stop sewers from flooding, for missing customer service targets, and for failing to generate enough renewable energy. English water companies have handed more than £2bn a year on average to shareholders since they were privatised three decades ago, according to analysis for the Guardian last year. Thames Water is owned by a series of investment funds, led by pension funds for Ontario retirees and UK academics as well as Abu Dhabi’s sovereign wealth fund. Macquarie Asset Management, part of an Australian investment bank, bought a majority stake in Southern Water in August. South West Water is owned by Pennon Group, a FTSE 250-listed company. The repayments will not be delivered directly to customers but rather will affect the amount that companies can charge during the 2022-23 financial year. Ofwat said it had decided to defer incentive bonuses that would have added £44m and £323,000 to the bills of customers of Severn Trent Water and Portsmouth Water respectively. The biggest outperformers were Severn Trent, the north-west of England provider United Utilities, which will be allowed to charge an extra £21m, and the east of England provider Anglian Water, at £12m. Ofwat also said it would make determinations on company performance on water consumption targets at the end of the 2020-25 period, after the coronavirus pandemic played havoc with water usage patterns. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021. The original headline and article referred to British water firms, but Ofwat only covers English and Welsh water firms.Flash flooding, heavy rain and severe thunderstorms are battering much of the east coast of Australia, with emergency services warning conditions are expected to worsen. Intense rainfall has lashed parts of Queensland and New South Wales with Dubbo recording 40.2mm of rain in 30 minutes. Flash flooding warnings were issued for multiple areas in NSW, including for the Northern Inland and Upper Hunter. The State Emergency Service has already received more than 250 calls for assistance and are bracing for more demand as the rain intensifies. “We’re expecting that number to increase quite significantly as the rainfall sets in overnight and into the early hours of morning,” SES assistant commissioner Dean Storey told ABC News. “The key focus will be that northern rivers including Lismore and Ballina area, we’re expecting heavy, potentially torrential rainfall tonight [and] into the early hours of tomorrow morning, creating a high-risk of flash flooding and potentially life-threatening flash flooding.” Storey urged residents to “never drive through flood waters” and to ensure they have a plan in place if they live in flood-prone regions. “Know your local risk, if you live in a flood-prone area, have a plan in place. If you need to evacuate, know what to do and where you would go ahead of time.” Winds of up to 104km/h were recorded in Tibooburra on Thursday afternoon, with a warning for damaging winds issued for parts of the Lower Western and Upper Western districts. Catchments in the northern and central tablelands and north-west slopes have been issued a flood watch, including potential minor to moderate flooding on the Namoi River and moderate to major flooding on the Upper Macintyre River. The bureau is also predicting severe thunderstorms across a large part of Queensland, with Queensland Fire and Emergency warning “we’re going to cop some form of wild weather today”. Mt Stradbroke recorded 46mm of rain in 30 minutes, as severe thunderstorms continue to affect central, souther and south-eastern Queensland. BoM issued a fresh warning of heavy rainfall and possible flooding for southern Queensland, particularly for communities, like Goondiwindi, close to the NSW border on Thursday afternoon. The dangerous weather is the result of a low pressure system moving eastwards from South Australia across NSW, a trough moving south from Queensland, and an “extremely moist air mass” from the tropics, which are predicted to combine to deliver intense localised rainfall in some areas. In NSW, northern parts of the north-west slopes and plains, and the northern tablelands, are expected to experience the most severe rain and flooding, with six hourly totals exceeding 100mm. Damaging to destructive winds are also predicted for late Thursday. Areas around the Gwydir River, which is predicted to deliver major flooding, received huge falls on Wednesday, with 94mm recorded at Delungra and 76mm near Narrabri in the north-west slopes. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning BoM senior meteorologist Jane Golding said that’s more rain than Narrabri would typically receive for all of November. In Queensland, major flooding is predicted for the Darling Downs and Granite Belt areas, while severe thunderstorms are expected across much of the rest of the state. In the 24 hours to Thursday afternoon, Weringa Creek recorded 96mm of rain, while 91mm fell in Stanthorpe. BoM warned six-hourly rainfall totals could reach 150mm in these areas on Thursday. Parts of Victoria and SA are also likely to experience heavy rain and damaging winds on Thursday. “Severe thunderstorms may also develop and produce localised INTENSE RAINFALL which may lead to dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding,” BoM’s warning said for both NSW and Queensland. BoM meteorologist Jonathan How said “rain around the Queensland-NSW border has already triggered river rises and flood warnings are current” and that “these will evolve as more rainfalls and water flows downstream”. How also warned that damaging winds predicted as part of the thunderstorms will have the potential to down trees. The SES has already been called out for six flood rescues. While most requests for assistance were from people in the north-eastern part of the state, there were also storm-related calls from Sydney. Earlier, SES deputy commissioner Daniel Austin said the SES was “heartened” by an incident near Narrabri on Wednesday afternoon that showed people were heeding repeated warnings not to drive through flood waters. About 5.30pm an empty school bus and three 4WDs, including one with children inside, were caught on a road between two creeks that had risen quickly. “Those people stayed in place and chose not to drive through those flood waters,” Austin said. “They called emergency services and we worked together to get those people out … that’s a really positive outcome that highlights what you can do and what you shouldn’t do: driving through flood waters.” A rescue took place near Bingara about midnight, with four SES crews ferrying up to 30 visitors at a flooded caravan park out of danger, Austin said. “This is a fast-moving event in places, the risk is not just from the long, slow rainfall, but these sharp short thunderstorms,” Austin says. “People across NSW have had a couple days of warning … we’re asking people across the whole state to take that into account and be prepared,” he said. With Australian Associated PressBack in 2003, BBC2 show Time Commanders somewhat sneakily used the strategy game Rome: Total War as the basis for its entire high concept: to give normal people the chance to take on military leaders in famous historical battles. In Age of Empires 4, each campaign mission is driven by documentary narration and bookended by featurettes on everything from the supremacy of the English longbow to the tactical application of Mongolian whistling arrows. Total War’s Time Commanders appearance was never the plan, but AOE 4 feels like it could have been designed deliberately for a BBC edutainment slot. Always well presented, and often fascinating, Age of Empire 4 is also a touch sterile and bloodless, making the single player offerings feel less like juicy, escapist campaigns and more teaching tools. For history, and for the competitive multiplayer that is, understandably, the main focus here. This is a polished real-time strategy (RTS) game that strikes a skilful balance between accessibility and complexity, with sharp presentation and sound design. But unless you plan to invest heavily in the competitive game (or have Game Pass) the package comes at a steep asking price. Especially as advancements aren’t a million miles away from AOE 2’s definitive edition. There are still some smart additions and changes. While the eight civilisations included at launch all have access to roughly analogous units, their economic games set them apart. The English can eventually produce gold from their farms, ensuring a steady flow right through the late game and reducing the need to capture additional mines. Mongolians can’t trade for stone, but automatically mine quarries with a structure called an Ovoo, which also confers bonuses to nearby buildings. Being nomadic, they can also pack up their buildings into vehicles and relocate their entire settlement. This focus on the macro is not to say the micro is overlooked, either. While a population cap of 200 means even the biggest battles are noticeably abstracted, messy unit clusters are discouraged in favour of rank and file positioning and balanced forces. Braced spearmen repel cavalry charges. Elevations bolster range for archers. Wooden palisades can be torched by infantry, who can construct siege weapons in the field to deal with stone fortifications. Crossbows tear through heavy armour. It makes for a kinetic clash of plays and counters that rewards flexibility and variety. Sound design and bright presentation are highlights throughout. Sparking steel and thudding trebuchets. Trampling hooves and warhorns. Operatic scores and Mongolian throat singing. Stone walls under siege bombardment chip, then crumble, then collapse. Buildings under construction thrum with the flickering silhouettes of workers and wireframe plans. It often feels like a slick, futuristic museum exhibit. While this sharp presentation can feel too clinical to capture the bloody chaos and muddy romance of medieval combat, its readability lends itself well to the competitive game. Both longtime RTS fans and Age of Empires vets will find things to love here, a comfy if well-worn tactician’s armchair to slip into, spiffed up, and with a few shining surprises stuffed down the sides. But it all comes at such a premium, and with campaigns geared so heavily as tutorials for the multiplayer, it’s hard to wholeheartedly recommend it to anyone not already invested. • Age of Empires 4 is out now; £49.99/Games Pass.As America’s pandemic – for now – seems to be moving into a new phase with national rates in decline from the September peak and vaccines rolling out to children, a new worry has appeared on the horizon: wildlife passing on the virus. A new study shows that deer can catch the coronavirus from people and give it to other deer in overwhelming numbers, the first evidence of animals transmitting the virus in the wild. Similar spillover and transmission could be occurring in certain animal populations around the world, with troubling implications for eradicating the virus and potentially even for the emergence of new variants. One-third of Iowa deer sampled over nine months had active infections, with a peak of 80% testing positive between November and January, according to a preprint study that has not yet been peer-reviewed or published. It builds on previous findings that one-third of deer in other US states were exposed to the virus and developed antibodies, but it differs in showing high rates of active infections, which last for a much narrower window of time. The virus very likely spilled over from humans to deer through several different interactions, and then it probably spread to other deer, according to the analysis. Nearly everything about their study shocked the scientists. They knew deer could be infected with the coronavirus. But they were stunned by the numbers – four out of five deer tested positive at the highest peak – as well as high viral loads that were “truly gobsmacking”, Suresh Kuchipudi, clinical professor of virology at Penn State and coauthor of the study, told the Guardian. They were also surprised by the fairly clear links in the genetic analysis connecting human transmission to the animals and then the rapid transmission to other deer. “If there is spillover into free-living deer, it will rip through like wildfire,” said Vivek Kapur, professor of microbiology at Penn State and coauthor of the study. This analysis was limited to Iowa, but the researchers believe widespread infection is just as likely among deer in other states. Deer, which are abundant in North America and a popular target for hunters, are highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2, and they may contract it by grazing on discarded food, drinking contaminated wastewater, or nosing through undergrowth where a person has spit or relieved themselves. “If they come in contact with the virus from any means of source, they are going to be infected,” Kuchipudi said. “It is highly likely that the animal will pick up the infection even though face-to-face interaction never happened.” These results have implications for other wildlife as well. It is possible certain other animals are also contracting and spreading the coronavirus around the world, which would make it difficult to eradicate the virus and to prevent mutations that could lead to new variants. Around the world, SARS-CoV-2 has been reported in cats, dogs, ferrets, minks, lions, tigers, pumas and gorillas. Hyenas at the Denver zoo recently tested positive, the first confirmed cases in those animals. In August 2020, an outbreak at a mink farm in Utah led investigators to sample wild mink nearby – and they found antibodies and active infections in some of the wild animals. In November 2020, Denmark killed 17 million mink after the virus jumped from people to farmed mink and back to people again – the only documented case of animals passing the coronavirus back to people. The virus mutated, but none of the changes were dangerous. Even before the Covid-19 pandemic, coronaviruses were well known for infecting animals, and vaccinations against common coronaviruses were standard for pets in the US. Another coronavirus, which now causes mild cold symptoms, may have driven the 1889 pandemic that claimed 1 million lives – and it probably spilled over from cattle. Notably, cattle have also passed coronaviruses to deer, prompting concerns that SARS-CoV-2 could similarly move between deer, cattle and people to possibly catastrophic effect. A virus that can circulate among animals as well as people is much harder to eradicate. “It’s much harder to get rid of a virus if it has a reservoir,” Stanley Perlman, professor of microbiology and immunology at the University of Iowa, said. As people build immunity to viruses, fatalities begin to drop, but the viruses don’t go anywhere – the flu virus behind the 1918 pandemic still circulates today. “It’s always gonna be with us. What form it’s in, I don’t know – hopefully, it’ll be an attenuated, weakened form,” Perlman said. This cross-species contagion can result in mutations – and it’s hard to know whether these variations will be milder or more severe. “So far, there’s just been no evidence” of spillback into humans from animals, Perlman said. But “the more any virus circulates and moves around, the more opportunity it has to mutate,” Ellen Carlin, assistant research professor at Georgetown University’s Center for Global Health Science and Security, told the Guardian. “Just because a virus mutates, that doesn’t mean it’s a problematic mutation for human or animal health. But it could be, so we need to watch for that,” Carlin said. “Anything is possible at this point.” The emerging evidence on animal reservoirs increasingly points to the need for several long-term efforts to stem the virus’s spread, Carlin said. Vaccines for humans, for instance, can only go so far in preventing cases when a virus is circulating among animals. “We need to do a better job detecting these viruses in animals before they reach people, and we need to be doing a better job preventing spillover before it happens. And that requires addressing really tough challenges, like land use change and deforestation and climate change and urbanization,” Carlin said. It also requires investing in health care and monitoring systems, experts say. The study in deer is “a really hard reminder that we need to do a much better job funding wildlife research, not just for SARS-CoV-2 but for other infectious diseases,” Carlin said. “We have scientists who are more than capable of going out there and figuring out what’s going on with SARS-CoV-2, but there’s no real system in place to do that on a national level.” More research would also reveal whether or how animals spread the virus across species, including to people. If research like this hadn’t been conducted, Kuchipudi said, the outbreaks among Iowa deer would have gone undetected. “There was a silent epidemic, if you will, happening in the deer,” he said. “We would have never known unless we tested the samples.”Brad Raffensperger, Georgia’s top election official, was sitting at his kitchen counter with his wife, Tricia, in early January, his cell phone on a metal stand so he could take notes. On the other line was Donald Trump, who had lost Georgia to Joe Biden in November, a result confirmed by multiple recounts. The president had a blunt and unimaginable request for Raffensperger: find enough votes to flip the results of the election in Georgia. Raffensperger, a mild-mannered engineer by training, refused to go along with the president’s request, but saw it as a threat, he writes in his new book Integrity Counts. He and his family have since been subject to a barrage of harassment, including death threats, from Trump and his supporters. Republicans in the Georgia state legislature have stripped him of his role as the chair of the state election board. Now, he’s running for re-election next year in what is expected to be an extremely difficult primary for him, in a field that includes at least one candidate, endorsed by Trump, who tried to overturn the 2020 election results. The Guardian spoke to Raffensperger about the January phone call with Trump, threats to election officials, and whether he thinks there’s a place in the Republican party today for officials who resist attempts to undermine the 2020 election results. Have you talked to Trump since that January call? Do you expect to ever talk to him again? No, I haven’t talked to him, and don’t expect that’ll happen in the future. Were you scared in the moment of [the phone call]? You have the president of the United States, the leader of your party, in a very heated environment in the days after the election, pressuring you to do something that could affect whether he serves another term. And did you ever doubt yourself in what you were doing? I wanted to make sure that we had all the facts. That we weren’t missing something. Our team was continuously asked by me: “What about this? What about that?” And so we ran down every single allegation. Then I sent a letter to Congress, it’s a 10-page letter, which I put in the book – they got it on 6 January and I know they were busy with other things. But it really goes through, point by point, every single allegation that was made. I understand my side is grieving and has difficulty understanding this, but 28,000 people, 28,000 Georgians, did not vote for anyone for president. They skipped that and yet they voted down-ballot. And when I give those three data points to Republicans it starts to really dawn on them, they start to understand that there was [tail-off] at the top of the ticket. But people are still talking about the ballots that were stuffed in the suitcase and whatever else. People don’t seem to be persuaded by facts. I think that everyone is best served when they have intellectual honesty. And to get intellectual honesty you have to have intellectual curiosity. That you actually want to uncover the facts and have the courage to actually look into it and maybe have your paradigm shifted and challenged because what you’ve been told has been wrong. At some point, I know that if I was lied to by all these people, and they know that they’ve been lying to people, I think that they may rise up in anger and really understand that they’ve been played. Does it worry you to see the Republican party flirting with these claims, and in some cases not disavowing them and even embracing them? Well, let’s be fair and balanced. It bothers me that both parties are doing that. Because Stacey Abrams was in Virginia less than three weeks ago, and she said “just because you win doesn’t mean you’ve won”. Her narrative of voter suppression has been parroted by many people, from Hillary Clinton to many other notable national figures. (Note: Abrams has strongly repudiated attempts by Raffensperger and others to equate her decision not to concede Georgia’s 2018 gubernatorial race to Trump’s efforts to overturn the election.) So it’s actually both sides are guilty of this. And both sides need to pull back, stop, and walk that line of integrity. When you walk that line of integrity, then you can start rebuilding trust. Are you continuing to get threats? Every once in a while, now that the book’s out, you get a text or a voicemail. It’s people that really don’t want to know the truth and don’t want to dig into the truth. I understand where they’re coming from. They’re not happy with losing an election. They’re not happy with the direction of the country and they’re not pleased probably with President Biden. There’s a lot that’s happened in the last year under his leadership that is very disappointing and alarming. Are you concerned about experienced election officials leaving their jobs? I’m concerned that we have seen in Georgia, probably less than a handful of county election directors leave, retire a little bit early. And so you hate to see that happen. And you just hope they’ll have a team in place that’ll pick up that mantle and lead with strong leadership. I wanted to ask you a little bit about the provisions of Georgia’s new election law that dealt with your authority specifically on the state elections board. How concerned are you about efforts to give legislatures in Georgia and elsewhere more control over the bodies like the state elections board and election administration? I’ve always believed that these boards should be held accountable to the voters. If you look in Georgia, the state elections board chair has always been an elected position. And so for that reason alone, I don’t believe it was wise. I believe in some point in the future, they’ll regret the decision they made. But it was made with the thought of payback, petty retribution, blame-shifting, to placate people looking for, you know, a head on a platter. So you’re still very opposed to it? Well it’s bad policy. I don’t support bad policy. You’re in a competitive primary with at least one opponent who has voiced serious doubts about the integrity of the 2020 election. How concerned are you that someone could get into power that gets a call from the president or someone else and is willing to go along with the kind of thing that you weren’t willing to go along with in 2020? I believe that Americans overwhelmingly are good, honest, people. And they’re looking for honest government. And they’re looking for people that will stand in the gap and do the right thing. And I’ve shown that I will make the tough calls to make sure that we follow the constitution, we follow state law. I talk to Republicans. I talk to a lot of them. And yes I get dog-cussed by a few. But many Republicans support what I did. They’re disappointed in the results. They wish that the president would have won. That runs the whole gamut. But people recognize that when people do what is right, even when it can appear to be difficult, that that is really something that should be modeled and esteemed. I’m curious what message you think it would send if people didn’t vote for that. If what you did in 2020 wound up costing you the election next year, what message would that send? Well, people have to decide individually and corporately what they want our country to look like. And I think that Americans, as I said, the vast majority are good, honest, taxpaying, law-abiding Americans. And what they want is people who will make the right decision.“Have you got a goblet or something? Because my heart’s bleeding.” This film was the receptacle for some of the most sulphurous outpourings of fear and rage and non-compassion in Mike Leigh’s career, and gave us a great monster of British cinema: the insufferable lippy wideboy and pseudo-intellectual Johnny, a character roiling internally with despair, with whom David Thewlis made his horribly watchable breakthrough in a 132-minute guitar-solo of a performance. Naked’s rerelease after nearly 30 years gives us the perspective to ask the question: is Johnny a rapist? Is he supposed to be a rapist? And what of the other young male character – a borderline-psychopathic posh yuppie who is apparently Johnny’s ex-girlfriend’s landlord? He appears to be a rapist too, or at least, like Johnny, a fan of rough sex in which consent is a grey area. Our first vision of Johnny is of him having sex with, or raping, someone in a dark Manchester alley. She screams at him afterwards that revenge is on the way and so Johnny – a gaunt, unshaven, coat-wearing Manc bloke, a lost Gallagher brother from hell who speaks like a nonstop smartarse NME interviewee – makes his way to London, intending to crash with his ex-girlfriend Louise (Lesley Sharp) at the address she has incautiously given him. She lives there with Sophie (Katrin Cartlidge) and Sandra (Claire Skinner), a nurse who is away on holiday in Zimbabwe. Johnny promptly seduces Sophie in that way that no one in 1993 called “problematic” and then, suddenly unable to endure being in the same flat with two women who now have an emotional claim on him, he finds himself roaming around London in a giant peripatetic journey of despair. He encounters drunk Glaswegian Archie (Ewen Bremner), and nervy security-guard Brian (Peter Wight), who lets him into the empty office complex from whose high window Johnny sees a woman in the opposite building, played by Deborah MacLaren, and he has a poignant encounter with her; then with a cafe-waitress played by Gina McKee; and finally he meets a guy putting up posters (Darren Tunstall) who gives him the horrible beating he’s been more or less asking for. Finally, Johnny’s Odyssean wandering brings him back to Louise’s house (having cheekily already praised Homer in an earlier scene), where hideous yuppie Jeremy (Greg Crutwell) is also to be found – a character maybe inspired by American Psycho, a novel that had come out two years previously. Naked is another of the Dickensian grotesqueries that Mike Leigh can create so fluently, and it is one of the great paradoxes of his career that despite devising them through improvisation, no other director makes films that sound so elaborately written. The sheer fanatical stamina of Johnny the provoker, Johnny the pisstaker, who won’t stop until someone puts him in A&amp;E, is awe-inspiring. There is also his impressively unrepentant behaviour at the end; I can’t see it without thinking of the Seinfeld dictum: no hugging, no learning. All the time, Johnny is talking, talking; never once does he back down or come off it; he’s always posturing or browbeating. And Johnny is a predator, an abuser whose evident anguish and self-hate does not entitle him to a moment of our pity. He is at the centre of a fiercely pessimistic story that is not leavened, as many of Leigh’s films are, with redeeming features. This is a movie of virtuoso nihilism and scorn. • Naked is rereleased on 12 November in cinemas.For $350, a Telegram user called NoVac Team offered to sell a Guardian reporter a fake vaccine card. The price, they said, would include having the reporter’s vaccinated status registered in the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) database which is connected to their health records. The CDC does not in fact maintain any vaccination records, nor does it provide a CDC-labeled vaccination record card for people. NoVac Team is a scammer, one of many on the messaging service Telegram who are offering fake vaccine cards to anti-vaxxers and then taking their money. The hidden market for fake vaccine cards has been growing as more states start to enforce vaccine mandates for public gatherings, and employers require proof of vaccination. Google searches for the term “fake vaccination cards” have also been rising as 4 January 2022, the date on which the national vaccine mandate affecting 83 million workers comes into effect, gets closer. But many of the people offering fake cards are themselves scammers who will take the money for a forged card and then disappear. The Guardian has identified seven sellers that were repeatedly flagged by a Telegram scammer warning group that seeks to alert people who might be looking to buy a fake vaccine card. Home Boy, who is based in Cameroon, sells cards for $170 and claims he delivers within 48 hours. He said he had worked with more than 250 people in the past three months. When asked about rumors about rampant scams on the platform, he shares “proof” of vaccine cards he has made. “If we have to work together we have to start by building trust,” he said. For $149, a user called “Admin 24/24”, based in Australia, said they could provide a digital vaccine pass “for every country”. Another scammer going by the name of “Stella Bright” promised to send QR codes provided by doctors who “work with the government but are ready to save the world”. When asked if this was a scam, she said: “We are part of those fighting fraudsters on Telegram and doing the right job. In a period of hardship like this one, we need heroes out there who can protect humans again since our government has failed us all.” Getting the vaccine is free, straightforward and safe but some people have instead chosen to spend weeks trying to illegally obtain fake vaccine cards only to get scammed, by other criminals, for hundreds of dollars. It took Maggie two tries and $450 before she realized she wasn’t going to get the fake vaccine cards she was looking to buy. The first seller that Maggie identified turned out to be a fraud. “The second time I was less trusting but still wanted to believe there was a way,” she said. “I fell for it again. I was so mad.” The second seller sent her a strange message after receiving her initial payment. “I’ll need a little more payment to complete your registration,” they said. “We need to pay for a certain situation.” Maggie told the seller she had no more money. A single mother, she had borrowed $350 to make the initial payment. Thinking that she might be getting scammed again, she pulled the plug. “I don’t trust any of them anymore. I haven’t come across even one other person [trying to buy a fake vaccine card] who has found someone legit,” Maggie told the Guardian. “The people who say they have – are usually in cahoots with the scammer or it’s a scammer’s alternate account.” While Maggie herself is fully vaccinated, something she says was “bullied” into, she has been looking for the card for her teenage daughter, who is an actor. Her daughter, she said, has been “treated like she has leprosy” in Hollywood because she doesn’t have the vaccine, and is losing jobs and access to her acting classes and agents. She found numerous groups on Telegram, with sellers offering fake cards for, as one puts it, “those who need results but not willing to take the vaccines”. “They tell you whatever you want to hear to get your money,” she said. Maggie believes almost everyone on the app are fraudsters. “That’s why I decided to make a group warning people,” she added. “I knew if I was in my situation and fell for it, people much more desperate and in worse situations than me were falling for it too.” Maggie’s group is now one of the first someone would see if they were looking for fake cards on the app. One user in the Telegram scam alert group said she lost more than $350 to a person who posed as a seller on Facebook. The user said they were desperate to buy a card to be able to see their family. “It takes me three days to make that much money,” they wrote. Sara, who is based in Australia, has been scammed by five people and lost more than $1,000. She had coronavirus in March and told the Guardian she believes she has enough immunity from the experience and so doesn’t need the vaccine. In many states, the cards are low-tech paper slips that could, theoretically, be forged easily. Maggie said she couldn’t just photocopy one because she didn’t know anyone who had a blank card that she could copy. She said the sellers often promise a deal that includes entering the buyer’s vaccine record on the Health and Human Services database in the event that doctors need access to that record, although, again, such a database doesn’t exist. Some users claim they have reported the users on Telegram, but there appears to be minimal intervention from the app. Some of the accounts flagged as scams within Maggie’s group disappeared a few days later. But others, like those mentioned above, remain active. Telegram’s community guidelines strictly prohibit scams, but it’s not clear what kind of action is taken against them. The Guardian contacted Telegram but did not receive a response. In a statement to the Guardian, PayPal, which a lot of the scammers used to request money, said they don’t permit sales of Covid-19 vaccine cards and have a “zero-tolerance policy” about such activities. “We thoroughly investigate fraudulent activity to ensure our services are used in line with our acceptable use policy and adherence to local applicable laws,” they said. They did not respond to queries about how they vet such transactions. At least some people are receiving fake cards. In September, 15 people in New Jersey and New York were arrested, including two women selling hundreds of fake cards for $200 and thirteen buyers. The New Jersey woman, who was known as AntiVaxMomma on Instagram, offered both a physical copy as well as an entry into the fictional online database for an additional $250. In the same month, border officers stopped two shipments with a total of 70 fake cards in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Last month, border patrol caught nearly a thousand shipments, each carrying five to 100 fake cards. While some of the cards are coming from outside the US, produced by international counterfeiters, there are many other ways to fake a card. A police officer and a colleague in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, were fired for using blank cards they had acquired from a cousin in the military. Maggie and Sara have both said they are resigned to the possibility that they might never get a card. “I think there may have been ways to get them at some point (early on),” said Maggie, “but after the mandates and threats of jail … I think it’s probably only scammers at this point.” Neither suggested their inability to cheat the system would push them towards getting themselves or their family members vaccinated. *Names were changed to protect identitiesJennifer, a family nurse practitioner in Texas, told her employer a few months into the Covid-19 pandemic that she was pregnant and requested changes to her work to limit her exposure to Covid-19. But it didn’t work. “Out of the blue, when I was about seven months pregnant, my employer reassigned me from a low-risk area with low exposure risk, to a high-risk area,” said Jennifer, who requested to withhold her last name due to privacy concerns. “I made it very clear to them that I wanted to continue working, that I just needed safety measures to prevent me from getting ill, and they were actually less safety measures than they had given a male doctor that I worked with who had an autoimmune condition.” Instead of providing her with accommodations to her work that would reflect her pregnancy, her managers held a meeting at which Jennifer claims she was told she was no good to them pregnant, and that she should take unpaid family medical leave as she was going to be replaced by a non-pregnant worker. She had worked at the employer for five years. “I went home that night and I just cried,” she added. “I had no idea what I was going to do because I was actually a high-risk pregnancy and needed health insurance.” Due to the pandemic, Jennifer’s husband wasn’t working as often, and her family relied on her income and health insurance. At seven months pregnant during the first few months of the Covid-19 pandemic, leaving to find another job wasn’t immediately an option. She was able to receive a note from her OB/GYN confirming to her employer that her pregnancy was high-risk, and demanded accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Though her employer provided some accommodations in response, she still felt exposed to Covid-19 at work. After her pregnancy, Jennifer opted to find another job, despite taking a pay cut to do so, for fear she would be forced out or intimidated from her position in retaliation by her employer. Jennifer is far from alone in America. According to a recent research brief conducted by the legal advocacy non-profit, A Better Balance, approximately two-thirds of pregnant workers are being denied work accommodations under current federal law, either forcing these workers out of their jobs or putting them and their pregnancy at risk. Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, pregnant workers with medical needs, but not disabilities, are left unprotected to prevent pregnancy complications. The burden is placed on individual pregnant workers to prove someone else in their workplace received similar accommodations in order to receive them. The Covid-19 pandemic has further exposed the issues facing women in the workplace, including a lack of any mandated paid maternity leave, high childcare costs and a lack of access to childcare, and women, particularly women of color, have been disproportionately affected by job losses and jobs recovery for women. In September 2021, more than 300,000 women in the US left the workforce. More than 26,000 jobs were lost in September 2021 for women, while men gained 220,000 jobs. The wage gap between men and women through 2020 was 83 cents to $1, with Black women paid 64 cents for every dollar paid to white men, and Latino women paid 57 cents for every dollar paid to white men. Over 12.6 million women and girls in the US had no health insurance coverage through 2020. Federal legislation to require employers to provide reasonable accommodations to employees for pregnancy, childbirth and related medical conditions, the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, passed in the House of Representatives in May 2021 with bipartisan support, but has not yet received a vote in the Senate. “We need one clear, federal standard to ensure that all pregnant workers are entitled to this basic protection,” said Dina Bakst, co-founder and co-president of A Better Balance. “Far too many have been and continue to be forced off the job because their employers refuse to provide them the modest accommodations they need to stay healthy and the pandemic has exacerbated the dire nature of this situation.” In a recent report published by the National Women’s Law Center, the most common occupations for pregnant workers, registered nurses, teachers, cashiers, retail workers, servers, are often low-paid and require physically demanding job duties. Black and Latino pregnant workers are disproportionately in low-paid jobs where workers are forced to stand for long periods of time, make repetitive motions and are exposed to disease or infections. Elizabeth Rocha worked at an Amazon warehouse in Tracy, California, when she found out she was pregnant in March 2016. Due to morning sickness and the physically demanding nature of her job, she informed her management immediately. Two weeks into working, she was pushed to take an unpaid leave of absence to get medication for morning sickness. As her pregnancy progressed, Rocha requested to be stationed near a restroom, but management didn’t move her. Then she started getting written up for time off task because she was using the restroom frequently, and she was constantly forced to stow heavy items. She tried to obtain a stool to help her stow items, but was told a different department needed it more, and her requests to have her rate lowered were dismissed. Two weeks before she was scheduled for maternity leave, her accommodation for a 10-minute bathroom break once an hour was finally approved, but she was put on a stowing station with heavy, bulk items like gaming systems, cat litter and fertilizer. After returning from maternity leave in early 2017, Rocha was eventually fired due to too many write-ups for missing her rate. “I thought I was having trouble because it was my first pregnancy and I didn’t know what to expect, so I didn’t want to cause too much trouble or ask for too much,” said Rocha. “At about four months in the pregnancy and on I would only get sick on the days that I would work. I know now that was due to stress and anxiety from fear of being written up and fired.”Relief washed over Jay Glazer when he saw two fighter jets whiz by overhead on 11 September 2001. The future Fox Sports reporter was out in the New York City streets and, like most people that morning, his eyes were fixed upward to the two burning towers ripped open by hijacked passenger planes. The country was under attack, but the presence of those jets gave many, including Glazer, a sense of security. In that moment, Glazer became an active supporter of the US military. Fourteen years later, Glazer and Nate Boyer, a former member of the special forces who briefly played for the Seattle Seahawks, launched Merging Vets and Players (MVP), a non-profit that brings military veterans and retiring professional athletes together in the gym. MVP is an amalgamation of Glazer’s journey through sports, but not the public one that took off when he became Fox’s NFL Insider in 2004 and was suddenly thrusted into millions of homes every Sunday. Football is his bread and butter, but Glazer’s passion is MMA. Glazer competed in two professional fights in 2003 and wanted more, but Fox instructed him to stop when he came into work one day with a black eye and a smashed orbital bone. “Only about 1% of the world was willing or able to do [MMA], so it made me feel good about myself for somebody who grew up with not a lot of self-worth, and was always kind of told that I was bound to get in trouble or bound to go to jail,” Glazer told the Guardian. “I felt that I belonged in the cage and it empowered me.” By 2007, Glazer’s NFL broadcasting career was well cemented. He broke stories of injuries and trades at breakneck speed, a lot of it due to his ability to relate to the players. That off-season, he persuaded a frustrated Jared Allen to join him at Arizona Combat Sports, where the defensive end incorporated MMA training into his routine. Allen later reported to camp 25lbs lighter and almost tripled his sacks that season. When Glazer got requests from other players, he enlisted UFC legend Randy Couture to help create MMAthletics, which has instructed more than 1,000 NFL players. The Unbreakable Performance Center, opened by Glazer and NFL hall of famer Brian Urlacher in 2014, was a necessary next step to ensure there was a dependable place for football players and Glazer, who had graduated to TV personality, to train without interruption. It quickly became a home for Hollywood stars like Chris Pratt and musicians like Snoop Dogg. At Unbreakable, Glazer made it a point to never turn away military veterans. He’d visited bases over the years and jumped at every chance to support the armed forces. Boyer befriended him there. Boyer was sitting with Glazer when he received a phone call from the wife of a retiring NFL player. It was the type of call Glazer had received before. “He hadn’t gotten picked up by another team and hadn’t left the house for six weeks. The blinds were shut day and night and she didn’t know what to do,” said Glazer, who noticed that Boyer was managing a similar call from a soldier. The correlation hit Glazer like a lightning bolt. “When you’re done playing football, you don’t get to play ever again,” said Glazer. “There are no pickup games like basketball. So, it’s something you’ve done since you were a little kid and all of a sudden, it’s over. I started seeing this with a lot of NFL players whose careers would end, they’d be falling off and struggling.” MVP was an opportunity for Glazer to meld together his passions. With Boyer’s military background and Glazer’s access to the NFL, the first of seven chapters had its beginnings in 2015. That same year, Romby Bryant’s 11-year career ended abruptly in the Canadian Football League. Bryant, who had made the rosters of the Arizona Cardinals and the Atlanta Falcons in 2004 and 2005, hadn’t given thought to what he’d do after football. When his wife became pregnant less than a year into marriage, the stress brought on anxiety and depression. “The transition was tough,” said Bryant. “It was the toughest thing I ever did. It’s almost like an identity crisis.” Bryant said he was lucky that he had a support system that encouraged him to reach out to a counselor. He eventually went back to school and earned his master’s degree in dispute resolution and conflict management. When Bryant was contacted in 2020 to help launch an MVP chapter in Dallas, he was already coordinating community outreach between the NFL Alumni Association and local military veterans. He hadn’t planned to join the first MVP meeting himself, but he related so much to what was being said that he stayed. “It was like football, like the locker room,” said Bryant. “A lot of us keep up with one another because we all had that shared experience. MVP had that same feeling of belonging.” Dallas chapter member and retired marine sergeant Frank Cortez joined MVP last February. There have been 50 suicides from Cortez’s 1,500-member battalion since 2008, he said, including his friend Elias Reyes Jr. After being discharged, Reyes graduated with honors from UCLA but succumbed to PTSD accrued over three Middle East tours. Cortez didn’t want himself or others in his battalion to end up like Reyes, whose family said he couldn’t get expedient and thorough care through Veteran’s Affairs. “In the military, you’re told to suck it up, to keep doing your job. On the infantry side, you’re considered weak if you go for medical attention, so you just don’t go,” said Cortez. “You don’t realize how combat has affected and changed you until you’re living as a civilian for a few years.” Cortez didn’t want to acknowledge his own symptoms: the sleepless nights and the mornings he’d wake up angry for no reason at all. “There’s no handbook on how to recover from war,” said Cortez, who’d met Bryant at another veterans event and joined the Dallas chapter. “We all react differently.” At an MVP session, the athletes and vets work out together, then sit in the huddle to talk and listen. The huddle can be diversified. In one group, a Vietnam War colonel was looking for a way to communicate better with his three military sons. Another veteran shared her trepidation about the approaching anniversary of her mother’s death, but didn’t feel alone when the other huddle members texted to check in on her. Cortez reached out to Bryant when his mother-in-law recently passed away. The pair like to play a round of golf when life will allow it, but if not, there’s always the huddle. “We talk, we cry and laugh about it and that’s the glue that brings us together,” said Cortez. “Then we go about our week with a better outlook on life, knowing that people who care about us have our backs again.”Steven Gerrard has been confirmed as Aston Villa’s manager on a three-and-a-half-year contract after leaving Rangers. The former Liverpool and England midfielder replaces Dean Smith, who was sacked after five consecutive defeats. Gerrard has been Rangers manager since June 2018 and won the Scottish Premiership last season. He leaves with the club top and as they prepare for the League Cup semi-final against Hibernian on Sunday week. Villa made Gerrard their top target as they attempt to climb away from 16th place, two points above the relegation zone, after finishing 11th last season. Gerrard’s first game will be at home to Brighton a week on Saturday. The former Liverpool captain is due to take Villa to Anfield on 11 December. He has a connection at Villa to Christian Purslow, the chief executive, who worked as Liverpool’s managing director for a number of years while Gerrard was at the club. Gerrard said: “Aston Villa is a club with a rich history and tradition in English football and I am immensely proud to become its new head coach. In my conversations with [the owners] Nassef [Sawiris], Wes [Edens] and the rest of the board, it was apparent how ambitious their plans are for the club and I am looking forward to helping them achieve their aims. “I would like to express my sincere gratitude to everybody associated with Glasgow Rangers for giving me the opportunity to manage such an iconic football club. Helping them secure a record-breaking 55th league title will always hold a special place in my heart. I would like to wish the players, staff and supporters the very best for the future.” Purslow referenced the time Gerrard spent working with young players at Liverpool as he welcomed him to Villa, describing that as “experience we value highly”. Purslow said: “He then took the brave decision to test himself in the intense and high-pressured environment of the Scottish Old Firm. His subsequent achievement in winning the Premiership title with Glasgow Rangers really caught our eye as did his experience in Europe. “It has been very clear in our discussions with him that Steven’s coaching ambitions, philosophy and values entirely match those of Aston Villa. We are excited he has agreed to lead us in the next phase of our ambitious plans as we look to build on the progress made since Nassef Sawiris and Wes Edens took over the club in 2018.” The Rangers chairman, Douglas Park, thanked Gerrard and said: “He has provided us all with some unforgettable moments, not least his delivery of the Scottish Premiership title back to Ibrox last season having not lost a match in the entire league campaign. In European competition, he has restored the good name and credibility of our club on the continent and leaves us in a very healthy position on the pitch.”Good morning. The murder case against Kyle Rittenhouse was thrown into jeopardy Wednesday when his lawyers asked for a mistrial over what appeared to be out-of-bounds questions asked of Rittenhouse by the chief prosecutor. Rittenhouse is on trial on charges of killing two men and injuring a third during protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year after a local Black man was shot by a white police officer. The startling turn came after Rittenhouse took the stand and testified that he was under attack when he shot the three men. “I defended myself,” the 18-year-old said. During cross-examination, the prosecutor Thomas Binger asked Rittenhouse whether it was appropriate to use deadly force to protect property. Binger also posed questions about Rittenhouse’s silence after his arrest. At that, the jury was ushered out of the room, and the circuit judge Bruce Schroeder loudly and angrily accused Binger of pursuing an improper line of questioning and trying to introduce testimony that the judge earlier said he was inclined to prohibit. What did the defense ask for? A mistrial with prejudice, meaning that if one is granted, Rittenhouse cannot be retried over the shootings. Will there be a mistrial? The judge did not immediately rule on the request and is allowing the trial to continue. What did Binger say? He told the judge he had been acting in good faith, but the judge replied: “I don’t believe that.” China and the US announce plan to work together on cutting emissions An unexpected agreement between the US and China to work together on cutting emissions has been broadly welcomed by leaders and climate experts. The world’s two biggest emitters appeared to put aside their differences at the Cop26 climate summit and on Wednesday unveiled a joint declaration that would bring close cooperation on emissions cuts that scientists say are needed in the next 10 years to keep global temperatures within 1.5C of pre-industrial levels. The agreement calls for “concrete and pragmatic” regulations in decarbonisation, reducing methane emissions and fighting deforestation, the Chinese climate envoy, Xie Zhenhua, said in Glasgow. The two countries will revive a working group that will “meet regularly to address the climate crisis and advance the multilateral process, focusing on enhancing concrete actions in this decade”, the joint declaration said. Was the move welcomed? It was broadly welcomed by global leaders and climate experts, with the UN secretary general, António Guterres, calling the move “an important step in the right direction”. Is this the first pact between US-China on climate? No, there was a bilateral agreement in 2014 which gave momentum to the historic Paris accord the following year, but that cooperation stopped with the Trump administration. Republicans who voted for Biden’s infrastructure bill threatened with retaliation A group of congressional Republicans who helped pass the Biden administration’s infrastructure bill last Friday are facing calls for political punishment by their own party, including the threat of having their committee assignments stripped for supporting the president’s agenda, according to reports this week. Several hardline Republicans, including the Colorado congresswoman Lauren Boebert and former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, have publicly urged retaliation against party colleagues who voted for the $1tn bill. Some members who were among the GOP rank and file who helped the bill pass the House say they have received death threats. Many of the Republicans who backed the bipartisan bill have ranking positions on full committees or subcommittees, including the homeland security committee and the natural resources committee. Would the bill have gone through without the Republicans? No – the bill, which passed 228 to 206, would have failed if no Republicans voted for it in the House late last Friday. Is this a sign of trouble in the Republican party? Certain GOP divides in Washington have grown in recent weeks , especially in relation to the bipartisan committee investigating the Capitol insurrection of 6 January. ‘We’ve made history’: Flint water crisis victims to receive $626m settlement A federal judge has approved a $626m settlement for victims of the lead water crisis in Flint, Michigan, which was one of the country’s worst public health crises in recent memory, in a case brought by tens of thousands of residents affected by the contaminated water. Announcing the settlement on Tuesday, district judge Judith Levy called it a “remarkable achievement” that “sets forth a comprehensive compensation program and timeline that is consistent for every qualifying participant”. Most of the money will come from the state of Michigan, which was accused of repeatedly overlooking the risks of using the Flint River without properly treating the water. “This is a historic and momentous day for the residents of Flint, who will finally begin to see justice served,” said Ted Leopold, one of the lead attorneys in the litigation. What happened to the water in Flint? The city’s troubles began in 2014 after it switched its water supply to the Flint River to cut costs. Corrosive river water caused lead to leach from pipes, contaminating the drinking water and causing an outbreak of legionnaires’ disease. How will the money be distributed? Payouts from the settlement approved on Wednesday will be made based on a formula that directs more money to younger claimants and to those who can prove greater injury. In other news … One of the men standing trial for killing Ahmaud Arbery said they chased him because they were convinced he was running away from a potential crime and not out jogging, a court heard yesterday. Greg McMichael told police he and two other defendants were convinced Arbery “was getting the hell out of there”. A French court has sentenced the killer of an elderly Jewish woman to life imprisonment with no possibility of parole for 22 years, in a case that caused an outcry over antisemitism in France. Yacine Mihoub was convicted of the murder of Mireille Knoll, 85 who died on 23 March 2018. The head of lighting on the film Rust has filed a lawsuit over Alec Baldwin’s fatal shooting of the cinematographer Halyna Hutchins on the New Mexico set of the western, alleging negligence that caused him “severe emotional distress” will haunt him for ever. People testing negative for Covid-19 despite exposure may have “immune memory”, scientists have discovered. The study found some individuals clear virus rapidly due to a strong immune response from existing T-cells. This could pave the way for a new generation of vaccines targeting the T-cell response. Don’t miss this: meet the ‘inactivists’, tangling up the climate crisis in culture wars In May 2020, as the world was convulsed by the coronavirus pandemic, a strange video began appearing on Facebook. “Climate alarm is reaching untold levels of exaggeration and hysteria,” said an unseen narrator, over a montage of protests and clips of a tearful Greta Thunberg. “There is no doubt about it, climate change has become a cult,” it continued, to the kind of pounding beat you might hear on the soundtrack of a Hollywood blockbuster. The video, one of many, showed that as climate science has gone mainstream, outright denialism has been pushed to the fringes. … Or this: how the wellness industry turned its back on Covid science Anti-vaccine or vaccine-hesitant attitudes are as abundant in online wellness circles as pastel-coloured Instagram infographics and asana poses on the beach at sunset. “People are really confused by what is happening,” says Derek Beres, the co-host of Conspirituality, a podcast about the convergence of conspiracy theories and wellness. “Why is their yoga instructor sharing QAnon hashtags?” As wellness gurus increasingly promote vaccine scepticism, conspiracy theories and the myth that ill people have themselves to blame, how did self-care turn so nasty? Climate check: ‘Our children may not want to be farmers’ Throughout Cop26, the Guardian has been publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. From extreme weather obliterating homes to rising sea levels ruining crops, climate breakdown is a terrifying daily reality for many including Manut Boonpayong, who lives in Samut Songkhram province, Thailand. He says: “Farming itself is not hard, but the issues that I am facing are ones that I cannot manage, and which are unpredictable and uncontrollable.” Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez gives verdict on Scottish favourite Irn-Bru Cop26 is not short of controversial subjects, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has demonstrated she is not afraid to get stuck into the big questions: namely, would she like the Scottish fizzy drink Irn-Bru? The bright orange drink has become the surprise curiosity of Cop26. Delegates from all over the world have been sharing their thoughts on its unique taste, with mixed reviews. In an Instagram video of herself trying the drink for the first time, the US congresswoman said: “Oh my God, love it, love it. This tastes just like the Latino soda Kola Champagne.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAbba singer Anni-Frid Lyngstad has suggested that the group may continue beyond what has been billed as their final album and performances. The Swedish pop quartet released Voyage, their first album in 40 years, last week, and it is certain to be a UK No 1 on Friday – all week it has been outselling the rest of the Top 40 combined. Next year, the group will appear on screens as digital “Abbatars” alongside a live band in a newly constructed venue in east London, the Abba Arena, for concerts between May and December. Benny Andersson has emphatically said there will be no further Abba activity. “This is it,” he said in October. “It’s got to be, you know. I didn’t actually say ‘this is it’ in 1982. I never said myself that Abba was never going to happen again. But I can tell you now: this is it.” In September, singer Agnetha Fältskog said of filming the footage for the live shows, which has been blended with CGI by Industrial Light and Magic: “One felt that maybe it’s the last thing we do. Same thing with the album … We’re a bit older now, and have our minor ailments. But we struggle on. I don’t dare to say [if a further reunion will happen], because it’s a bit uncertain.” But speaking to Zoe Ball on BBC Radio 2 in a rare interview, Lyngstad – known as Frida – said: “I have learned to say never say never. We have probably said this must be the last thing we do – think of our ages, we are not young any longer. But you never know – don’t be too sure.” Of the upcoming live show, she said: “It’s very exciting. I didn’t know what to believe in the beginning … it was hard to comprehend, I must admit. But now we see some of the results, I’m very excited about the whole thing.” Lyngstad, who once lived in Henley-on-Thames, also praised the UK, saying it had “been very, very important for us. We have a strong bond with the UK, that maybe we don’t have with any other country in the world.” But she was disparaging of the Eurovision song contest, which Abba won in 1974. “I’m not so interested [now],” she said. “Because it has changed so much over the years, and it’s not what it was at that time [in 1974]. Now it’s more like a show, it’s very technical. There are some good songs coming out of it, but I cannot say I’m a fan of Eurovision – maybe I shouldn’t say it!” Speaking about the ecologically minded song Bumblebee, she hailed Greta Thunberg as “a little queen in Sweden, raising her voice for everything, and I’m very proud of her, this young person getting all these young people with her.” She was also full of praise for Fältskog, describing singing with her again as “coming back home again, having fun with my little sister, that’s how it felt … She’s an absolutely wonderful storyteller, she has something magical in her storytelling, which I, unfortunately, [do] not have in the same way. Or maybe that is good, because that means that we kind of sing the lyrics and the songs in different ways.” Discussing the success of the Voyage album, she said: “We didn’t expect anything, actually – you’re always a bit nervous when you release something new. But, if I compare it to how it was 40 years ago, it’s a bit of a difference. Because I would personally say I don’t take it that seriously as I would do earlier on, when I was younger – then it meant so much. We don’t have to prove anything [now] – we have done it for the fun of it.”My father, Ron Kipps, who has died aged 84, was a social worker and lifelong campaigner and letter writer. Ron expressed his moral convictions and political commitment to socialism through the written word. He wrote thousands of letters over the course of his life, to newspapers including the Guardian, politicians from Joan Ruddock to Jack Straw, David Blunkett, David Cameron and Nick Clegg, his local Conservative MP, Gareth Johnson, the BBC, and even the Queen, from whom he received a reply. These missives covered issues from the Iraq war and refugees to ID cards and the NHS. When Ron was asked about his motivation for such profuse letter writing he said, “rather than stewing, I write a letter … [and] get the satisfaction I had done something”. Born in Bermondsey, south-east London, to Albert Kipps, a foreman at Hartley’s jam factory, and Bessie (nee Sowden), Ron left school at 15 and joined an advertising agency as a runner. His undeveloped intellect was soon noticed, and he was encouraged by his workmates to read, go to the theatre, and develop a career. This led to promotion at the agency as a typographer in 1956, then as a visualiser doing artwork. Despite his evident skill, his emerging beliefs in social justice and an antipathy towards capitalism meant that in 1970 he chose to leave his well-paid job and train as a social worker at North London Polytechnic. This presented challenges with a family of three children, but he was supported by his wife, Sylvia (nee Kenward), a GP’s receptionist whom he had met while skating at Streatham ice rink and married in 1958. They had moved to Dartford, Kent, soon after their marriage and his first social worker role, working with many poor and needy families, was with Bexleyheath local authority, rising to senior social worker with Lewisham. In 1988 he took early retirement to help with the care of his disabled son, Nicholas. Letter-writing was not Ron’s only way of making his voice heard. With his family he regularly took to the streets for many causes, from anti-nuclear protests to the free Nelson Mandela campaign. His most recent activism was focused on justice for the Palestinian people. Also an active local campaigner on protecting greenbelt areas, in 1999 Ron became chair of the Gravesham and Dartford Committee for the Protection of Rural England. Ron truly believed that a Labour government could make this country better for the many, not the few. Standing over voting sheets on election days, knocking on doors, Ron was still campaigning into his 80s. Despite living through many defeats Ron never stopped fighting. Nicholas died in 1999. Ron is survived by Sylvia, his two daughters, Lindsay and me, four grandsons, William, James, Edward and Jacob, and two great-grandsons, Arlo and Wren.Burberry has reported slowing sales growth in its latest financial quarter as the impact from Covid-19 restrictions persisted even as sales remained at just above pre-pandemic levels. The luxury fashion retailer said that total revenues for the 26 weeks to 25 September were £1.2bn, up 38% year on year. However, like-for-like store sales rose by only 6% year on year in the second half of that period. Shares slumped by 5%, making it one of the biggest fallers on the FTSE 100 on Thursday. The company blamed Covid-19 restrictions in the Asia-Pacific region for the sales difficulties. In China, a key market for luxury goods, restrictions were “especially impactful […] reducing footfall materially, leading to an adverse effect on revenues”, the company said. However, it added that there was a “good recovery” in September. In-store sales in Europe, the Middle East, India and Africa also continued to struggle, down by 25% in the latest financial quarter. Zuzanna Pusz at UBS, an investment bank, noted that Burberry’s like-for-like sales growth “looks rather weak” compared with peers. Richard Hunter, head of markets at Interactive Investor, an investment platform, said the share price drop reflected the “weakening of sales during the second quarter, even though numbers for the first-half as a whole are in comfortably positive territory”. It also suffered from “generally high expectations”. Burberry is in the process of switching management, after it poached the head of Versace, Jonathan Akeroyd, to take over as chief executive from Marco Gobbetti, who was part way through a turnaround plan aimed at taking Burberry further upmarket, with prices to rival its French and Italian rivals. Gobbetti will step down at the end of the year, after saying he wanted to return home to Italy. The move upmarket for the British brand – best known for its trenchcoats and signature check – has meant the company has reduced discounts, focusing instead on growth in products sold at full price. Gerry Murphy, Burberry’s chair, said the company “made strong progress in the half”. Murphy, who will oversee the company from January until Akeroyd starts in April, highlighted “double-digit percentage” growth in full-price sales, which he said was generating fatter profit margins on products. He added: “We are seeing an acceleration in performance in countries less impacted by travel restrictions and we remain confident of achieving our medium-term goals.” Burberry also reinstated its dividend and restarted a share buyback programme.The phrase used to describe the scandal enveloping parliament – “MPs’ second jobs” – is indicative of the problem. Being an MP is not a “job”, it is a public service. In exchange for the privilege of representing your community and helping to determine the future direction of your country, you are handed a publicly funded salary of nearly £82,000, placing you in the top 5% of earners, pulling in around three times the average wage. That is beyond anything most Britons will ever hope to earn, and indeed is a sum of money the vast majority of us think qualifies you as rich. It is, of course, important that MPs are paid for their service: until 1911 they were not, and the then new Labour party was at the forefront of demanding an allowance so working-class candidates could afford to be parliamentarians. In 2021, there can be few supermarket shelf-stackers or cleaners who are deterred from a life in politics by an excessively low pay packet. The real driver of the crises which have periodically enveloped Westminster – from the expenses scandal to the current outrage – is that MPs see themselves as upper-middle-class professionals. They look at the salaries of those they deem to have comparable status – like CEOs, whose median wage has gone from 20 times that of the average UK worker in the early 1980s to 120 times, or Barclays, which pays over £1m to 450 of its staff – and they feel hard done by. Tory MPs in particular socialise in such circles: more hail from business and commercial backgrounds than any other occupation, for example, while the party has received £11m from the financial sector since the 2019 general election. When Tory MPs rub shoulders with hedge fund managers and financiers at elite fundraisers, they meet what they regard as their elite counterparts. But while City slickers can send all of their brood to the most expensive public schools without it denting their finances, such a prospect is an extravagance on a parliamentary salary, depending on the occupation of one’s spouse. It was those same Tory MPs who unleashed the market forces of the 1980s that so enriched the upper echelons of society: why shouldn’t they benefit from the proceeds, too? After all, surging levels of inequality were rationalised by a new prevailing dogma: that those at the top deserved to be there, because they were the go-getters, the risk-takers, the most able and hardest-working of the crop. That new mantra could be summed up by the slogan of L’Oréal: “Because I’m worth it.” And MPs who saw themselves as the most important profession of all certainly believed they were worth it. No wonder, then, that they believed they were entitled – as a bare minimum – to top up their salary with expenses, until SW1 was enveloped in the wide-ranging scandal of 2009. It is this same mentality that leads more than a quarter of Tory MPs to take up jobs in sectors ranging from gambling to private healthcare. That it corrupts democracy in one way is obvious, as the Owen Paterson scandal highlights. Private firms know that MPs give them a vital “in”: they can influence legislation, ask high-profile questions which put pressure on government to deliver desired results, and they often have close relationships with ministers and Downing Street’s inner circles. If the MP has served in government, they also understand how to navigate the heavy machinery of the state. The most high-profile example of this, of course, was David Cameron’s tawdry lobbying for Greensill, but this is the final destination of many senior ministers and civil servants alike. That enables certain private interests to wield disproportionate and unaccountable power. But our democracy is also corroded in a manner that is more subtle – though no less egregious – than flagrant corruption. The interests of MPs become inextricably aligned to those of corporations, multinationals and the well-to-do, rather than those of their constituents. In advance of George Osborne slashing the top rate of tax, rich City donors told the Financial Times that such a move was driven by their closeness to the party. If you are a party kept afloat by financiers and hedge funds, your parliamentary party is stuffed full of MPs with jobs on the side, and you regard your political career as a lucrative springboard into high-end private sector jobs, why wouldn’t you feel an instinctive sympathy for policies that enrich the few who are already thriving? Indeed, it is this revolving door that helps cement a bond of solidarity between elected politicians and business elites. While this is primarily a Conservative scandal – only three Labour MPs have registered second jobs – it is not exclusively so. Take Geoff Hoon, the former Labour defence secretary, who approved the awarding of a £1bn contract to AgustaWestland – a leading supplier of the Saudi dictatorship – and then ended as their managing director for international business. All above board of course: but if you were a minister with one eye on your prospects, how does that influence your decisions, consciously or otherwise? The only solution is to restate that being an MP is a public service and a duty, not a top-end profession requiring appropriate remuneration. But we need to do more than just say it: putting an end to corruption requires urgent reform. That means banning second jobs – with the exceptions of actual public services, such as healthcare or teaching – and heavily constraining the revolving door and the lobbying activities of former MPs. Those who claim this would limit MPs with “real-world experience” are telling on themselves: it’s not gilded private consultancies that inject reality into the Westminster bubble, but the small minority of parliamentarians who know what it’s like to languish on a social housing waiting list, to have your benefits slashed while raising kids, or to lie awake fretting over unopened energy bills. Our greatest national institution – the National Health Service – was not the brainchild of a heavily remunerated City speculator, but of the poorly educated ex-miner Nye Bevan, who understood the suffering of working-class citizens condemned to the cruelty of a society without a welfare state. If we can make politics the public service it always should have been, there will be losers, sure – MPs’ sense of entitlement and the power of big business – but some of our diminished democracy will finally be recovered. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistThe Home Office’s admission that only four people were deported to Jamaica on a flight in the early hours of Wednesday morning has raised questions about the continuing viability of such flights. The Airbus A350-900, which can take up to 350 passengers, left Birmingham airport at 1.20am on Wednesday with four of an original list of more than 50 deportees onboard, along with escorts and crew. The average cost of a Home Office deportation charter flight is £200,000, so the operation cost the equivalent of £50,000 a person. The numbers removed on the last four Jamaica charter flights have decreased steadily at 17, 13, seven and now four. In a statement on Wednesday evening, Priti Patel said: “I make no apology for removing foreign national offenders who have committed crimes which will have had a devastating impact on their victims. The people removed to Jamaica today are convicted criminals who have been found guilty of a range of serious offences. They have no place in our society. It is absolutely galling that, yet again, last-minute legal claims have stopped the removal of 33 people, including those guilty of abhorrent crimes such as murder and child sexual offences.” The home secretary made no mention in her statement that some removal directions were deferred because of a Covid outbreak at Colnbrook immigration removal centre near Heathrow. Home Office sources confirmed the outbreak and said they were working closely with the UK Health Security Agency to tackle it. One lawyer who represented several people who were on the list for the Jamaica flight but did not ultimately fly said: “Some due to fly had been unable to access legal advice prior to being detained due to the cost and others had obtained poor-quality advice. “Most cases were deferred by the Home Office themselves, and in those brought to court it was independent judges who ruled that there were legal grounds why many on the flight list needed to remain in the UK while their cases were considered further.” Karen Doyle, of the organisation Movement For Justice, said: “These unjust flights rip families apart. Of the 34 detainees we spoke to many had no or inadequate legal representatives.” Bella Sankey, the director of Detention Action, said: “All of those removed from this flight were removed because either the court or the Home Office decided their removal would be unlawful. Yet still those removed may have had inadequate legal advice as a result of the shambolic operation of the legal advice system in detention. The high court has now given permission for Detention Action’s challenge to these shortcomings to be heard next month.”Canada could face compensation payments to Indigenous communities worth billions, after a court found it had willfully deprived First Nations of the immense wealth extracted from their lands. The Crown has made payments to 23 First Nations of the Robinson-Huron Treaty territory since 1850, in exchange for a territory roughly the size of France. In 1874, the payment was increased to C$4 per person per year. It has not changed since then. On Friday, Ontario’s court of appeal ruled unanimously that the meagre payments were a violation of the spirit of the treaty: to share the wealth generated from the territory. The case has now been sent back to a trial judge to determine how much money the nearly 40,000 Anishinaabe descended from nations that ceded the territory are owed – a figure will probably be in the billions of dollars. It is not yet clear if the federal government, the government of Ontario, or both, will be required to pay the compensation. At a press conference on Tuesday, Chief Dean Sayers of the Batchewana First Nation hailed the court victory as “an incredible moment in the history of our lands here in Canada” and said the decision represented a long-overdue chance for Anishinabek people to “reclai[m] our inheritances”. The treaty, named after fur-trader-turned-politician William Benjamin Robinson, who negotiated with Indigenous communities, covers 35,700 square miles of land and grants Indigenous communities the rights to hunt and fish the land – as well as an annual “rent” paid to each person. In the 171 years since the treaty was signed, the land on the north shores of Lake Huron and Lake Superior has become a valuable source of revenue for the mining and forestry industries. But despite the immense revenues generated by industry, remote First Nations communities live in abysmal conditions, sometimes lacking access to clean drinking water. “Obviously, the Anishinaabe would not have expected their communities to suffer a range of deprivations, including substandard housing and boil water advisories, while non-Indigenous communities thrived,” the court said. “Nor was it likely, based on the Anishinaabe principles discussed by the trial judge, that the Anishinaabe would have wished to enjoy great personal wealth while their fellow Canadians suffered deprivation.” The high court victory marks the latest win for the litigants, who have “won every step of the process” in the multi-year fight, Mike Restoule, chair of the Robinson Huron Treaty Litigation Fund, told reporters. Ontario’s attorney general’s office says it is reviewing the decision, but could not comment on a matter before the courts. The federal government has indicated it is willing to discuss a settlement if Ontario agrees to participate in the talks. “We know it is the time now for the government of Ontario to embrace the reality, to embrace the facts, to embrace the history and also embrace the rule of law,” said the Wiikwemkoong chief Duke Peltier. Ontario has 60 days to appeal the ruling, which would send the case to Canada’s supreme court – but Indigenous leaders have instead called on the provincial government to join them at the bargaining table. There is also mounting pressure on various levels of government to not appeal against court rulings that affirm Indigenous rights or significant final settlements due to those communities. Justin Trudeau’s Liberal government has faced sharp criticism for its recent decision to appeal against a ruling that would pave the way for a huge compensation payment to Indigenous children who suffered in foster care.Winning tip: To mountains and the beach, Corsica We’ve visited Corsica a few times. As penniless students sleeping on the beach, as new parents with travel cot and buggy in tow, and as newly retired tourers with hire car. But our best-ever Corsican trip was with a seven-day Pass Libertà for the 230 miles of the Chemins de Fer de la Corse, which costs just €50. The Y-shaped network links the coastal towns of Bastia, Ajaccio (both accessible by train and ferry via mainland France), Calvi and hilltop Corte, showcasing Corsica’s unbelievable mountain scenery and spectacular coasts. Hard to pick the best leg of the journey, but pulling in to Calvi station at dusk along the sweeping sandy beach takes some beating. cf-corse.corsica Alison The right kind of snow, Sweden and Norway The most fabulous train journey I have ever done was from Kiruna in north Sweden to Narvik in Norway. Blue, white, grey and black with the occasional red of a wooden house or a splash of dark green from conifers, colour the landscape. The views across the snow-capped mountains and the endless lakes are phenomenal. Stop off at Abisko and hike along the Kungsleden (King’s Trail), the long-distance path through a landscape with lots of snowfields, reindeer and cold rivers to cross. scandinavianrail.com Monique Gadella Moors and dales, Middlesbrough to Whitby The Esk Valley line, operated by Northern Rail, takes you from Middlesbrough to the seaside town of Whitby in 90 minutes. The route is only 30 miles, but there are 17 stations as you pass through the North York Moors national park. At Battersby, the driver swaps ends, as the train does a switchback. Names such as Kildale, Commondale and Castleton Moor provide an insight into the type of scenery to expect as you follow the course of the River Esk, while at Grosmont you might catch a glimpse of the more touristy steam train. eskvalleyrailway.co.uk Roy Messenger Unruly wilderness, the West Highland line A friend and I took the train from Glasgow to Mallaig for a short trip in February. The train is an older model and the conductor wandered down the aisles, cheerfully greeting customers he recognised, and those he didn’t. The journey began with the line passing through industrial estates and residential areas but eventually the buildings stopped and we began to climb. We passed over icy lochs and snow-covered pine forests, all held beneath a moody, threatening winter’s sky. The wind whipped around the train, especially higher up, sending flurries of snow with it. After the pavements of Glasgow for the past few months it was a piece of unruly wilderness – and magnificent. scotrail.co.uk Kirsten Ancient hills and red kites, Swansea to Shrewsbury The Heart of Wales line runs between Swansea and Shrewsbury. Many of its stations link to the new long-distance walking trail, the Heart of Wales line trail, allowing you to hop on and off and walk between stations. The route encompasses winding river valleys, wild forests and Cambrian mountains. Highlights include viaducts at Knucklas and Cynghordy, and the magnificent Sugar Loaf mountain. Alight at Llanwrtyd for a spot of bog snorkelling or to see the red kites; visit Llandrindod’s Victorian fair in August. Or simply sit back and enjoy the glorious scenery. heart-of-wales.co.uk M Ashley Castles and crags, Germany My favourite train ride is the 38-mile stretch that follows the Rhine from Bingen to Koblenz through its magnificent gorge. Castles, crags, forests and fortresses tower above you round each bend in the river. Medieval robber barons fought for control of the river highway and Lorelei (a steep slate rock) lured fishermen to their deaths on the rocks with her siren song. You’ll emerge safe from your carriage in under an hour, but changed forever by your journey back through time. Regular trains run daily and a ticket costs about €15 one way. raileurope.com Susanna Callaghan Rural beauty, Ireland The train from Dublin to Galway takes you right across the belt of the emerald isle. Moody hills sit on the horizon, with the weather creating an ever-changing landscape. It might be raining and grey outside, but you can enjoy Ireland’s rural beauty from the comfort of a train carriage. There’s even a snack cart, selling nice hot Irish tea and packets of biscuits to help pass the 2½-hour journey. Galway station is in the heart of this small city, and a stone’s throw from An Púcán, a great stop for a Guinness when waiting for your return train. Catch the Galway service from Dublin Heuston. An open return costs €52.10. irishrail.ie Charlotte A journey through history, Dresden to Budapest Leave Dresden in the morning, as the journey takes about nine hours. You will be treated to a variety of landscapes, from the valley of the Elbe to the mountains in the Czech Republic and Slovakia to the flat valley of the Danube. The train stops more than 10 times, including Prague and Bratislava. The rolling stock is a mixture of carriages from different countries and eras, including at least one from communist times, with signs in several languages. Walk along the train to compare eating arrangements and ticket prices, and be surprised by the variety of restaurants and bars on board. You’ll arrive in Budapest in time for dinner. raileurope.com Irene Colourful villages, Cinque Terre, Italy Seeing the Cinque Terre by train, starting in Levanto, is possibly the best way to experience the five colourful villages on the Italian coast. An adult Cinque Terre card costs €7.50 and allows unlimited travel between the villages. You can also hike between Monterosso and Vernazza and then on to Corniglia. Although why walk when you can enjoy the sites from the train? I particularly enjoyed a lemon and basil sorbet in Corniglia. cinqueterre.eu.com Rachel Elizabeth Worth waking up for, Milan to Vienna The Nightjet sleeper train from Milan to Vienna is not cheap, but the two-person sleeper accommodation is comfortable and the early-morning section of the journey across the spectacular viaducts of Semmering Pass is a never-to-be-forgotten experience. Arrival at Vienna’s main railway terminus before 9am allows a full day’s sightseeing and coffee drinking in that fabulous city. From €50pp. nightjet.com ChrisLet’s picture a dinner with family or friends that began by enjoying beer, wine, fruit juice or maybe a fizzy kombucha beverage. You’re contemplating a glorious basket of bread, rapt in awe of its perfect crumb and fantasizing about the moment you slather it in butter or olive oil. Then come the fresh vegetables sauteed with soy sauce, maybe tofu or free-range beef with potatoes or rice, followed by cheese, or a chocolate dessert – and to top it off, a lovely cup of coffee or tea with some chocolates or maybe some sake? We need to stop for a moment and thank fungi for all of this. Honestly, none of it would be possible without them, and your dinner would certainly not be so tasty! Fungi are responsible for almost all our food production, and most of our processed materials. They are also to be thanked for many of the important medical breakthroughs in human history that treat both physical and mental ailments, for naturally sequestering and slowly releasing carbon, for optimizing industrial processes, and so much more. When most people think about fungi, they tend to associate them with decay. Many people mistakenly believe fungi are plants. However, fungi are neither plants nor animals but rather organisms that form their own kingdom of life. The way they feed themselves is different from other organisms: they do not photosynthesize like plants and neither do they ingest their food like animals. Fungi actually live inside their food and secrete enzymes to dissolve nutrients they then absorb. Included in this kingdom are yeasts, moulds, mushrooms, wood-ears or conks, and several other different types of unicellular and multicellular organisms that live in marine, freshwater, desert and both young and old ecosystems on Earth. Basically, a morel and a chanterelle are as closely related as a flea and an elephant. The latter are both animals, the former are fungi. Interestingly, fungi are more closely related to us animals than to plants, sharing a common ancestor in the form of an opisthokont, which is a cell with a posterior flagellum – like human spermatozoids. Now to the central question: what would happen in a world without fungi? Most plants can’t live outside water and rely on fungi to survive. There would be no forests for you to hike in or any agriculture to feed you. Herbivores such as cows can’t break down grass without the fungi in their gut. Fermentation is possible only because of yeasts, which, going back to our dinner table, means that no fungi would mean no bread, no chocolate, no soy sauce, no beer or wine. Hence our gratitude for fungi at dinner. Moreover, without moulds like koji many ancient civilizations could not have preserved food, other than using salt or smoking (imagine that for a second). For decades we have extracted enzymes from fungi to clean clothes in cold water (yes, it’s fungi that do that in your detergent), have bioengineered natural pesticides with entomopathogenic fungi that eliminate the toxic burden of synthetic pesticides, and have learned to use some species to maximize the amount of metal extracted from rocks in mining processes. We have also discovered the cholesterol-lowering statins in fungi, life-saving antibiotics like penicillin, the medicines that allow for organ transplants to be successful, and we are now finally accepting and legalizing medicinal compounds made by fungi to treat urgent and life-threatening mental health ailments such as PTSD and depression. As if that weren’t impressive enough, our ancestral and traditional ways of ritually reaching the celestial from the terrestrial almost all include fungi – from the ritual beverage Soma in Vedic cultures to communion with bread and wine in Roman Catholic cultures. Fungi matter – a lot. Nevertheless, the entire kingdom is ignored in most biodiversity, climate change and environmental legal frameworks. And by the general public too: for too long macroscopic diversity and species on earth have been referred to using the now obsolete term flora &amp; fauna, or just plants and animals instead of fauna, flora &amp; funga, or animals, fungi and plants. The third “f”, representing fungi, is acknowledged as the correct term to refer to the diversity of fungi of a given place. The IUCN species survival commission and the global NGO Re:Wild – among others – have adopted this terminology. It seems the time has finally come to leave mycological illiteracy behind. *** Decomposition, or decay, is the very beginning of a fundamental natural process that enables life. There is no regeneration without degeneration of organic compounds, because energy is not lost, it is transformed – and it is the fungi that are heavily responsible for this vital transformation. For example, if we look at a fallen tree in the forest and imagine it is composed of building blocks, we can understand how decomposition works: fungi weave their way through the blocks, loosening them until they are “free” and ready to “rebuild” in another form. For too long this process has been considered distasteful, under the once-upon-a-time understanding that life is a linear process. It is shocking to think that we can attribute any negativity to rot when we understand the incredible nature-based solutions it holds. We can use rot for a more sustainable future too. For instance, mycelium – a mostly invisible group of fungi, such as mushrooms and conks – is a tangible and safe alternative to animal leather as well as plastic packaging, and is starting to revolutionize the fashion industry. Mycelium leathers and packaging are offering the opportunity to use fungi involved in decomposition as a source of clothing and durable, recyclable and natural materials that are more sustainable to produce. Materials like Mylo Unleather and Made with Reishi, as well as incredible packaging materials made by Ecovative, are trailblazing for industry to move away from pollutant materials whose manufacturing process requires unsustainable amounts of water, toxins, and energy, and sometimes requires the end of an animal’s life. As legendary mycologist Paul Stamets said during Paris and London fashion weeks on the Stella McCartney runways: “In fashion, mushrooms are the future.” He says this while he wears a hat made of amadou, a fungal felt or suede of ancient eastern European origin which demonstrates that fungi have a successful past in fashion too. *** There is consensus among mycologists that we know only 10% of species diversity within kingdom fungi, at most. It is urgent to further species knowledge before species are lost forever and with them their potential. This goes beyond their use as materials or food: fungi sustain culturally important activities for rural communities all over the world. Thousands of families living in subsistence economies depend on the seasonal appearance of fungi as food and as a tradeable product to be consumed both locally, nationally and internationally. Not only is this an activity that sustains livelihoods; it keeps cultures alive. In southern Chile, for instance, while the spring fungus Cyttaria espinosae “digüeñe” is being harvested by entire families, firewood is collected, songs are sung, oral history is transmitted, and you can hear the laughter and fun throughout the hills of the southern beech forests. Cyttaria – now that’s a delicious addition to the dinner table! *** We must not ignore or underestimate the fact that fungi create ecosystems. How so? Well, let’s picture a cake: if we don’t put that binding ingredient like egg or aquafaba into the mix, the sugar and flour do not stick together. In a forest, for example, plants and animals do not “stick” together without the fungi to create the ecosystem. The science is clear: fungi are essential to maintaining a stable climate system (given their role in sequestering carbon in soil) and preserving ecosystemic health. Legislation, however, has not caught up. Across many environmental and conservation policies, fungi have been overlooked or undervalued. This oversight has consequences: when fungi are put at risk – endangering the ecosystems that depend on them – we miss opportunities to advance solutions to serious environmental problems like climate change and land degradation. That’s why the Fungi Foundation is calling for the incorporation of fungi across law and policy at every level – national, regional and international. In the aftermath of COP26 I hope the UN puts fungi – which provide critical solutions to urgent environmental challenges like climate change – on their agenda. Together with biologist and best-selling author Merlin Sheldrake and NYU Law professor César Rodríguez-Garavito, the Fungi Foundation prepared a manifesto and a roadmap for the legal recognition of fungi that has been endorsed by leading environmental experts and activists, including Jane Goodall, George Monbiot, Donna Haraway, Paul Stamets, Kristine Tompkinsand Peter Gabriel to name a few, as well as more than a thousand other signatories from more than 70 countries. International governance institutions – from the UN bodies to the Conference of the Parties (COP), which meets to advance the Convention on Biological Diversity – can use their political and legal clout to encourage the updating and creation of laws and policies that protect fungi and mainstream them into environmental, biodiversity, and conservation law and policy. National governments can follow the lead of Chile in adopting legislation that extends to fungi the legal protections that are recognized for plants and animals. All mushrooms are magic. Take it from me, as someone who studies them. It’s time to say their name by acknowledging them all around - from the dinner table to international conservation policies - and including them in our conception of ecosystems that need to be cherished and protected. Say it with me: the world is inhabited by fauna, flora and funga. Without fungi, the world as we know it would not exist. Giuliana Furci is the founder of the Fungi Foundation, the first NGO dedicated to fungiIt’s hard for a novelist to add twists or drama to the real-life spy cops scandal. Guardian journalists exposed a secret web of undercover police, the so-called Special Demonstration Squad, who infiltrated protest groups. They maintained split identities for years, developing intimate relationships with their unwitting targets, in some cases even fathering children, before abruptly vanishing. The scoop prompted an official inquiry and widespread revulsion. What a novel can do, perhaps, is round out the emotional resonance behind redacted transcripts, journalism and legalese. In Alice O’Keeffe’s second book, free spirit Skylark and her perfidious partner are loosely based on the testimony from women who were duped. Interspersed in the story of this intimate betrayal are excerpts from the SDS’s actual “Tradecraft Manual”, together with fictional briefings between Dan Greene – UCO (undercover officer) 122 – and his handler, DI Wells. This foregrounding, while creating abundant irony, vitiates any suspense; unlike Sky, we know he’s a phoney from the off. Sky is instantly attracted to buff, mysterious Dan when he starts turning up at climate protest meetings, although she does register that most of her fellow protesters have skinny vegan physiques rather than bulging biceps and a rigid posture. Dan and his handy van are quickly accepted by the likes of wannabe circus performer Bendy Aoife and The Rev, a radical sculptor and Sky’s fellow escapee from suburbia (real name Rupert). That everyone on the alternative scene is in the process of radical reinvention only helps the infiltrators to blend in. Dan prefers to have sex with Sky in total darkness, for reasons that eventually become clear, although benevolent Sky simply assumes that, like others in the movement, he’s a damaged soul suffering a past trauma. The protest scene in the 90s, with its pop-up raves and joyful disruption, is lovingly evoked, but as the direct actions become more violent, Sky is happy to retreat into home life, although she finds Dan’s unexplained absences baffling. Reporting back to DI Wells, Dan is deceiving both sides, repeatedly denying that he’s involved with a “weary”, but the psychological pressure is beginning to tell. Even with the benefit of the inquiry, motives were hard to fathom as the largely unrepentant UCOs slithered back into the gloom. Sky’s trajectory through growing doubts, a shocking reveal and the shattering aftermath of betrayal is keenly expressed, but Dan remains little more than a cipher. A deeper delve into his troubled psyche and hidden motives would have enriched the novel. O’Keeffe’s telling is respectful and moving, but a vital piece is missing. • Skylark by Alice O’Keeffe is published by Coronet (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Thursday once more, and it is time to brave the triple challenge of some topical questions, some general knowledge teasers, and some very silly regular features. Will Kate Bush be the correct option this week? Will Ron from Sparks look disapprovingly at your answers? And will you be able to earn a bonus point by spotting a hidden reference to Doctor Who? No anagrams this week, but you’ll all be thrilled to know that the flag round is back. Have fun and let us know how you got on in the comments. I think it might be a tricky one. The Thursday quiz, No 29 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you wouldn’t want him to cast a spell on you.Romania and Bulgaria are recording the EU’s highest daily death rates from Covid-19, after superstition, misinformation and entrenched mistrust in governments and institutions combined to leave them the least vaccinated countries in the bloc. “A village is vanishing every day in Romania,” Catalin Cirstoiu, the head of the Bucharest university emergency hospital, where the morgue is filled to overflowing with coronavirus victims, lamented this week. “What about in a week or a month? A larger village? Or a city? Where do we stop?” Cristiou told Associated Press the system was near breaking point, “all caused by one thing: the population’s inability to comprehend they need to get vaccinated”. While new infections have recently started to edge down, Bulgaria this week reported its highest ever total of daily fatalities. Its seven-day rolling average of deaths per million inhabitants reached 22.8, compared with an EU average of 3.1. In Romania the average daily death rate hit 23.7 per million last week and has since dipped to 21, according to figures from OurWorldInData – still more than 30 times higher than in Portugal, France or Spain. Despite ample vaccine supplies, the two countries have fully vaccinated the lowest proportion of their populations in the EU: 34.5% of Romania’s inhabitants have received two jabs, and 23.04% of Bulgaria’s. That compares with an average of 65.2% across the EU, with countries such as France, Finland, Italy, Ireland, Belgium, Denmark and Spain all nearing or exceeding 70% and Malta and Portugal surpassing 80%. Low vaccine take-up has exposed a deep east-west faultline defined by poverty, underdevelopment and low levels of health education – and compounded, in many ex-communist eastern EU states, by very low confidence in government. Surveys have consistently shown that populations in central and eastern Europe, much of which emerged from communist rule barely 30 years ago, place significantly less trust in national governments and institutions than in the west. That has led to official campaigns promoting vaccination being widely disregarded, while efforts to deploy alternative, more trusted messengers such as family doctors or even priests have so far failed to substantially increase uptake. In some cases, church leaders and politicians have even fuelled the suspicion caused by popular mistrust of government and online misinformation. A bishop in the Romanian Orthodox church is under criminal investigation for spreading Covid disinformation, while Diana Șoșoacă, a member of the country’s upper house, has repeatedly called the pandemic “the lie of the century”. Political uncertainty has made matters worse. Romania’s government collapsed last month, and in Bulgaria the prospect of parliamentary and presidential elections on 14 November has left politicians reluctant to alienate voters by imposing stricter measures. In both countries, the overwhelming majority of deaths are among unvaccinated people. In Bulgaria, Ivan Poromanski, the head of Pirogov hospital in Sofia, told local television that nine out of 10 patients in its intensive care unit died, and the number of deaths among the vaccinated was “minuscule”. Romanian authorities introduced tighter preventive measures a fortnight ago, including a 10pm curfew and making vaccination certificates obligatory for activities such as going to the gym, the cinema or a shopping centre. More than 90% of fatalities are unvaccinated, according to the health ministry, and roughly 85% are over the age of 60, with mistrust, misinformation and isolation keeping elderly people, in particular, away from vaccines. However, Maria Sajin, the head of a university hospital morgue, said some of the dead were as young as 20 or 25. “They don’t understand they need to vaccinate, that there’s no medicine,” she said. “Nobody understands that vaccines save lives.” Valeriu Gheorghita, Romania’s vaccination campaign coordinator, told Reuters there was “a mentality of ‘at my age I will live as long as I am meant to’. It’s very difficult to convince people to get vaccinated – it’s a matter of how they perceive life and risk of disease.” Gheorghita said that unlike in other EU countries where many elderly people were in retirement institutions, in Romania they were more likely to be at home, alone and harder to reach. “And there is the issue of trust – they are just extremely hesitant.”I do not know if I can survive three more years of Democrats stumbling over themselves to disavow the Democratic platform in a doomed attempt to win bad-faith culture wars. It is too painful, like watching ruthless hunters herding panicked animals over the side of a cliff. The poor, dumb beasts inevitably go extinct if they are not able to outthink such a rudimentary strategy. Walk around your town. Explore a major American city. Drive across the country. What are the most important problems you see? There is poverty. Homelessness. A lack of affordable housing. Vast and jaw-dropping economic and racial inequality. There is a lack of public transportation, a broken healthcare system, environmental degradation, and a climate crisis that threatens to upend our way of life. These are real problems. These are the things that we need our government to fix. These are what we need to hear politicians talk about. These are what we must debate and focus on, if we are really concerned about human rights and our children’s future and all the other big things we claim to value. I guarantee you that neither “cancel culture” nor “critical race theory” nor, worse of all, “wokeness” will grab you as enormous problems after your exploration of America, unless that exploration ranges only from a college faculty lounge to a cable TV studio to the office of a rightwing thinktank. These are all words that mean nothing. To the extent that they are real at all, they are niche concerns that plague such a small subset of Americans that they deserve to be addressed only after we have solved the many other, realer problems. All these terms function primarily as empty vessels into which bad-faith actors can pour racism, so that it may appear more palatable when it hits the public airwaves. Common sense tells us we should spend most of our time talking about the biggest problems, and less time on the lesser problems, and no time on the mythical problems. To engage in long and tortured debates over these slippery and indefinable culture war terms is to violate that rule, with awful consequences for everyone. Let’s not bullshit about this. Racism is a wonderfully effective political tool for Republicans, yet explicit racism is frowned upon in polite society now, so there is a constant flow of new issues to stand in for racism in political discourse. Lee Atwater, who invented Nixon’s “southern strategy”, explained this all decades ago, and it is still true. George Wallace could be outright racist, but subsequent generations of politicians have had to cloak it in “welfare reform” or being “tough on crime” or, now, opposition to “wokeness” and “critical race theory” – things which mean, by the way, “caring about racism”. Three-quarters of a million Americans are dead from a pandemic. We have a Democratic president and a booming economy. So we will get culture wars, and more culture wars, all of which are built on stoking various forms of hate. This is a game that serious leaders should not play. Unfortunately, we don’t have too many serious leaders. We have the Democratic party. Republicans will push these culture wars as far as they can, but it takes Democrats to make the strategy work. There are two types of Democrats falling for this trap now. One type is the group of fairly well-meaning people who assume that the fact there is a cottage industry dedicated to amplifying these terms in the media means there must be something to them. The other type are the opportunistic Democrats, who often brand themselves “centrists”, who see the culture wars as a way to steal power from the left wing of their own party, even if it comes at the cost of hurting millions of Americans. We have seen this movie before. The 1990s was the era of fiery and stupid debates over gay people in the military, flag burning and Sister Souljah. They were just an earlier iteration of the same thing we’re going through now. The decision of Democrats to lean into this dynamic by running to the right led to atrocities like Bill Clinton’s “welfare reform” and crime bills that won him momentary electoral power by immiserating an entire generation of poor, non-white people, many of whom are still caged in prison today. Choosing to give credence to the culture wars has real life consequences. Already, we can see panicked Democrats rushing to decry the very sort of social justice fights that give the decrepit party its only redeeming value. Here is the good news: we don’t have to do this. We can step off this train before it pulls out of Bad Faith Station on the way to the Trump 2024 victory party. What we need is some sort of broad force that can unite people of disparate races and persuasions around a shared, common interest. Something capable of demonstrating the value of the fight against inequality and corporate domination in a real, tangible way. Something that wages its fights in reality, not in the remote world of buzzwords and misdirection. Guess what? That thing already exists. It’s called the labor movement. And it’s energetic as hell right now. A wave of strikes across the nation that has been building for months is garnering levels of attention unseen in decades. The popularity of unions is high. This is a model of progressive values in action that a political party could rally around, if that party was not always so easily tempted to trip over its own shoelaces. In deep red rural Alabama, you can find hundreds of striking mine workers – black and white, Democratic and Republican – completely united and fighting hard, in unity, for economic justice. These people whom our society typically divides have come together in a union, and are sacrificing for one another, side by side. The military is the only other institution in American society that accomplishes this feat of unity, and unions can do it without shooting anyone. The labor movement is living proof that the substance of progressive politics – protecting the poor against the rich, promoting equality, giving everyone fair treatment no matter who they are or how much money they make – is a tool powerful enough to overcome the background drone of Fox News (and the Atlantic). Democrats do not need to wonder how to overcome the culture wars. We already know how: organizing working people to create power that can produce a more just and equal world. It works. But to make it work, you need to hold it up and promote it and help it and talk about it, rather than talking about whether things are “too woke”. Our problems are in the real world. Our solutions are in the real world as well. Our politicians? Many of them are floating in the ether. Come back down to earth, join the labor movement, and help people walk the path away from the incredibly dumb nightmare that awaits us if we get sucked into bullshit debates, with bullshit people, about bullshit. Hamilton Nolan is a labor reporter at In These TimesJury service cannot only be for the white, the lucky and the obstinately stoic in the face of racial injustice. The jury seated in the trial over the killing of Ahmaud Arbery – a Black man who was shot and killed by three white men in Glynn county, Georgia – makes a mockery of the need for a randomly selected jury. Of the 12-person jury, 11 are white and just one is Black, in a county where more than 25% of the residents are Black. That Black jurors were dismissed because of the way they answered a series of questions about their life experiences and perceptions of racism seems particularly ironic given that only one question was asked of Ahmaud Arbery (“What were you doing back there?”) before he was pursued by three men with guns. Initially, 12 Black jurors out of 48 were deemed to be qualified by Judge Timothy Walmsley. To live in Glynn county and not be aware of the killing of Ahmaud Arbery was an extremely unlikely occurrence and almost all jurors had seen the cellphone video taken by Roddie Bryan. The judge questioned them about the media they consumed and found them able to “set it aside” (the preferred locution of the court) and be open to verdicts of guilty and not guilty. In the next stage of jury selection, the defense attorneys proceeded to dismiss 11 of the 12 Black jurors through the use of peremptory strikes, the limited number of dismissals given to each side to use against jurors whom they perceive to be unfavorable. While attorneys have great latitude in their use of strikes, they cannot base strikes on the race or gender of the juror, as detailed by the supreme court in Batson v Kentucky (1986). In the ongoing trial, the defense counsel stated that they had used peremptory strikes against 11 Black jurors because those jurors had a problematically “fixed view” of the case. Black jurors, under oath during voir dire, are caught in a difficult position – they are asked to speak candidly about their thoughts about the crime, but then dismissed for not meeting the hidden standards for peremptory strikes the court has set for them. Juror 253, a Black woman, supposedly expressed this fixed view with statements such as, “no one needs to have their life taken,” and “I believe it was wrong … There should be another solution instead of ‘Bam!’” While these statements suggest that she had strong opinions based on what she knew about the killing of Ahmaud Arbery, it does not represent the totality of her capacity for legal judgment. In order to avoid dismissing jurors, particularly Black jurors who have disproportionately had negative interactions with the police and experienced racial discrimination first-hand, it is necessary for the court to take even more care in separating out moral and legal judgment. To ask the juror to lead the judge or the lawyers in making this distinction through their carefully crafted answers is to get the process backward. Judges must convey their confidence that such a separation is possible and what exactly it entails, including how the life experiences and conscience of a juror can be a legitimate part of the deliberation process. Attorneys must then not be allowed to undermine Black jurors’ right to serve by implying that their intimate acquaintance with the scourge of racial violence in America impedes their ability to be fair to the defendants. After the prosecution brought up their concerns about the improper dismissal of Black jurors, the judge acknowledged, “There appears to be potential discrimination in the panel” but that he was bound by the precedent set in the state to allow peremptory strikes against any juror if attorneys give a plausible race-neutral reason. Other states have attempted to address this longstanding problem of seemingly race-neutral reasons given for dismissing Black jurors leading to all white or nearly all white juries. Support for policies encouraging the separation of moral and legal judgment should also come from social movements, including Black Lives Matter groups and social media. In a post on Twitter, Lee Merritt, the attorney for the Arbery family, wrote, “Register to Vote. Show up for jury duty. Remember this phrase: ‘I can be fair.’” Kevin Gough, defense attorney for Roddie Bryan, one of the men on trial, accused Merritt of tampering with the jury process by implying that jurors should say that they could be fair regardless of what they believed. This obscures the deeper point. What Merritt perhaps should have tweeted is, “Remember you CAN really be fair,” to communicate to potential jurors that they can, in fact, be honest about racism they have experienced and seen, and honest about their ability to uphold the standards of a fair trial in this particular case. This requires that jurors have reflected on the elements of the adversarial trial that they think are worth preserving even if they might want dramatic changes to the way the criminal system both over-punishes certain crimes (where Black people are the defendants) and under-punishes others (where Black people are the victims). In pre-trial motions, the defense lost their request that the jury not see a photo of a Confederate flag vanity plate on Travis McMichael’s truck. The defense feared that the image would induce the jury to view him as racist and probably guilty of a racially motivated murder. While all attorneys must advocate for their client, there must also be a way to evaluate the possible racial motivations for this crime. Even racists deserve a fair trial, but in the interest of avoiding one type of injustice (a guilty verdict based on prejudice), the court cannot enable another: a trial where the racial context for the crime is not adequately considered. By removing Black jurors who were “biased” toward seeing patterns of racial violence in America, the court is removing bias from a picture – the crime in question – whose very essence may in fact be the most horrible extremes of distorting bias. Sonali Chakravarti is a professor of government at Wesleyan University. She works on questions of emotions, the law and democratic institutions. She is the author of Sing the Rage: Listening to Anger after Mass ViolenceAnd with that, let’s call it a night. Australia face China at 2am AEDT on Wednesday. It’s going to be a huge game. The Socceroos could really do with getting back to winning ways, after defeat to Japan and now a home draw with Saudi Arabia. See you next time. Here’s Emma Kemp’s report in the meantime: And finally, a word with Socceroos coach Graham Arnold. “Overall we played well. We created the chances but they didn’t go in tonight. I think a little bit of frustration set in that with the time wasting and the tactics from the Saudis. You know we have to learn to be better with that. I think that was when we started, or they got a couple of their chances. “It is what Matty [Ryan] is there for, to save those goals. It was a time of frustration and things. A lot of these boys are putting in a lot of commitment and effort. I was proud of them.” Arnold confirms that it’s Harry Souttar’s knee that forced him off. “He’s got to go for scans tomorrow morning. I cannot really say until we know those scans. “We are in a great position still. Ten points and five games. Now we go to the second lot of five games and we beat China. We are in a fantastic position. It is all about one game at a time and making sure that we are ready for the next game.” And here’s Martin Boyle, who like Leckie ran his golden socks off tonight. “You can see [the frustration] in the faces. It was that final bit, we didn’t have enough execution. They threw a bit at the end to us. We played well. Still a long way to go. “This is perfect conditions for me, which is great. It is perfect conditions, the ball moves along the ground beautifully. A great stadium and pitch. The fans came out in their numbers and spurred us on. “[Milking contact] might have been part of [Saudi Arabia’s] game plan. You have to get on with it. It be frustrating at times. “Tuesday is massive for us. We can put that right on Tuesday night. It is part of the journey. We are looking forward to it.” Leckie says it was great to be back in front of fans once again: “It’s been so long and the first time playing in this stadium, which is a great stadium. The pitch was perfect tonight. Yeah, like I said, it is just unfortunate we didn’t get the three points to celebrate with the fans. They were loud. They were cheering us all game and we definitely heard it. We appreciate it." Here’s Mat Leckie, who put in a shift tonight: “Well, obviously we wanted the three points, playing at home it, it has been so long and we wanted three points for the fans and to put us into another good position to compete and get closer to Saudi. I think the boys, we had a great performance today. It was just the centimetres that stopped us from scoring a couple of goals. I am proud of the boys. I think we put in a great effort. We didn’t get the three points. “There were inches in it. A few crosses where I was a few centimetres from someone getting on to it. They defended well as well. And that double opportunity after the free kick, the keeper pulled off a great save. Still a positive performance. We created chances. On another day we score.” There’s more than a hint of disappointment for the Socceroos with this result, although a share of the spoils is probably fair. Australia dominated the first half, but lacked a cutting edge and they were nearly made to pay for it after a late surge from Saudi Arabia nearly produced a breakthrough goal for the visitors. The Saudis were impressive as the second half progressed and they remain top of Group B with a cushion of three points. We will await the rest of tonight’s results - particularly the match involving Japan - but Australia’s game against China next week is now huge. 90+4 mins: All over at CommBank Stadium! It ends goalless in the rain! 90+3 mins: Nabbout cuts inside before pinging the ball towards Duke, but he catches his fellow substitute on his heels and the move breaks down. 90+1 mins: McGree slings it in... it drifts all the way through to Nabbout, who lets fly! Wide of the mark, and that could well be that. 90 mins: Into injury time - three minutes of it to be played - and Behich wins a free-kick after a kick at his heels from Al-Muwallad. Perhaps one final chance here? 89 mins: Nabbout gets yellow-carded. Not sure what for. Play goes on with the Saudis moving forward. 88 mins: Is there a twist in this tale yet? Saudi Arabia are in the ascendency, but they may have left it too late to grab all three points. You feel they’ll be pleased with a share of the spoils though. 87 mins: Australia make two more changes - McGree and Dougall on for Hrustic and Boyle. 86 mins: Down to the other end... Nabbout sends over a dangerous cross but again there’s no one there to convert. 85 mins: Al-Dawsari! Again Ryan is forced into action! A leaping fist denies Al-Dawsari and the Saudis this time! 83 mins: Here they come again. Ooh! That could have been it! Al-Shehri’s glancing header skids inches wide of Ryan’s post! The Socceroos breathe a huge sigh of relief as Ryan gestures for his teammates to calm down. 82 mins: Australia are walking a tightrope here as Saudi Arabia finally come into the game as they seek a deliver late hammer blow. 81 mins: Ooh! Al-Dawsari finds his way through the Socceroos defence and only a combination of a fairly weak shot and some decent positioning from Ryan prevent Saudi Arabia taking the lead! 80 mins: Ten minutes remaining... 78 mins: Kanno finds Al-Dawsari beautifully on the Saudi left, skidding the ball across the slippery surface. You love to see that in these kinds of conditions. 77 mins: Souttar’s stretchered off, and yes Degenek comes on in his place. A second change is made as Andrew Nabbout comes on to replace Leckie, who’s put in a decent shift. 76 mins: Souttar went down in all that action, and it doesn’t look good for the defender. He’s going to have to come off. Degenek will replace him. 75 mins: Ryan comes to the Socceroos’ rescue! He saves from Al-Faraj, after the Saudi captain holds off Souttar and gets off a shot on target! 74 mins: Grant gives the ball away but that’s a poor effort from Mohammed Kanno, who blazes well over Ryan’s bar. 73 mins: The Saudis make their first change of the night: off goes Al-Brikan and on comes Saleh Al-Shehri. 72 mins: Nasser Al-Dawsari gets forward now, but his cross is way overhit and the ball sails all the way over the Australian box and out of play for a throw on the other side. 71 mins: Boyle beats his man on the right now; Nasser Al-Dawsari resorts to fouling the Socceroo. Pretty cynical that one, but the ref keeps his card in his pocket this time. 70 mins: Behich looks for Leckie on the left-hand side, but the striker can’t take the ball in his stride, instead only managing to help it on its way out of play. Saudi goal kick. 69 mins: Things are heating up on the pitch, and you just get the feeling at this point there’s a goal in this match yet. 68 mins: 23,214 is the crowd tonight - not bad for a rainy Thursday in Parramatta. 66 mins: Here’s Mitch Duke, on for Mabil, who so nearly broke the deadlock moments earlier with that sweetly-struck free-kick. 65 mins: Mabil! Super save to deny the Socceroos! Boyle is there on the follow up! Another save from Al-Yami! The ball skews off a defender and behind for a corner! 64 mins: It takes Boyle ages to get to his feet, and after all that, we’ll have a Socceroos free-kick, about 30 yards out. Hrustic over it again... and Mabil. 62 mins: Al-Bulayhi joins his central defensive partner Al-Amri in the referee’s book for a stud on the foot of Boyle, who goes down apparently in some pain. 61 mins: Straight down to the other end and Al-Muwallad has a great chance for Saudi Arabia! But like Irvine, he miskicks and the chance goes begging! 60 mins: Moments later Irvine has a shooting chance but the midfielder mis-hits it and Al-Yami is not called into action again! 59 mins: Leckie! Close to the opener for Australia! After using his strength to see off his marker he is foiled by a great save by Al-Yami! 58 mins: Leckie involved again here. Saudi players want a yellow card after the Australian is a bit late on Al-Malki. There was nothing malicious in it though. 56 mins: Wow, Al-Amri hits the deck like a sack of spuds after Leckie pushes him over. Al-Amri was trying to prevent Leckie taking a quick throw. Yellow, the first of the match, for the Saudi defender. 54 mins: Mitch Duke is also on the bench for Australia tonight, along with the aforementioned Jamie Maclaren. 52 mins: A rare chance for the Socceroos! Boyle gets to the byline and sends a cross fizzing across the face of goal - in behind keeper Al-Yami - but there’s no one there to stick it in! 50 mins: Boyle, like Irvine a few moments ago, is remonstrating now. The difference, the Socceroo was in the wrong there. A couple of emails! “Thanks for your commentary,” writes Gerard Clancy. “I’m an Irish Saudi Arabia fan living here in Jeddah. It’s a mild 30C here and sunny, nice winter day. In the truest Irish fashion I am hoping for a mud-splattered 0-0 draw. To say our crowd here in KSA are unused to rain is an understatement to say the least.” 49 mins: Irvine wins the ball from Al-Malki, but the Australian midfielder is pulled up for a foul. He can’t believe it, but he’d better - the ref’s not going to change his mind. 48 mins: Hrustic pings another beautiful ball to Mabil, but again the winger can’t get the better of his marker. 47 mins: An early throw to Australia gives Grant the chance to sling in a long one, but not until he’s dried the ball with a towel. He finally launches it, but the flick-on is cleared by the Saudi defence. 46 mins: Here we go again then. No changes to tell you of at the break. It’s still tipping it down. Australia certainly had the better of a fairly hectic opening period, but they have nothing to show for it at the break. Indeed, they rarely threatened the Saudi goal, and will need to find a more clinical approach in the second half if they are to break down the group-leading visitors. Don’t go anywhere. 45+2 mins: There goes the whistle. Are they boos? Weird. Not sure who they were from, or to whom they were directed. Goalless at the break. 45+1 mins: Hrustic takes it.... headed clear at the first. The ball comes back to the Australian midfielder, but again his delivery lacks height and it’s headed clear for a second time. 45 mins: Perhaps there’s one final chance here for the Socceroos to grab a goal before the break as Grant wins a corner. 43 mins: Behich is befuddled by the conditions here as the ball zips off the pitch, straight past the left-back and out for a Saudi throw. 42 mins: Irvine plays in Leckie who in turn fires across towards Boyle, who flings himself at the ball, but in truth is miles away from it. 40 mins: Players sliding in all over the show here. Jeggo wins a throw as the first half draws to a conclusion. 38 mins: Mabil again is fed on the Socceroos’ left, but he’s left frustrated once more by Al-Amri. 37 mins: Boyle goes in early on Al-Dawsari, and the Saudi dangerman is again given no time or space. He’s yet to stamp his mark on this game... that’s not to say he won’t. 36 mins: Mabil with the ball again on the Socceroos’ left. But again he can’t make anything of it, as his early cross is blocked by a green shirt. 35 mins: It finds Mabil, who cuts inside and has a crack on goal. But it lacks accuracy and the ball balloons way over Al-Yami’s bar. 34 mins: That’s a loose ball from Jeggo, gifting Saudi Arabia possession. It’s OK though, as they win it back soon enough. 33 mins: Nice vision from Mabil who finds the onrushing Behich on the left. Behich gives it back to Mabil, but the move breaks down soon after . 31 mins: Irvine and Al-Faraj clash in the middle of the park... the Saudi captain comes away with the ball, although he didn’t seem to know where it was. 30 mins: Half an hour gone, and still goalless in Parramatta. Australia have enjoyed the better of the opening skirmishes, but they are yet to really test the Saudi keeper. 29 mins: Boyle plays the ball across to Hrustic, who has a pop first time, but he doesn’t catch as well as he’s capable of and Al-Yami is not troubled. Half a chance though. 28 mins: Al-Malki makes a tremendous double tackle, sliding on the greasy surface, and a kerfuffle breaks out soon after over nothing much at all. Tempers cool as quickly as they flared, and we can all move on. 27 mins: Australia look largely comfortable at the back so far (he types, inviting the liveblogger’s curse). 26 mins: Hrustic whips in a deep cross, but there’s too much height and bend on it, and the ball flies well wide of the Saudi goal frame. 25 mins: Al-Amri falls to the floor after attempting a bicycle kick clearance. There doesn’t seem to be much contact, but he gets his wish of a free-kick. 24 mins: Well this is something you don’t see often - a foul throw! From a professional footballer! Nasser Al-Dawsari is the culprit and replays are no less forgiving than the original! 23 mins: Ryan collects the ball easily enough after Al-Dawsari’s radar fails him. 21 mins: No, Hrustic fails to get much elevation on his kick and the Saudi defence clears. Offside flag is up anyway. Disappointing for the Socceroos. 20 mins: Boyle wins a free-kick now with Al-Dawsari pulled up for a foul. Danger here with Hrustic and Boyle over it. 19 mins: Leckie now nearly gets his head onto a superb cross into the Saudi box from Behich on the left flank! 18 mins: Andy Harper has just likened Martin Boyle to a virus. In a positive way. I think. 16 mins: Ooh, a heart-in-the-mouth moment from Saudi keeper Al-Yami - risky stuff from him and he acknowledges that to his teammates as they all breathe a sigh of relief. 13 mins: Al Faraj with a shooting chance now! But Souttar puts his body on the line to make a crucial block! 12 mins: What a lovely ball from Hrustic to Grant on the right hand side, but the full-back can’t quite get to it and actually goes down under a challenge. Perhaps the slick surface was to blame for that. 10 mins: Al-Dawsari gives an indication of what he’s capable of now and the ball flashes across the face of the Socceroos’ box. They’ll need to watch him tonight. Correct. Apologies, was getting overexcited. US games to come at the end of the month. 9 mins: The ball is switched from left to right, to Boyle who picks it up and hoons forward. He’s eventually checked, but Hrustic keeps it going with a lovely crossfield ball to Mabil. A few stepovers from him don’t fool the Saudi defence though, and the move loses it momentum. 8 mins: Jeggo flies into a challenge and is pulled up for a foul. The Saudis haven’t really had time to settle on the ball so far. 7 mins: Saudia Arabia in green shirts and socks, with white shorts tonight by the way, Australia also in their traditional kit with green shorts and gold shirts and socks. 6 mins: It’s tipping it down in Parramatta - did I mention that? The ball skids off the slick surface and Leckie won’t get onto that long through ball, which is claimed by keeper Al-Yami. 5 mins: Hrustic lets off a shot on goal now, blocked on the edge of the Saudi box though. Arnold wanted his team to get at the visitors early, and that is exactly what they are doing so far. 4 mins: Still the Socceroos press - this game has shades of the Matildas-US clash at this venue the other week already. Hectic start. 3 mins: Hrustic floats a ball into the Saudi box, finding Leckie, but the can’t quite get the ball under control and the visitors are able to clear their lines. 2 mins: Here is the Saudi skipper Al-Faraj, who is muscled off the ball in the middle of the park. The camera cut to Renard, who is attempting to do up one of those aforementioned buttons. A little too revealing, perhaps? 1 min: Australia on the front foot immediately, as Boyle and Hrustic link up on the right before the ball falls to Grant, who tries his luck from distance. Over the bar this time, but that’ll certainly get the crowd into this one early. 1 min: Saudi Arabia get things underway! Advance Australia Fair blasts out, and now it’s time for the Last Post ceremony, followed by a minute’s silence. And finally to kick-off... Here come the Socceroos to a rapturous reception, swiftly followed by Saudi Arabia. First up, the Welcome to Country, and now the Saudi anthem. The teams are lining up in the bowels of CommBank Stadium, ready to step out onto the pitch. Mat Ryan is at the head of the Socceroos column. Hervé Renard is already out of the tunnel and in the Saudi dugout. He cuts a cool figure in a crisp white shirt with the top buttons daringly undone. A tick under 10 minutes to kick-off now. The stadium is filling up with plenty of plastic rain coats - the rain continues to fall in Parramatta. Not to go on too much about home advantage, but it is a thing. Or at least, that’s what Graham Arnold would have us believe (even though the Socceroos enjoyed their record-breaking streak without home comforts). Here’s what he had to say on Wednesday: “They [the Saudis] have have been fortunate [in] that they’ve played all their World Cup qualifiers at home except for Oman. We’ve played 11 out of 12 games away from home, they’ve played 11 out of 12 games at home.” Here’s Emma Kemp with more on that: Saudi Arabia arrived in Sydney at the weekend, and since then they’ve made it clear they intend to head back home with all three points. They’re full of confidence, rightly so, given their current form. “We have beaten stronger teams than Australia, and with the current group of players we are able to return from there with full points,” said Saudi defender Ahmed Sharahili, who starts on the bench tonight. Read John Duerden’s full story below: And here’s Hervé Renard, the wily fox (apologies) who coaches Saudi Arabia. “I think it is a good weather to play think it is a good weather to play football. The most important is to football. The most important is to play in the beautiful stadium with a play in the beautiful stadium with a good crowd. So, we have to be ready. “We have almost 3,000 fans from Saudi. So it will be important and I’m sure they will push behind us, but we are they will push behind us, but we are ready. “We are improving a lot. We won 20 places in the Fifa rankings. So step by step we are going forward, but the most important thing is to reach the World Cup 2022 at the end.” Weather check. You could call this perfect weather for football. There’s been light rain this afternoon in Sydney and it’s currently raining in Parramatta - a slick surface is guaranteed. Ideal for knee-sliding goal celebrations and such like. Graham Arnold has spoken on Channel 10. “I’ve worked hard to build depth since I’ve taken over this job and Leckie will step in. Leckie looks in great shape. He’s very positive about his physique and where he is at. It is what it is. We get on with it and we make sure we put in a fantastic performance. “It has been a while. The nerves are there, but it is more excitement. It is more the adrenalin is going through me at 100mph and I can’t wait.” The teams are in. Changes aplenty (well, four) for Australia with Aaron Mooy absent due to club commitments, and Tom Rogic and Adam Taggart both injured. Mat Leckie returns after making himself unavailable for the last two matches while Awer Mabil, who started on the bench last time out, comes back into the starting XI. James Jeggo also comes into the side while Rhyan Grant replaces Fran Karacic at right-back in an otherwise unchanged back line. For Saudi Arabia, left-back Yasser Al-Shahrani is out, as is central defender Abdullah Madu. But the big inclusion is dangerman Salem Al-Dawsari, who has missed the last couple of games. A homecoming like no other. At least it will be for Socceroos defender Fran Karacic, who before this week had never set foot in Australia, despite having made five appearances for his country. The Brescia right-back, who was born in Croatia, qualifies as his father has Australian citizenship, but since breaking into the national team has not had the chance to play at “home” given the Covid pandemic. “It’s my first time .. it’s great,” he said yesterday while doing what every first-time visitor to Australia does - pay a visit to the zoo and get acquainted with some koalas and kangaroos. “To see Australia, to see Sydney … I’m happy they are bringing some part of Australia to us like the koalas and kangaroos. I hope in the next years I’ll have more time to visit Sydney and Australia and spend more time here.” If a week, as the saying goes, can be a long time in football, how long exactly is a period spanning 109 weeks? The Socceroos last played on home soil a total of 763 days ago, an eternity in footballing terms on the long and winding road to Qatar. But here they are now, in the western suburbs of Sydney, back in front of their fans, hoping to recover from a defeat in Japan last time out and get their World Cup qualification campaign back onto a winning track. The 2-1 loss in Saitama was Graham Arnold’s first in 12 matches, and saw his side cede top spot to unbeaten Saudi Arabia in Group B of the third stage of Asian qualifying for the 2022 World Cup. Victory tonight over the new group leaders would claim it back and put the home side in a strong position to finish as one of the top two - and automatically secure a place at next December’s competition in Qatar. Defeat, however, could have huge ramifications for the Socceroos’ qualification hopes - Japan and Oman are lurking ominously just three points behind them, with games against bottom sides Vietnam and China respectively to come later tonight. It all points to a crucial 90 minutes ahead, and a tough examination of Arnold and his team’s credentials against a Saudi side on the up under the guidance of Frenchman Hervé Renard and seeking a ninth straight win. Kick-off in Parramatta is about 45 minutes away. In the meantime, feel free to get in touch either on email (mike.hytner@theguardian.com) or Twitter @mike_hytner.Louis Walsh – The X Factor Some TV judges earn their place through force of personality, or by sheer diagnostic precision. Others, though, just have an ineffable spirit; a mystifying quality that somehow elevates everything around them. An X Factor, if you will. That’s right, I’m talking about Louis Walsh. Sue me. True, during his time on the show, Walsh contributed little in the way of tangible good. He would often fall into an unbreakable cycle of the same glib platitudes. His indecision repeatedly crashed episodes into deadlock. He once tried to convince the nation that a young performer stood at the forefront of modern music by forcing him to sing the 1982 hit Zoom by Fat Larry’s Band. Yet look at his achievements. JLS were a Louis Walsh group. So were Girls Aloud, and Jedward. But more than this, his presence on the show always stopped it from capsizing. The X Factor was never a good television programme by any stretch of the imagination, but episodes that didn’t feature Louis Walsh were flat-out unwatchable. The man is a wizard. Stuart Heritage Michelle Visage – RuPaul’s Drag Race When Michelle Visage is not convinced, you are sure to know about it. New Jersey’s leading drag authority doesn’t so much have resting-bitch face as a permanent “doesn’t suffer fools” aura, with a touch of “I’d rather get a root canal every day than see another queen in a skin-coloured bodysuit with glued-on rhinestones”. But, really, the contestants – and there are many, many contestants now, as Drag Race wraps its diamante-studded tentacles around the planet – rarely have a bigger cheerleader. Championing drag in all its forms, never condoning bullying or bad behaviour, and pushing the competitors to their limits, Visage is always there to support them – as long as they don’t wear green. Having come through New York’s drag ball scene, she brings all-important authenticity to a contest that is now international and inarguably mainstream. Crucially, she can always take a joke: when US contestant Peppermint proclaimed “Not since Destiny’s Child has there been a Michelle so famous for riding somebody else’s coattails”, Visage was in stitches. Hannah J Davies Gregg Wallace – MasterChef It’s impossible not to be impressed by Gregg Wallace. This isn’t simply a man who has spent the past 16 years judging other people’s cooking – amateur and professional – off the back of zero cheffing experience. He has parlayed it into several unrelated areas: the economy (The Money Programme), military strategy (Time Commanders), the entire world (this year alone, he has hosted two different eponymous travel programmes). In 2015, Charlie Brooker’s Weekly Wipe observed Wallace’s ubiquity not merely as a host or a guest, but as a constant reference point on other shows. Somehow, in the years since, he only seems to have become more … everywhere. The sheer miraculousness of Wallace’s career is not what makes him my favourite TV judge – although it does make me feel a lot more optimistic about life’s possibilities. That said, I like how underqualified he is. Having an avowedly non-expert host (albeit one with a palate more danced upon than most) stops MasterChef from descending into stuffy, navel-gazing territory. Yes, Wallace is loud, irritating and generally inane, but instead of tediously (and desperately) amping up the seriousness of his competition, he brings a certain levity to proceedings – an attitude of: “Cooking, eh?!” – that puts contestants at ease. That isn’t to say Wallace is dismissive – quite the opposite. While long-running TV shows are great for broadcasters, usually getting slicker and cheaper as they go along, they tend to drain the enthusiasm. Luckily, Wallace has enthusiasm to burn. Nobody, I’ll wager, in the history of time has reacted more enthusiastically to more plates of food than Gregg Wallace. Rachel Aroesti Doug Marcaida – Forged in Fire Hammer time! If you have never seen Forged in Fire, it’s the addictive US reality show where each week four amateur blacksmiths (usually male, often burly) compete to forge wicked-looking knives and blades from scratch within a tight time limit. With the macho vibe of sizzling metal being brutalised on anvils you might expect the four judges to be bellicose blowhards eager to cut the sweaty hopefuls down to size. Instead, the rotating Forged in Fire panel is comprised of self-possessed craftsmen whose no-nonsense assessments are always tempered with encouragement. Among this wise fraternity of surrogate father figures, I have a particular fondness for Doug Marcaida, the Jedi-like edged weapons specialist who evaluates the sharpness of finished blades. This usually involves donning safety goggles and adopting a warrior’s scowl before he pirouettes round customised targets – such as sandbags, billowing sailcloth or bushels of bamboo – in a flurry of Zorro-like slashes. Watching a bloke behead a ballistic dummy that oozes fake blood would usually be pretty gruesome, but the way Marcaida’s game face morphs into a puckish smile before he gives his verdict makes it all rather charming. Graeme Virtue Keith Brymer Jones – The Great Pottery Throw Down Every time Keith Brymer Jones, master potter, cradles a delicate ceramic in his enormous hands, it is like watching a child discover a gift for the first time. There is wonder in his watery eyes as his 6ft frame stoops over a selection of hairline cracks and bright glazes. As he turns to the maker, he begins to speak and his voice breaks. “It’s amazing mate,” he says. Every time he says that, he cries. Jones has been a judge on The Great Pottery Throw Down since it first aired in 2015. A clay-based take on the Bake Off formula, the show is untroubling, ambient television, but Jones makes it highly watchable. Where so many TV judges perform – Gordon Ramsay’s disdain, RuPaul’s sass – Jones is earnest and radiates wholesome passion. Watching this large man quiver like jelly when faced with amateur handiwork should give us all hope that there is something we, too, could be moved by. Perhaps for me it’s watching grown men cry on telly. Ammar Kalia Katy Perry – American Idol Fading stars aligned when the once mammoth American Idol hired Katy Perry as a judge for its 2018 reboot – still a successful pop star, but not the world-beater she had been. While her salary (allegedly $25m per season) initially made news, headlines continued into her tenure, like the moment she gave a contestant his first kiss, or the time she loved a performance so much she pulled off her wig. Four seasons in, Perry has turned out to be a natural. Her cartoonish, Betty Boop styling makes for a lighthearted presence alongside Lionel Richie and country singer Luke Bryan. Despite her candy-coloured visuals, she doesn’t sugarcoat her advice to contestants. Her USP is sometimes blunt but mostly relevant mentoring for the contestants, with the odd call to arms, such as when she told one competitor to “make the stage your bitch”, or another that she was “all frosting”, as part of an extended metaphor about cake. Television judging is not usually a promotional tool for pop stars, but Perry has turned the gig into something arguably more valuable: an opportunity to zhoosh up her brand and show her weird side. Henry Wong Motsi Mabuse – Strictly Come Dancing “He’s really obsessed with me, I have to call security sometimes.” Motsi Mabuse recently overshadowed a studio of A-listers on The Graham Norton Show, using her wit and vivacity to cock a snook at Craig Revel Horwood. A couple of years earlier, on the same chatshow, she breezily schooled Tom Hanks on the scoring system. A dancing queen was born. Aside from top-tier star quality, Motsi – now on her third turn as a Strictly judge – holds the ultimate judge’s trifecta: she’s firm, fair and friendly, with a cracking sense of humour. She also knows what she’s talking about; having joined Germany’s version of Strictly as a dancer in 2007, she then became a judge on the show for eight years. And, while Motsi’s star is rising, you just know she would be a hoot in a crappy club with a sticky dancefloor. Hollie Richardson The Inquisitor Red Dwarf Without stakes, what exactly is the point of a judge? Think about it: Simon Cowell has just told someone their version of Wind Beneath My Wings made him want to feed knitting needles into his ears. Or Craig Revel Horwood has compared a celebrity’s samba to someone dancing on a bed of nails. What’s the worst that happens? There might be crying. Perhaps a meme is born. But in the end, the judged skulk off home, and are soon picking wallaby sphincter out of their teeth in the jungle or presenting a segment about bus fares on The One Show. Twitter might have a meltdown for an hour, then life trundles on. It’s boring. In order to matter, judgments need consequences. And what bigger consequence is there than being cast into oblivion? Which brings us to The Inquisitor, Red Dwarf’s rogue, skull-helmeted android, who marauds across space and time offering one very grand – and final – judgment. Having lived until the end of the universe, the Inquisitor came to the conclusion that the only true meaning of life is to lead a worthwhile existence. If he pays someone a visit and decides they have squandered their gift, he uses his time-laser gauntlet to excise them out of existence altogether, their spot in this mortal coil given to another sperm-and-egg cocktail. Like all judgments, it’s subjective, and more than a bit mean. Unlike others, if you come up short, even your cat won’t remember you. Take note, Paul Hollywood. Luke Holland Did your favourite TV judge make the cut? Let us know in the comments below.Marcus Smith has been named to start at fly-half for England against Australia on Saturday, with Manu Tuilagi making a shock move to the right wing to accommodate him. Owen Farrell returns to captain the side at inside-centre as Tuilagi shifts to the wing in place of Adam Radwan. Smith’s promotion to the starting lineup comes after an impressive cameo against Tonga last time out and gives the 22-year-old fly-half a third Test start. Eddie Jones finally gets to see Smith line up next to Farrell, who missed last weekend’s 69-3 win having been forced into isolation and was with the British &amp; Irish Lions over the summer, when Smith started against the USA and Canada. Jones’s decision to move Tuilagi to wing is a surprise, however. The 30-year-old impressed in a centre partnership with Henry Slade, who remains in the No 13 jersey, but the return of Farrell and Smith’s inclusion has led Jones to reposition him. Tuilagi has won just one of his 44 England caps on the wing, in a 28-27 defeat by New Zealand in 2014 under Stuart Lancaster. Smith’s introduction means George Furbank drops out of 23 altogether, with Jones opting for a 6-2 split on the bench, naming Sam Simmonds among his replacements. Simmonds has not played for England since 2018 but is in line for his ninth Test cap, having appeared for the Lions against South Africa. The Sale pair of Raffi Quirke and Bevan Rodd are also among the replacements and set to make their debuts. Elsewhere, Jones has largely stuck by the side who beat Tonga, with Ellis Genge, Jamie George and Kyle Sinckler making up the front row, Maro Itoje and Jonny Hill continuing at lock and Courtney Lawes, Sam Underhill and Tom Curry once more named as the back-rows. Ben Youngs continues at scrum-half, with Jonny May staying on the wing and Freddie Steward again at full-back. Max Malins comes on to the bench to add versatility, alongside Quirke as one of two back replacements. Jones said: “We know this will be a tough test for us, we’re playing against a team who have been together a while and who have beat the world champions twice. As an Australian I know how much this game means. We’ve had a really good week of preparation, we’re looking to improve our performance this week and I think this side is building well.”Graham Arnold once called Parramatta Stadium a “little shed”. In 2015, back before Pirtek Stadium was demolished, the then Sydney FC coach had a cute pre-Sydney derby crack at the Wanderers’ 21,000-capacity home ground. Six years later its successor, CommBank Stadium, hosted his Australian team’s long-awaited homecoming that was tipped to make or break their World Cup qualifying campaign but instead offered little insight into the road from here to Qatar 2022. This venue, with its steep stands and capacity to hold 30,000, was made for moments of grandeur, and this perhaps should have been one of them. It was the Socceroos’ first home match in 763 days, since before the start of the pandemic. They rarely lose here – in home World Cup qualifiers it has happened only once in the past 40 years. Victory would have set them on course for automatic qualification ahead of next Wednesday morning’s tie with China. What the Socceroos got was undefeated Saudi Arabia on a wet Thursday night. What could possibly go wrong? As it turned out, a nil-nil draw and a grave-looking knee injury to defender Harry Souttar that could well have longer-term ramifications. It was not all bad for the 23,314 in attendance. A loss would have had greater implications in terms of the group maths. As it stands Australia remain second in Group B, three points behind the Saudis and on equal goal difference. But the tourists asked Australia serious questions and the answers were not always forthcoming. When they were, momentum was disrupted by stoppages and gamesmanship, and Souttar’s late exit set off a 10-minute tightrope walk relying mostly on Mat Ryan’s impeccable balance. The draw was a fair result on the balance of play, during which momentum shifted back and forth, but the visitors will leave the more content, with one foot already in Qatar. For the Socceroos, this was an opportunity missed to right the ship after last month’s loss to Japan, which snapped their world-record streak of 11 matches. Despite their sustained pressure, it was also one relatively scant on gilt-edged chances, with Mat Leckie probably coming the closest in the second half. In the absence of Aaron Mooy and Tom Rogic, and largely unable to play through the midfield, Australia made inroads down the left via Awer Mabil and Ajdin Hrustic. But the cheeky backheels and attractive attacking plays repeatedly promised more than they delivered, and the final ball too often dissipated as quickly as the Saudi defence snapped back into shape. They did not park the bus but they were impervious, guarding their box diligently as their manager, Hervé Renard, motioned from his dugout. The Frenchman, dressed like James Bond and just as cool in temperament, opted to sit undercover in the dry. His tracksuit-clad counterpart, Arnold, braved the wet, pacing his technical area as Martin Boyle played the ball across goal to Hrustic and the latter’s first-time attempt failed to trouble Mohammed Al-Yami. This was effectively the essence of the contest. Some good things were there, others were not. Salem Al-Dawsari, though, was all the things. The vision. The pace. The passing. The Al-Hilal winger pursued a long ball all the way to the corner flag and then wooed it gently back in play, continuing the dreamy courtship along the byline. It was much to the chagrin of Rhyan Grant, who played the part of third wheel in unrequited love as the ball continued to evade him and sailed across the face of Ryan’s goal. Grant otherwise made himself more than a mild inconvenience at full-back and might also have scored in the first minute had his shot from distance not sailed over the bar. The consistency of the rain ensured a surface more slippery even than Al-Dawsari. Had this venue been an actual shed the corrugated iron would have made for some serious noise. Instead it was provided by the 3,000 or so Saudi supporters congregated in the upper tier at the south end. The north end was somewhat more subdued, a throng behind some green-and-gold safe smoke and a “no place like home” tifo. It took some skullduggery to rouse the home fans into voice, a chorus of “bullshit” after defender Abdulelah Al-Amri hit the deck and then went into the book for an altercation with Leckie. When Abdulelah Al-Malki went down moments later – again in combat with the Australian forward – it was enough to get even Renard off his seat. Leckie, who opted out of travelling overseas for the four qualifiers in September and October due to quarantine restrictions, was lively on his return and very nearly broke the deadlock on the hour, turning his marker only to be denied by Al-Yami. The Saudi goalkeeper was soon on the money again in a double save to stop Mabil’s long-range free kick and Boyle’s follow-up, which ricocheted off a defender and behind for a corner. But the Saudis soon had the ascendancy and, as Salman al Faraj drew a crucial block from Ryan, Souttar was felled in the action clutching at the back of his knee and promptly stretchered off, leaving both the player and coaching staff nervously awaiting scan results in the coming days.Who in tonight’s audience, I wonder, thought they were going to end up in a singalong to Sisqó’s Thong Song? That’s in between drawing wisdom from both Hamlet and The Lion King. Writer, director and choreographer Lanre Malaolu has a light touch on heavyweight subjects. His sharp, naturalistic script switches between laugh-out-loud comedy, personal psychology and social comment to address black masculinity in the 21st century. Malaolu’s a polymath who intuitively brings together different forms. Samskara is not a play, he says, nor is it a dance piece. Instead he takes the best of both – the clarity of text, the depth and texture of movement – to make something powerful, moving, rich and straight-talking. Dance is where it begins. The Silent Man (Paaliba Abugre) and drummer Yahael Camara Onono, whose rhythm is stitched into the action. Abugre’s body is solid with tension, his arms stretch wide and his chest expands as if prising open his ribs to expose his heart, or to freely breathe, until a strong hinge snaps him closed. It feels like thankless exertion, daily struggle, until interrupted by a swaggering Young Buck, Ntonga Mwanza puncturing the seriousness with a cocked head, smirk and winning charisma. The cast are uniformly good and given multifaceted characters to play, representing four generations of black British men (Mwanza is joined by Oliver Alvin-Wilson, Will Atiomo and Razak Osman, alongside the silent Abugre), steering the line between strength and vulnerability, honesty and front. Authoritarian fathers, and absent ones, are recurring themes. “No one tells me what to do! Except my dad – but he ain’t here so no one can tell me!” It comes from a place of knowledge, although Malaolu also confronts the stereotype that white society blames: “Twist it into a noose and make you put it around your own neck.” The men speak on softness, discipline and how to make the best jollof rice. The dance amplifies the details and shows how identity, fear, pride and hope play out in the way we move (or how low-slung you wear your tracksuit bottoms). Malaolu is a real talent, and Samskara deserves a wide audience. At the Yard, London, until 26 NovemberThe publicist from the film company won’t be able to make it to the hotel in Leicester Square to introduce me to the Hungarian film-maker Dénes Nagy, whose gruelling slow-burn war drama Natural Light recent won him the best director prize at Berlin. But he emails to say that spotting Nagy shouldn’t be too difficult: “In the nicest way, he looks like the director of Natural Light.” And it’s true. There is a man in the foyer with an unmistakably auteur-like air: small wire spectacles, intellectual high forehead and a haircut he could have snipped himself in front of a mirror. Natural Light is an unapologetically serious and beautiful piece of hardcore arthouse cinema. It’s set in the Nazi-occupied Soviet Union in 1943 and follows a unit of Hungarian soldiers, allies of the German forces. Bleakly inscrutable and with very little dialogue, it’s an intense watch. As one review put it, this is a film that “makes demands on its audience”. Nagy adapted the script from a novel by the Hungarian writer Pál Závada that is 600-odd pages long and spans 20 years in the life of one man. But he ended up using around seven pages – just three days’ worth of story – for the film. He looks appalled when I joke that he could have changed the name of the protagonist, Istvan Semetka (played in the film by Ferenc Szabó), and dispensed with crediting the book. “No! What’s important is that the spirit of this main character is very much like it is in the book.” Corporal Semetka is a poor farmer conscripted to the Hungarian army and sent to the Soviet Union. His unit’s orders are to trudge through a frozen forest, rooting out partisans in remote peasant villages. Nagy’s background is in documentary film-making; Natural Light is his first feature and he went to extraordinary lengths in the pursuit of authenticity. “Everything is real, to make it go deeper,” he says earnestly, then breaks into a mischievous grin. “Maybe I’m not inventive enough to create my own reality. I want to stick to reality.” Against the advice of everyone, he insisted on filming in Latvia in the middle of winter. “They said it was a very crazy idea. But I am fascinated by this landscape, very foggy, muddy and swampy. This nature is hostile.” It took seven years to make the film – “but I didn’t have a plan B. I’m not this kind of person”. When it came to the actors, Nagy cast the film entirely with agricultural labours, all non-professionals, the 21st-century equivalent of peasant farmers. He recruited a team of 20 film school students – “working only for enthusiasm” – who drove around Hungary visiting cow and chicken farms (a swine flu pandemic ruled out pigs). He was looking for people who do physical work outdoors all year, rain or shine. “In Hungary people who did this work they have this kind of exhaustion or tiredness in their faces, which I believe creates an authentic situation. You believe they [have been] several months in the war in very harsh conditions.” The result is extraordinary: a gallery of faces that could have been painted by Bruegel: weather-beaten and etched deep with lines. Nagy didn’t give his actors full scripts or much in the way of direction – “They are basically playing themselves,” he says with a shrug – and so the actors give nothing away; mostly they glare grimly at the camera. It’s up to the audience to guess what’s going on inside their heads and hearts. “The face already tells a story in itself” is how Nagy puts it. As a film-making style this has tuned out to be arthouse marmite. I found it hypnotic, watching these world-weary faces keeping their secrets. For others, it’s all a bit patronising. One reviewer got the feeling that Nagy considers his characters “slightly lower on the evolutionary scale”. I ask Nagy if he was he hurt by the negative criticism? “I was more concentrated on the positive, so no, I wouldn’t say that I was bothered by that.” He giggles a little uncomfortably. His own grandfather fought in the second world war, sent to Ukraine as a young village primary-school teacher. When he was a kid, his grandfather would tell the story of the time he was ordered to shoot a partisan. “But then in the moment, something happened, the enemy was coming maybe.” So his grandfather was saved from pulling the trigger. “I asked him several times: ‘What did you feel at that moment you got the order to kill this guy? What went through your mind?’” But his granddad never answered. “He couldn’t. He didn’t want to go back to all this.” Later, when Nagy watched war films like Elem Klimov’s harrowing masterpiece Come and See, he couldn’t relate to the “wicked” soldiers with “satanic” faces. He could never picture his grandfather with an evil face. In Nagy’s film, Corporal Semetka is neither evil nor good. His attitude seems to be that if he can just keep his head down and survive, he’ll get back to his family. But when he unexpectedly finds himself in charge of his unit, it becomes clear that Semetka doesn’t have the stomach for wartime leadership. Nagy says he relates to Semetka’s existential crisis, his feeling that something bad is going to happen but without knowing in the moment what to do: “It’s something very human. We fail to make the right decisions.” He reaches for an example from his own life. At the height of the Syran refugee crisis a few years ago, hundreds of Syrians camped out in a station in Budapest for several weeks, a few miles from his apartment. “I’m sitting behind my nice desk, drinking my nice coffee, looking at what’s happening on the news. Later, I felt so ashamed of myself – that I didn’t bring a blanket to them or didn’t bring some food to them.” There was line cut from the script, where a young Soviet peasant boy says to Semetka: “You’re a good man, but you’re weak.” Nagy says he semi-regrets cutting it. “I liked it because we all tend to think we’re good,” says the director. “But we’re all weak.” • Natural Light is released on 12 November in cinemas and on Curzon Home CinemaSixty schoolchildren have been rescued from a doubledecker bus that has crashed on a country lane in Lincoln. A boy, 12, broke his arm during the incident and a girl, 14, was taken to hospital as a precaution. Ch Insp Phil Vickers said the bus, which was delivering the pupils to two nearby secondary schools, did not overturn but slid against the hedgerows. “The bus has put its passenger side – its near side – on to a soft verge and has slid slightly against the hedgerows and trees alongside the road,” he told BBC Radio Lincolnshire. Emily, who was sitting on the top deck, described children on one side of the bus flying on to the other side, landing on top of the people sat there. “It kind of went to the side, and everyone was scared because, obviously, we didn’t know what was happening,” she told the local news station. Parents were urged not to go to the scene of the accident. Instead police directed them to a nearby special needs school which acted as a rendezvous point. Meadow Lane, North Hykeham, near Lincoln, was closed shortly before 8.30am on Thursday while emergency services dealt with the crash. It reopened about an hour later, but was later closed again as engineers began to recover the vehicle. The bus was operated by Stagecoach, which said its immediate thoughts were with the children involved and their families. “We are giving the police our full support in helping to investigate and establish the circumstances of the incident,” a company statement continued.England’s players rode the crest of a wave all summer as they made it to the final of the European Championship but came crashing down with those missed penalties. The physical exertion of a year of nonstop football is very hard to recover from but the mental exhaustion is even harder, especially when it ends in disappointment. I did nine back-to-back summer tournaments and never got back to feeling myself until after Christmas, when the women’s game takes a break, but the men do not have that opportunity this winter. Few of England’s players have hit the ground running in the Premier League as they struggle to process the disappointment of missing out on a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to win a major tournament on home soil, and perhaps the mental anguish has taken its toll. The body is remarkable – it can recover from anything – but the mind can take time. During a club season a player builds themselves up to play well to earn international recognition and get picked to spend a tournament going through the highs and lows football brings, and for England that resulted in crashing and burning at the end. People will say: “They’re on £250,000 a week.” But that does not take away from the fact you want to play for your country and win an international trophy. No money in the world can buy that – you can’t use your wages on a winner’s medal. After the tournament the players may have missed out on a full pre-season, making it impossible to get up to speed for the start of the campaign. If you start a season not at full physical fitness it is hard to catch up. It is unsurprising that clubs want their best players on the pitch but it could be worth reconsidering the breaks players are offered, to help them and the team in the long term. If you look at Arsenal in the Women’s Super League, they have great examples of players who had an opportunity to rest mentally, allowing them to come back stronger. Beth Mead missed out on Great Britain’s Olympics squad but has returned vibrant and full of confidence, scoring and creating four goals in eight games. Kim Little is also looking back to her best after retiring from international football to give her the breaks she needs. Vivianne Miedema has been rested by the Netherlands and Arsenal this season to ensure she does not burn out and has rewarded the decision with her performances. Harry Kane had a tumultuous summer even before the Euros, and was questioned before, during and after the tournament. The striker was keen to leave Spurs but that never happened, he missed almost all of pre-season and was greeted by a new coach in Nuno Espírito Santo who has already been and gone. In that time, Kane has scored one league goal and looked a long way off his best. A break may be what he needs – not even goals will help. Going away to build up fitness and sharpness in order to come back refreshed is required but that cannot happen, so he has to rely on teammates to dig him out more. He will already be looking towards the summer for a rest. Kane may see Antonio Conte’s arrival as the fresh start he needs, because with Nuno things were up in the air after a summer of trying to engineer a move. You do not know how much of a relationship he built with Nuno after a summer of not knowing whether he would be a Tottenham player. He has a clean slate with Conte and will be there until the summer at least. Manchester United’s England internationals have failed to find form. Luke Shaw has been poor, Harry Maguire has gone off the boil and Marcus Rashford has struggled with injury. Jadon Sancho took a mental break, a wise move for a player who endured such a tough ending to the competition by missing in the shootout, but that may not have helped him physically. The winger did not feature too much during the Euros, so a month-long break between the tournament and starting at a new club was less than ideal physically for a player lacking game time. It may have had a detrimental impact on his fitness and it is unwise to arrive when not at your physical peak after a big-money move, leaving him battling to make an impact at Old Trafford. It proves there is a fine line when it comes to getting a player to their optimum level. The situation was similar after the 2018 World Cup semi-final loss to Croatia. Very few players rebounded from the disappointment the next season, and some took as long as 18 months to get back to normal. Declan Rice is carrying on where he left off –although he is out of these England games because of illness – and Kyle Walker is in good form but it is hard to find another England regular from the summer shining in the Premier League. Joining up for another international break could help the group, however, because they are all in the same boat, trying to kickstart their seasons. It takes you to a safe environment where you are loved, they know you and it puts a bit of a protective arm around you. Time away from the daily routine of club football can be helpful; I would often use an England call-up to reinvigorate myself if things were not going well for me in the league. If you have mental fatigue, you constantly feel like you’re pulling a bus or a train. Life is hard enough without that feeling, so sometimes the best solution is the simplest: rest.There’s almost too much to shoehorn into this infectiously admiring profile of jockey Frankie Dettori, he of the spring-heeled vault out of the saddle in the winners’ enclosure. By any measure he has had an extraordinary career: sent to England as a kid by his authoritarian father (also a top jockey), a star turn as an apprentice, a hot streak as a young rider, two humiliating drug scandals, a plane crash in which the pilot was killed, a near-breakdown after being edged out of his elite stable, a stream of record-breaking achievements, and one triumphant comeback after another. But there’s considerably more to this than a greatest-hits package. Dettori himself is a documentarian’s dream: he appears to hold nothing back, his charisma bounces off all four sides of the screen and he bursts into tears at least four times during the interviews. Then there are the supporting characters, led by Dettori padre – with whom Frankie has, shall we say, a somewhat tumultuous relationship. (I lost count of the number of times they mentioned they had stopped talking to each other or embarked on some torturous feud.) Dettori’s older sister Alessandra, his wife Catherine, and manager Peter Burrell also put in highly sympathetic appearances – although the key line would appear to come from trainer John Gosden, who suggests after Dettori’s seven-win clean sweep at Ascot in 1996: “I don’t think it propelled him to be any more full of himself than he already was.” Still, Dettori comes across as a highly likable character, with a preternatural confidence that is amazingly engaging. It also is to the film’s advantage that so many of his activities in the hothouse world of racing have been captured on film – we even see some alarming footage of his plane crash. Director Anthony Wonke picks a beautifully clear path through the blizzard of life events and intra-family strife; it can’t have been easy. Dettori is released on 15 November in cinemas and on digital platforms.When May’s Glastonbury livestream finally creaked into life, it offered viewers an interesting study in contrasts. At 9pm, Coldplay appeared, rolling out the big hits from their 20-year career on an illuminated platform in front of the Pyramid stage, the empty field filled with lights. It was a performance with a distinct hint of top-dog gamesmanship about it: ignore the running order – everyone knows who the headliners are here. Afterwards, the cameras cut to a mulleted Damon Albarn seated at a piano. He performed a series of serpentine unreleased songs, decorated with shivering, abstract electronics and guitar and occasionally atonal string arrangements. He played a song from Dr Dee, his 2011 opera about the 16th-century mathematician, astronomer and occultist. And when he finally dished up something from the Blur or Gorillaz catalogues that the casual observer might know, it was rearranged in a way that made it sound darker and sadder. It was a neat illustration of Albarn’s contemporary approach to music-making. By all accounts one of the most zealously driven artists of the Britpop era, he has spent the last 20 years doing something you would expect more major rock stars to do, but that hardly any actually seem to manage: using the space and time created by vast success in order to do exactly what they want, unbothered by commercial concerns. Doing exactly what he wants has sometimes occasioned more vast success – Gorillaz’s second album Demon Days sold 8m copies worldwide – but there have also been musicals with lyrics in Cantonese, collaborative projects influenced by Sun Ra, Funkadelic and Fela Kuti, and soundtracks for immersive theatre works performed by the Kronos Quartet, none of which appear to be have been made with an eye on the charts or top billing at festivals. Then there are the projects that sit somewhere in the middle of what you might call the sliding Albarn scale (Girls and Boys or Feel Good Inc at one end and Dr Dee’s experiments with the viol and theorbo at the other), of which The Nearer the Fountain is a perfect example. The source of most of Albarn’s Glastonbury set, it began life as a commission from a French arts festival, underwent a knotty, Covid-punctuated gestation period and has emerged as the de facto follow-up to Albarn’s 2014 solo album, Everyday Robots. It’s a markedly different beast from its predecessor: more opaque musically and lyrically, flecked with jazzy saxophone, frequently driven by the sound of an ancient drum machine. It drifts along in a melancholy, stoned mist – you can detect its origins in improvisations inspired by the view from Albarn’s Reykjavik studio – its mood subdued by the pandemic and the death in 2020 of frequent Albarn collaborator Tony Allen, whose ghost looms over the opening title track: “You seemed immortal … to my heart you were nearest.” The lyrics are filled with disquieting memories of happier times: children playing on a beach, abandoned buildings where parties were once held. Ostensibly a love song, even the relatively upbeat Royal Morning Blue sounds haunted by something other than the relationship at its centre: “Nothing like this had ever happened before … stay by my side at the end of the world”. There are moments where the music sounds almost too crushed by the weight of the world, where the songs start to unravel and become hard to latch on to. The Cormorant shifts in and out of focus, somewhere between dreamlike and frustrating; the intense sax improv of instrumental Combustion is hard work. But for the most part, the album’s mood is affecting and enveloping. If there’s a thread that runs throughout Albarn’s diffuse projects, it’s a specific type of melody, suffused with a weary sadness, played out over descending chords. Its earliest iteration might have been on Blur’s This Is a Low, but it’s a style of writing that seems to crop up regardless of the musical setting. It even survived his experiments with a Chinese pentatonic scale on 2008’s Monkey: Journey to the West. It’s pushed to the fore here, in some lovely examples of type: the tune of Daft Wader is plaintively beautiful, at least until it collapses into dark, foggy ambience; Darkness to Light swoons languorously in waltz time; the bleak travelogue of The Tower of Montevideo fits perfectly with its sighing tune. There’s no getting around the fact that The Nearer the Fountain is emotionally heavy going. Optimism flickers fitfully through the murkiness, listeners who prefer the perky, poppy Albarn of Dare or Song 2 are resolutely not thrown a bone, and the sense of an artist doing precisely what he wants is as strong as ever. Albarn recently suggested that he was “not opposed” to another Blur reformation on the grounds that it would be “light relief compared to what I do now”, but, for all its exhausted, preoccupied darkness, The Nearer the Fountain is a genuinely beautiful album. This week Alexis listened to Curtis Harding - Can’t Hide It If Words Were Flowers, the new album by the US soul singer, is fantastic: an updating of classic styles that never feels hemmed in by reverence. Can’t Hide It is tough, distorted, funky and powerful.My family has suffered a great loss. We will still have our memories, of course, each one suffused with a warm glow. But the source of those memories? After 35 years, that has gone. We have lost our family’s restaurant: the one that was so much more than somewhere to eat out. It was where my wife and I went before the kids arrived, and when those kids were young, and when a treat was needed, and when a treat wasn’t needed, and in the last days before every Christmas, when gifts would be exchanged with the lovely staff. It was our restaurant. Farewell then to Y Ming, the brilliant, eclectic Chinese on Greek Street in London’s Soho which, after 35 years, finally closed its doors at the end of last month. Lots of families have somewhere like this, a place where generations of customers and generations of staff accompany each other down the years. Each navigates the vagaries of fashion. Because a restaurant where families grow up together is never really about what’s new. They are about what’s reliable and what’s familiar and what makes you feel cared for. They are an extra room in the extended family home. My wife and I first stumbled into Y Ming one night while out in Soho many years ago. On the other side of Shaftesbury Avenue were the clattering Chinese restaurants of Gerrard Street, in those days banging out rough-hewn versions of Cantonese favourites, with service which was, shall we say, brisk. Here at Y Ming there were carpets, and jade green walls and staff who seemed pleased to see us. Stay awhile. There were northern Chinese dishes I’d never before encountered: the Tibetan lamb or the shredded duck with winter greens, or the melting folds of double-cooked pork in hot pot. The latter came with a citation announcing it was beloved of both Jonathan Meades and Matthew Fort, the titans of the restaurant reviewing world which I admired from afar. I had been going for years when I finally wrote about it almost two decades ago. It was one of the rare occasions when I hesitated. Did I really want to tell the world? Well, yes, I did. They needed to know about the addictive Ming-style deep fried cauliflower. (And it would prove the route to adding my name to the menu next to that double cooked pork dish.) I quickly discovered I was not the only one who thought of Y Ming as his place. It was many people’s place. My publisher announced he was a regular, as did the then editor of the Observer magazine. Once, the two of us turned up together and the head waiter, William Tiger Sin, looked momentarily flummoxed then delighted to see two of his regulars eating together. But mostly I went just with my family. We measured out the landmarks of our life as a unit with the double-cooked pork and the cauliflower. It was where my boys learned to use chopsticks. It was that place. The owner, Christine Yau, had long been an advocate for Chinatown, and had helped found a Chinese cookery course at Westminster College. But the restaurant was her life’s work. She has only closed now, she told me when we visited one last time in October, because her head chef has had to move on and replacing him would be impossible. So it’s goodbye. There will be a gap in my mental map of London. The door to one of the rooms in our extended house has closed. But we will still have those memories. And so, from the Rayner family to Y Ming, thank you. Thank you, for everything.Art on TikTok is more Tony Hart than Marcel Duchamp. It’s not hard to imagine the late BBC children’s artist enjoying “Here’s how I paint with a mop” and “Where I find monsters for my goth art”. You won’t find the next Steve McQueen or Tacita Dean here, uploading serious video art – or at least I haven’t – but you will encounter many enthusiasts and indefatigable outsiders. Avant garde art is in short supply on TikTok, though. But this simply reflects what’s happening in art galleries in the wake of BLM, as people use traditional methods to assert a new identity politics. Tabitha Whitley is a Brooklyn artist who creates prints and paintings of idealised, powerful Black faces, which she shares in TikTok vignettes. Like other artists on the platform, she combines displaying her work with telling us about her life. Another painter, Kodi Delaney, says her art reflects her experience of mental illness. She displays it in videos that starkly set Klimt-like female figures against the reality of trauma. Like Whitley, she uses TikTok as a platform to sell prints. In other words, this is an alternative art economy. I was impressed by the artistry in videos loaded by DIY fashion brand Unfinished Legacy, of Milwaukee, whose artists make raw and wild designs then screenprint them on to highly desirable T-shirts. I looked hard for what museum curators call contemporary art. Searching for “performance art” led to clips of school musicals, along with a lot of fan videos about the moment when Ulay, the pioneering artist and former lover of Marina Abramović, sat down in front of her during her performance The Artist Is Present. Fans talk of its emotional power, as these people who were once close look into each other’s eyes. What this confirms is the direct, intimate, confessional quality of TikTok art: it’s not some abstract concept that fascinates people, but the great love story of Abramović and Ulay. The power of art is also well explained by the TikTok art critic, Nakama Umeboi, in a lovely piece about the late US visual artist Félix González-Torres. Umeboi makes a virtue of TikTok’s short videos by succinctly explaining entire art movements or challenging works. Showing a pile of wrapped sweets by González-Torres, he explains how it was a memorial to the artist’s lover who died of Aids (as would González-Torres). As visitors took sweets away, it was as if the memory of him was fading, yet this sharing was also a way of touching the lost. Thus González-Torres haunts TikTok. The artist who most impressed me, however, makes use of the medium itself with videos that exult in this platform’s short-form cinematic urgency. In her short clips, sculptor Ameyalli O shows in disturbing intimacy the process of making clay images of skulls, heads and arms. With her focus on separate body parts and close camera work, she makes figurative sculpting seem a strange, perverse activity. Best of all is the one of her smoothing down a male torso, feeling every contour as she handles it in the peace of her studio. You feel involved in a dangerous act of creation. Far from luring users into a digital world where art becomes just a virtual expression of itself, TikTok lets people show and praise real art in real life. Users are not technomasters, or technophobes, but they value doing stuff more than seeing stuff, so they like actual art made by humans. Nor do the humans have to be young and cool. One user dedicates his account to exhibiting his dad’s latest oil paintings. His dad just stands there, proudly holding a landscape or a nude.“I’m excited about the potential for large wildflower-rich grassland areas mixed with naturally regenerating scrub,” said Prof Alastair Driver, director at Rewilding Britain. “It won’t be long before these areas are ringing with warbler song and sizzling with grasshoppers and crickets.” The source of Driver’s excitement is Allestree Park, the largest open space in Derby, to which Derby city council has given the green light this week to become what Rewilding Britain believes to be the UK’s largest urban rewilding project. The plan has been described as a “huge moment” by Dr Jo Smith, CEO of Derbyshire Wildlife Trust, which is working with the city council, the University of Derby and Rewilding Britain on the project. “This is an incredible opportunity for the people of Derby,” said Smith. “It sets an exciting precedent to push at the boundaries of what our parks and green spaces offer people, but also for tackling the rapid decline in wildlife, like hedgehogs and bees.” Comprising woodland, open parkland, a lake and a recently closed golf course, Allestree Park covers 130 hectares (320 acres) in the north of the city and forms part of the Derwent valley corridor, which runs through Derbyshire, connecting the uplands of the Peak District with the Trent valley. Exactly how the rewilded park will look depends on a future public consultation but the process could include the creation of new habitats, such as woodlands, grasslands, scrubland and wetlands (which will provide nesting sites for songbirds), more trees, walking and cycling trails, community orchards and vegetable-growing areas, and the possible reintroduction of such species as water voles, dormice, harvest mice, red kites and red-backed shrikes. Rewilding work, which aims to restore entire ecosystems, often focuses on countryside areas. But rewilding in urban environments is seen by many as key to a better future for people, wildlife and the planet. “Given the biodiversity crisis, the climate emergency and the mounting pressures facing our health service, urban greenspace rewilding should be a top priority for all city authorities,” said Driver. “On a scale such as Allestree, rewilding can make an important contribution to mitigating the impacts of climate change through carbon sequestration, and to soil and water quality through the cessation of chemical and fertiliser applications on the land.” Rewilding parts of towns and cities brings direct benefits to the people who live in them, according to Driver. “It’s hugely important to people, as well as wildlife, that we take the opportunity to rewild green spaces in our cities wherever possible,” he said. “There’s enough evidence out there to tell us that nature-rich green space is so much more valuable for health and wellbeing than boring ‘kick-about’ rye grass fields, especially in terms of mental wellbeing. “We know that as time passes our population is becoming more urbanised and losing contact with the natural world. Rewilding accessible sites, like Allestree, within city boundaries will help residents re-establish their contact with nature, and increase people’s understanding and respect for our natural environment.” Derbyshire Wildlife Trust sees the project as part of a “Natural Health Service”. “Being outdoors makes us feel good,” said Smith. “Hearing birdsong, watching a red kite soar or catching a glimpse of a summer butterfly reduces blood pressure and helps us relax. We need nature as much as it needs us.” The ambitious urban rewilding project at Allestree should inspire other councils to follow the lead, said Smith. “Derby city council has taken a bold step at a really important time. Once we show what can be achieved, we can provide a blueprint for other councils to follow. “We want to share what we learn and help others take similar steps. Imagine what we could achieve if all our urban parks became just a little bit wilder.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe corruption of British political life could easily be stopped, and ending second jobs for MPs is a very obvious place to start. But that kind of change requires a government – and a prime minister – that respects standards in public life. At the moment, we have neither. An intensely relaxed attitude to politicians becoming filthy rich emanates from the very top of this government. Boris Johnson flagrantly flouted the rules of parliament’s anti-corruption watchdog, the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba) when he returned to his £275,000-a-year job as a columnist for the Daily Telegraph just days after resigning as foreign secretary in 2018. Ex-ministers are supposed to wait three months before taking on jobs to avoid them exploiting access to government contacts. Theresa May – still the MP for Maidenhead – has earned almost £2m on the international lecture circuit since resigning as prime minister two years ago, including being paid £115,000 to address a women’s forum founded by the Dubai ruler accused of kidnapping his daughter (which he has denied). David Cameron expected that his lobbying for Greensill would net him tens of millions, while Sajid Javid had only been out the door of No 11 Downing Street for six months before taking up a role “advising” JP Morgan for £150,000 a year. These should be scandals, but they are not – they go on in plain sight. The Conservative MP Geoffrey Cox’s incredibly lucrative moonlighting for the British Virgin Islands was recorded in the register of interests. Last week’s revelations that Tory donors who gave the party £3m and served as the Conservative party’s treasurer have been put forward for seats in the Lords drew from publicly available data on donations to political parties. Tory MPs have declared that they have been paid more than £4m for second jobs. MPs’ outside earnings have not always been this transparent – for years second jobs were deliberately kept off the books. That was until 1953, when the journalist Andrew Roth was left baffled after watching the Labour MP Richard Stokes make a stridently pro-Arab speech in the Commons. Stokes’s party at the time had a strong pro-Israel position. Why, Roth wondered, had the honourable member for Ipswich taken such a different line. Digging into Stokes’s background, Roth found out that he had a sideline as managing director of an engineering company making heavy machinery for oilfields around the Arab world. That experience inspired Roth to write The Business Background of MPs, and start campaigning for a register of interests to chart MPs’ second jobs. Roth’s diligence did not, of course, end the scandal of MPs’ second jobs. A register of members’ financial interests did not happen until 1974, after a series of scandals on second jobs. The Nolan inquiry, set up in 1994 after the “cash for questions” scandal in which it was found that a lobbyist working on behalf of the Harrods owner, Mohamed Al Fayed, was paying two Conservative MPs £2,000 a time to ask parliamentary questions for him, established the House of Commons Committee on Standards. This is the committee that is supposed to advise the prime minister on ethical standards, the one that Johnson tried to tear down to defend Owen Paterson, who was paid £500,000 by two companies for whom he lobbied, Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods. Johnson’s attempts to defend Paterson ultimately failed – but MPs’ second jobs are a symptom of a much deeper corruption, particularly in the Conservative party. Some 90 Conservative MPs have second jobs in consultancy or as directors, compared with three Labour MPs. The pernicious influence of money in British politics has seldom been so blatant, from the erstwhile housing secretary Robert Jenrick overturning a planning decision to profit a developer who then donated to the Tory party, to the £2.1bn in PPE or Covid testing contracts awarded to companies with links to the party. For centuries, MPs were unpaid. Campaigners such as the Chartists argued, with some justification, that this meant that politics would remain the preserve of the wealthy. Herbert Asquith’s Liberal government eventually voted for a £400 annual salary in 1911. Now, however, the House of Commons has become a place where many go to seek their fortune. • This article was amended on 12 November 2021. The Nolan inquiry established the House of Commons Committee on Standards, not the Committee on Standards in Public Life as an earlier version said. Peter Geoghegan is investigations editor of openDemocracyEarlier this year, I found myself in the city of L’Hospitalet de Llobregat to the south-west of Barcelona. It lacks the fame and tourist hordes of the Catalan capital, but the two places are connected by the same dire housing crisis. Guided by Júlia Nueno, organiser of a grassroots tenants’ movement, I found a community of neighbours in L’Hospitalet who hold their meetings in a public park yet are managing to take responsibility for something the authorities are failing at: putting a roof over people’s heads. Their challenge is daunting in a corner of Spain that still bears the scars of the 2008 economic crisis and remains in the grip of the Covid pandemic. L’Hospitalet de Llobregat is the second-largest city in Catalonia and one of the most densely populated in Europe. Its proximity to Barcelona has attracted generations of migrants over the past six decades. Spaniards from the south of the country arrived in the 1960s, later giving way to people from Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, Morocco and many other countries. Today, many of the municipality’s 260,000 residents work in low-income jobs and live in overcrowded conditions in small, cheaply constructed flats. Increasingly, they are joined by young people priced out of Barcelona by gentrification, property speculation and extortionate rent rises. Those fleeing unaffordable rents in Barcelona unwittingly perpetuate the problem; when they arrive, rents in L’Hospitalet also rise and locals wind up unable to afford homes they may have rented for a decade. Since 2019, people threatened by eviction have been able to turn to the local chapter of El Sindicat de Llogateres, a renters’ union founded in Barcelona and active across Catalonia. Renters’ unions are nothing new in Europe, but what these people are doing to reset the relationship between tenants and landlords is out of the ordinary. I decided to make a film for the Guardian about Sindicat members in L’Hospitalet that would also tell the stories of some of those who struggle, often invisibly, on the outskirts of the city where I was born. Victor, in his 50s, from Ecuador, for example, is stuck in a three-year lease for his tiny flat. His rent, once €690 a month, has risen to €805 a month and his landlord is now squeezing him for €900 a month – which equals his wife’s salary in two full-time jobs as a cleaner. Then there is Marlene, a single mother from Bolivia who came to Spain more than two decades ago. Her story, which makes up much of the film, is far from uncommon. People without a regularised immigration status often work cash-in-hand as carers and find themselves marginalised and abandoned to the mercies of the market. “We undocumented people don’t exist,” Marlene says in the film. “They want us to take care of their elders, or clean their houses. But when we ask for economic help or for a roof to live under, we are not valued. We just don’t exist.” The Sindicat helps to stop evictions by staging rallies and publicising cases. It offers people a practical toolkit of legal help and guidance so they can negotiate with landlords. Perhaps more fundamentally, it lets people know they are not alone, and shows there is strength – and comfort – in numbers. The Sindicat has helped vulnerable evicted families through direct action – by opening up flats owned by either banks or vulture funds that have lain empty for at least two years. Since the 2008 financial crash, words such as “eviction” and “squatters” have featured in the Catalan news headlines and in much of the mainstream media narrative Catalonia is referred to as “the region with the highest number of squatters”. Quantifying the number of people who don’t officially pay rent with a word that has negative connotations, related more to an aesthetic and a way of living than a position of vulnerability, does little to promote public understanding of the scale of the housing crisis. There’s a fear and a misconception among homeowners that their houses may be taken over by squatters if they go away for the weekend. But the reality of who is squatting what couldn’t be further from the media portrayal. Making this documentary and showing what drives someone to occupy a flat was the reason why the community in L’Hospitalet was happy to cooperate in the making of the film. In Spain, social housing represents less than 2% of homes, one of the lowest rates in the OECD and the EU. So who takes responsibility for the lives of those at the frontline of poverty? In Catalonia, which is also the region where most evictions happen in Spain, more than 24 families are evicted every day. In L’Hospitalet de Llobregat specifically, evicted families are only given three days’ stipend and then left in the streets. Without an adequate welfare or social services system in place, families and single parents are often left in limbo. Women such as Marlene – and Dalila, another of the film’s protagonists – are forced to carry an emotional burden because of the lack of housing security. They have both found themselves on the streets with nowhere to go, caring for a child who has learned way too young the cost of living. But these resilient women can only think one week at a time, and the Sindicat has helped them temporarily with a place to live, even if that means squatting. They know that they didn’t fail in their lives, but that they were on the wrong side of a structural problem: the unfair access to affordable housing. They themselves received help and support from the community, and now, as they work long hours juggling different precarious jobs, they want to give back that help by standing with their neighbours. Sindicat organises through collective counselling, meaning that cases are discussed at a weekly assembly, which often takes place in a public park, where anyone who has gone through a similar experience can give advice. The union is also setting a precedent in collective bargaining, by organising neighbours who have the same landlord, either in the same building or in different locations, to work on a common negotiation strategy. One of the Sindicat’s highlights so far has been to help shape a rent control act that was approved in Catalonia’s parliament in September 2020. Stopping an eviction, opening up an empty property, winning a contract or changing policies are victories that strengthen the housing struggle and perhaps hold lessons for communities in other European cities battling against a shortage of affordable homes. Organising in the streets as they do, Sindicat’s members in L’Hospitalet de Llobregat are also gathering extensive and valuable social knowledge. This knowledge makes the community stronger and opens the door to respectful and humane housing solutions that don’t involve marginalising families in distress. If health and education are considered basic rights, why not housing? Irene Baqué is a documentary film director who explores issues of identity, gender and social justice Watch more Guardian Documentaries here. Sign up for the Guardian Documentaries newsletter here to be the first to hear about new releases and exclusive events. Sign up for the This Is Europe newsletter here to get a weekly selection of the most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment.David, 63, Portsmouth Occupation Semi-retired primary school teacher Voting record Labour – years ago because he thought it was essential to do so, now because there’s no one else to vote for Amuse bouche When he was 10, he won a south London art competition with a painting of a flamenco bar, even though he’d never been to Spain, or a bar, or any flamenco Emma, 52, Portsmouth Occupation Secondary school teacher Voting record Labour, except once when she cast a tactical vote for the Lib Dems Amuse bouche Emma once fell over Prince Charles’s feet when he came to the Royal Show in Warwickshire For starters David I arrived first, and mistook the photographer for the person I was meeting. I don’t know why, he’s a different gender. I think it might have been a bit of nerves. Emma We did not draw breath for the whole time we were together. David She came walking in with her big smile and I thought: “She’s going to be nice.” Emma I had this delicious starter – lamb belly with some cockles on the side. And a piece of hake. David I ordered the oysters, and then I had the sea kelp gnocchi. The big beef Emma We disagreed about statues. As I get older, I’m a bit more militant rather than less. I just think: let’s all glue ourselves to something to say how cross we are. If we’re going to put up statues, let’s put up statues to really great people, great allies, great pioneers, great scientists. Let’s not always make them white people with objectionable parts of their history, which are somehow forgiven because it’s such a long time ago. David I’d like to see a true description put on the base of these statues, of what the person did and how they got their money. I worry that we’re erasing what happened if we tear them down. Like a lot of middle-aged gay people, my partner and I have given up bondage and joined the National Trust. Now I want to hear the stories of how that money was made, how these houses were built. One of the things I’d like to see is a statue of Aneurin Bevan in front of every NHS hospital. Emma’s reaction was, “Ooh, that’d be nice” but she probably thought: “He’s on a rant now.” Emma I do understand his strength of feeling for the NHS and why it’s precious. But when it’s being systematically ruined, I’m not sure a statue of Nye Bevan will alert people to the dangers of that. Sharing plate Emma We started talking about queer fluidity and agreed straight away – we’re both really committed to the idea that the fluidity kids have now is great and necessary. We’re open and inclusive about our trans pupils at school – they feel safe, they feel supported and they feel loved. He’d grown up in a time when he couldn’t experiment with any side of himself at all. David I got into my personal life quite fast. It was one of those things where you talk to a stranger who’s quite friendly and you open up. I’ve been married and had a family, and it was in my late 30s that I decided I needed to be braver and more honest with myself. I met my current partner in my mid-50s. It was murder coming out to some of my close friends. For afters David Emma’s lived in Portsmouth longer than I have, and she also lived in London for a while. We talked about that, and how we’d never move back there. I miss the diversity of London but I was up in the centre a couple of weeks ago for the first time since lockdown and I think it’s become a much more unequal city, for people with money. All the quirky little shops have gone. It’s not the city I grew up in. Emma He goes back and notices the stark differences between rich and poor. Whereas for me, it was just the noise and the hubbub. I got on the tube the other day and thought: “Urgh, people, how did I ever live here?” Takeaways David You can’t fight with Emma, she’s too nice. Emma It was a really warm, really engaging conversation. Then we decided to have a cocktail pudding. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • David and Emma ate at The Briny, Southsea Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreAccumulated incidents of police intimidation, harassment and aggression towards activists at Cop26 are creating “an atmosphere of fear and repression” on the streets of Glasgow and have had a chilling effect on protest, campaigners and monitoring groups have said. Organisers of Saturday’s Climate Justice march through Glasgow have also claimed that police risked “chaos” by failing to adhere to agreed arrangements, while Scottish immigrant groups and indigenous visitors have described their feelings of discomfort and threat prompted by “saturation policing” throughout the city. The Guardian has collected first-hand accounts from activists across Glasgow, who have reported: Being threatened with arrest for unfurling a banner at a train station. One activist operating in a police liaison capacity was given an identifying blue bib to wear by organisers, but later had it confiscated by a police officer and was threatened with arrest for impersonating a police officer. The organiser at an activists’ campsite was threatened with arrest for “child neglect” after an officer witnessed families asking whether they could stay there. Police vans driving past the site in the early hours blasting an air horn and shining a spotlight with the apparent intention of disturbing sleep. One activist was reduced to tears after being followed into a men’s toilets by three officers. Kat Hobbs, of the Network for Police Monitoring, said: “Police Scotland seem to have gone for a saturation approach to policing the Cop26 protests, and with so many officers and little for them to do, reports are flooding in of police intimidation, harassment and aggression. All of these small incidents add up to create an atmosphere of fear and repression, and have a chilling effect on the right to protest.” These reports stand in stark contrast to Police Scotland’s repeated insistence that policing of protests would be “human rights-based” and “welcoming, friendly and proportionate”. The assistant chief constable Gary Ritchie said officers had “enjoyed very positive engagement and constructive relationships with the vast majority of people” who had come to Glasgow to “have their voices heard and engage in peaceful protest”. There is a view among some activists that mutual aid officers from English forces notorious for their heavy-handed tactics are undermining Police Scotland’s approach. On Monday, occupants of a disused building in Glasgow that was squatted to provide emergency accommodation for activists accused the Metropolitan police and Welsh forces of trying to break into the site with batons drawn in the middle of the night, and reported that the situation was only calmed when Police Scotland officers arrived. A spokesperson for Police Scotland confirmed that officers went to the building. However, Police Scotland denied that the operation was a raid or an attempt to force entry, or that a battering ram was used. Police Scotland have said mutual aid officers are working under the command and control of their chief constable. Before the summit beginning, many were expecting high-impact disruption from protest groups such as Extinction Rebellion. This has not transpired, with organisers saying they wanted to maintain focus on indigenous and youth voices, but despite this XR activists have told the Guardian of being regularly followed and harassed by police since their arrival in Glasgow. During a protest against greenwashing last Wednesday, XR activists were kept stationary by a police cordon for several hours. During that period – which activists described as “kettling” because they were unable to leave, and which Police Scotland called “containment” – those inside the cordon reported having no access to food or water, and march stewards had to construct a makeshift toilet space with banners to allow people to relieve themselves above a drain. Scotland’s justice minister, Keith Brown, when asked by the Scottish Greens at Holyrood on Tuesday about this and other reports of kettling, defended the police actions as “proportionate”. He said they had been discussed by the independent advisory group for Cop26, which was set up to inform the human rights-based approach. But others on the group have stressed that it is not a substitute for legally enforced scrutiny of police actions. Campaigners have also raised concerns about the policing of the Climate Justice protest last Saturday, in which at least 100,000 people marched through Glasgow city centre. Organisers say they were promised there would be only blue-jacketed police liaison officers walking with marchers, while conventional yellow-jacketed officers would block roads as required. But stewards described conventional police becoming increasingly interventionist as the march progressed, splitting up prearranged marching blocs without offering a reason and increasing tensions by stopping one section of marchers. After an initial delay in the first bloc of indigenous groups setting off, stewards claim that conventional officers harassed marchers, including indigenous elders who needed breaks along the walk, to catch up the lost time. Quan Nguyen, the Scottish coordinator of the activist group Cop26 Coalition, said: “For the majority the march was still a positive experience but that was despite police actions, which made our job as organisers much harder. The irony was that the police caused much more disruption that day than any activists did.” Ritchie thanked all police officers, protesters and stewards “Since the start of the conference police officers have had over 1,000 engagements with people who were protesting and have made fewer than 100 arrests. We have also helped ensure that two huge marches through the city were completed successfully,” said the assistant chief constable. “With the exception of a tiny minority of protesters who were intent on creating conflict and compromising public safety, all of these events were peaceful, and as a result over the two weeks of conference we have made only a very small number of arrests.” • This article was amended on 11 November 2021 to clarify that the activist operating in a police liaison capacity was given an identifying blue bib to wear by organisers, not by police.Growth is up, said Rishi Sunak in his budget speech last month, but the figures for the third-quarter show this claim is no longer true. The rise in national income, or GDP, of 1.3% in the three months to September was down from 5.5% in the previous quarter. It meant the recovery from the worst slump in 300 years slowed over the summer and in a troubling development, is now on a much lower trajectory. It must worry the chancellor, less than a month on from his upbeat declarations in the budget, that the pace of growth has slowed dramatically and that one of his other measures of success, namely how well the country is doing in relation to its G7 counterparts, puts the UK at the bottom of the league. All the major economies have recovered more quickly than the UK economy, which remains 2.1% below its pre-pandemic peak. Germany and Italy are 1.5% and 1.4% below their pre-pandemic best while the US has jumped ahead to be in positive territory by 1.4%. Our closest neighbour, France, which looks and feels economically most like the UK, is only 0.1% below where it was before Covid-19 forced governments to impose wide ranging lockdowns. Our European neighbours keep more in reserve to cope with the bad times, preventing a deep slump when a financial disaster strikes. The US government, just as it did in the financial crash of 2008, allows the slump to wipe out businesses and jobs, but then does so much more to turn the situation around. Sunak said he had a plan for growth “that builds a stronger economy for the future”. At the time it sounded presumptive, given the puny support for the economy from his various tax and spending measures. Today that statement is likely to ring distinctly hollow among businesses in the manufacturing and construction sectors where growth slipped backwards in the third quarter. Short-time working in the car industry and the mothballing of construction projects outside the excessively profitable housebuilding sector have left these two bedrock industries struggling. During the quarter the manufacturing sector contracted by 0.3%. Construction slumped by an even sharper 1.5%. Another quarter dominated by a lack of skilled staff and a shortage of vital materials and components to work with, and both sectors will likely contract for a second successive quarter in the final three months of 2021, fulfilling the definition of a recession for each one. The Conservative narrative is that there is not much Sunak can do to help employers fill vacancies in the short term. Nor can he manipulate the global trading system to ease bottlenecks. That would be true without Brexit. The government’s adoption of the hardest of Brexits has cut the supply lines of skilled staff that would have eased the manufacturing and construction industries through the pandemic. A hard Brexit has also persuaded many of our European trading partners to turn away from Britain. This can be seen in the quarterly trade figures, which are so bad they drag on growth. Ana Boata, head of economic research at the credit insurer Euler Hermes, said trade barriers would almost certainly push the UK’s manufacturing recession. The lack of goods coming into the country would also contribute to higher inflation, which the Bank of England says will reach 5% by next spring, she said. It is reasonable for voters to ask why the government is battling the EU over article 16, risking a trade war with the most important destination for our goods and services, when the UK’s industrial base is contracting and households are staring at a year of falling living standards. At the moment the government shows no sign of budging.Patients experiencing life-threatening emergencies such as heart attacks, strokes or major breathing problems are becoming trapped for many hours in GP surgeries, unable to get to hospital, because ambulances are taking so long to turn up after the GP practice rings 999. GP leaders say growing numbers of very unwell patients are getting caught up in such situations after attending for an appointment. They say hard-pressed ambulance services are seeing surgeries as “places of safety” and taking longer to send paramedics there, because they are so busy dealing with other emergencies and assume GPs and nurses are looking after the patient. In some cases GPs have become so worried by the long delay for an ambulance that they have ended up driving the patient from their practice to A&amp;E themselves. The British Medical Association (BMA) and Royal College of GPs (RCGP) voiced alarm at the recent rise in very sick patients getting stuck on their premises and said the patients could face irreparable harm to their health because they had not been transported to hospital fast enough. They want ambulance services to stop regarding GP surgeries as “places of safety” and start treating patients stuck there as just as much of a priority as those who are in trouble elsewhere. Dr Richard Vautrey, the chair of the BMA’s general practitioners committee, said: “GPs and their teams will always do all they can to respond to clinical emergencies. When we have delays in ambulances arriving it means a nurse or GP being taken away from other appointments, and these incidents are increasingly common. “It’s vital that when called for help and support, ambulance services treat calls from surgeries as seriously and quickly as they do that from any other location. Delays not only put individual patients at risk but they also take practice clinicians away from the many other patients they need to attend to.” The incidents are a stark illustration of the pressure NHS ambulance services are under. Ambulance crews are spending huge amounts of time tied up outside hospitals looking after patients because A&amp;Es are too busy to accept them. In late October two patients died in the back of an ambulance while waiting outside Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge and Worcestershire Royal hospital in Worcester. Dr Joanna Poole, a hospital doctor, tweeted last week about one patient with low oxygen saturation levels waiting for hours, while a man with chest pain was sent in a taxi from his GP’s surgery to the emergency department “arresting in car” because the surgeries were seen as “safe places”. Last week the medical website Pulse told how Dr Lucy Pocock, a Bristol GP, had taken a six-year-old patient to A&amp;E at 9pm herself after her 999 call at 4.45pm did not yield an ambulance. “I don’t want a patient dying in my care while we wait for an ambulance. It’s not the care I want to give. I don’t want that on my conscience,” Pocock said. In response to her story, Dr Richard Greenway, another GP in Bristol, said: “This is getting very dangerous.” He said in recent weeks his practice had had several such incidents, including: A patient with a fractured hip who waited nine hours in the surgery for an ambulance before the ambulance service sent a taxi instead at 9pm saying “no ambulance available”. A patient with chest pains who missed the chance to have stents fitted because, despite them and their GP dialling 999, no ambulance came to take them to hospital. A patient with acute heart failure and atrial fibrillation who had to be kept on oxygen in their surgery for more than four hours before an ambulance arrived. GPs and practice nurses, despite being highly skilled, cannot give proper care to patients whose life is at risk, Vautrey said. “When a patient is suffering with an urgent or serious medical condition such as a heart attack or stroke, they must be treated by specialist services and clinicians as quickly as possible and in the most appropriate setting, such as an emergency department.” Prof Martin Marshall, the chair of the RCGP, said: “If a member of staff at a GP surgery calls an ambulance, it’s because a patient needs emergency treatment or care that can’t be delivered at the surgery, and as such it’s vital that these calls aren’t deprioritised, as per some reports we’re hearing about. “While GP surgeries are clinical settings staffed by highly trained clinicians, practices may not be equipped with all of the equipment or appropriate medications needed in an emergency situation.” He and Vautrey acknowledged that ambulance services were not to blame for the long delays because they are under unsustainable pressure owing to lack of resources and record demand. The Association of Ambulance Chief Executives, which represents England’s 10 ambulance trusts, has been approached for a response.The cocksure approach of Old Firm supporters is only occasionally – and amusingly – spoked. When Brendan Rodgers decided Leicester City was a more valid career option than seeking to equal, or make, history at Celtic the response was volcanic. Steven Gerrard will be spared such abuse – the Rangers following go weak at the knees within 500 yards of their now former manager – but the swapping of Ibrox for Villa Park and Premier League mediocrity still stings. Rangers, fresh from years as an on- and off-field laughing stock, adored the kudos bestowed on them by association with Gerrard. That he chose to walk away is a blow to light blue ego. Rodgers, it should be noted, departed Glasgow with seven domestic honours – including two Trebles – and further Champions League experience. Gerrard has collected one Scottish trophy from a possible nine, with his wider mission as incomplete as it is tricky to evaluate. What he has in common with Rodgers, his former manager, is a debt of gratitude to a club in Glasgow, who did as much to elevate status as was the case in reverse. Rangers were good for Gerrard by providing an environment not widely available elsewhere. If you can manage the Old Firm, you can manage anywhere, as Dick Advocaat once put it. Should Rangers win this season’s Scottish top flight, they are almost certain to gain direct entry to the Champions League. Gerrard apparently could not care less, a path back to Anfield not being particularly well served by trouncing Ross County or watching players skate around an artificial pitch at Livingston. As the Rangers support lament Gerrard’s loss, they are entitled to query the timing. It gives credibility to whispers all season that all was not well behind the scenes. One also has to wonder why Gerrard would not be fully confident of retaining the title, given the margin to Celtic at the end of 2020-21 was 25 points. Just last month, days after insisting he was “happy” and “settled”, Gerrard broke ranks with the assertion that: “To compete with the teams we are playing against, we have to spend big money.” His point related to the Europa League. In response, the Rangers hierarchy were entitled to point to a seven-figure salary-bill increase mid-pandemic. The club has a last-reported £48m in staff costs, £33.5m of which relates to the first-team squad. It is a sad indictment of a player-trading model beyond Gerrard’s domain that not a single player was sold for even moderate value during his reign. Gerrard paid only lip service to the development of youth players via the first team. All the while, Rangers were reporting huge financial losses. Gerrard’s desire to return to England follows logic. He made no effort to forge media relationships in Scotland, a matter linked in part to Rangers’ small-time approach towards press relations. Gerrard’s family remained in England throughout. If the grand plan is to succeed Jürgen Klopp, Gerrard has cause to believe he needs to be in view of the Liverpool hierarchy. Much of Gerrard’s approach in Scotland made this seem like merely a career stop, where England was the more serious or significant domain. Goodbye Stevie G, we never really knew you at all. Relative obscurity in Scotland, however, undoubtedly assisted him. It is the reason, in fact, that his performance at Rangers is widely and lazily depicted as somehow sensational. It would be ludicrous to portray Gerrard’s time at the club as anything other than good, perhaps very good, but context needs to be applied. Rangers supporters protest when an 11% domestic trophy success record is pointed out but this is a club that has always dealt in the currency of winning. St Johnstone claimed two trophies last season. It is perfectly reasonable to ask whether other coaches would have achieved more than or identical to Gerrard with the same ever-increasing resource. The one trophy Gerrard did deliver was key. Rangers’ title success last season may have been the most important in their history. It was the first since the financial implosion of 2012 and stopped Celtic returning a record 10 in succession. Celtic’s fall is an easy reference point but the fact is Gerrard’s Rangers played a part in that with their relentlessness. Successive runs to the last 16 of the Europa League were noteworthy. There is a debate to be had on whether Rangers should be aiming for that kind of territory as a minimum but the fact remains they had been light years away from it before Gerrard arrived. Rangers topped a group that included Benfica. They had looked back to fine domestic fettle immediately before their manager’s departure. Their lead at the top of the table is four points, with a League Cup semi-final a little over a week away. Earlier, there had been struggles, including an embarrassing Champions League qualifying defeat by the 10 men of Malmö. Given their margin of 2020-21 league leeway, there was no excuse not to be fully prepared for that tie. Instead, Rangers capitulated at home. Gerrard’s task was to ensure last season was not the exception, given Rangers had been a clear second best in Scotland in 2018-19 and 2019-20. When Rangers lost at home to Hamilton in March 2020, days after being bundled out of the Scottish Cup by Hearts, there was audible disquiet from the Rangers support relating to Gerrard’s capabilities. As football duly shut down, Rangers performed the perfect reset. Gerrard is streetwise. He conducts and carries himself as a former Liverpool and England captain – and Rangers manager – should. Early over-praise and over-criticism of players at Rangers was toned down. When the training ground was revamped – again at decent cost – it was Gerrard’s way of raising standards. Yet would a manager with his CV, without the wow factor Gerrard had as a player, be appointed by a Premier League club? It is tricky to imagine that being the case. “Let’s go,” declared Gerrard to mass appreciation as he was hired by Rangers. Go he did. At the first reasonable opportunity. What happens next at Ibrox may reveal Gerrard’s true value.A powder blue airplane flew from London to Glasgow in September to deliver on a promise. Airlines around the world have committed to decarbonizing the industry – the British Airways flight was meant to demonstrate a decade of progress toward that goal. Sustainable aviation fuel (SAF), made partly from recycled cooking oil, along with more efficient engines, a sleeker design and improved air traffic management helped reduce the flight’s carbon emissions by 62% compared with a similar trip in 2010, according to BA. The airline was able to bill the trip as “carbon neutral” because it bought carbon credits to offset the remaining 38% of emissions. In demonstrating how far aviation has come, the flight showed the industry is far from carbon free. Commercial aviation emitted 918m metric tons of carbon in 2019, about half of which came from frequent flyers. The industry makes up about 2.5% of annual global emissions, but that figure will grow. Passenger travel rose nearly 300% between 1990 and 2019 and the pre-pandemic increases in traffic outpaced emissions savings from improved aircraft and air traffic efficiencies. Emissions could triple in the next three decades, according to some predictions, if aviation returns to its pre-Covid growth trajectory. The industry has been slow to decarbonize, in large part because fossil fuels continue to be by far the cheapest and easiest way to fuel planes. But there is movement. In October, the International Air Transport Association (Iata) committed to reach net zero emissions by 2050, following a slew of net zero commitments this year from large European and US airlines. To meet these targets, they are relying heavily on sustainable aviation fuel. SAF is seen as something of a holy grail for decarbonization, especially as zero-emissions aircraft powered by hydrogen and electricity are a decade or more away from commercial operation. Made from non-fossil-fuel feedstocks including cooking oils and agricultural waste, SAF could cut carbon emissions as much as 80% compared with conventional jet fuel, according to Iata. Research has shown that the use of SAF can also reduce engine soot and contrails, which have an even greater warming effect on the planet than aviation’s carbon emissions. And as a “drop-in” fuel that can be blended with kerosene, SAF is compatible with existing aircraft fuel systems. Dozens of aviation and energy companies – including Delta, American Airlines and BP – recently committed to replace 10% of global jet fuel with SAF by 2030. The problem is it’s expensive – up to eight times more than conventional jet fuel – and there’s not that much of it. About 100m litres (22m gallons) of SAF will be produced in 2021, according to IATA, a fraction of the 449bn litres (119bn gallons) the group estimates will be required by 2050 to keep to net zero commitments. Environmental advocates also warn that if demand for SAF is met by using crops as feedstock it may lead to deforestation to clear land and could compete with food production. Some scientists are hoping to help SAF scale by exploring the potential of waste. Derek Vardon, a researcher at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in Colorado, investigates ways to make fuel from “wet waste”, including food scraps and municipal wastewater. “Despite a lot of recent buzz around increasing SAF production, there’s a limited amount of non-food fats, oils and greases to use,” he said. By diverting food waste that was destined to decay in landfill, Vardon and his colleagues say they can create SAF with a carbon footprint up to 165% lower than conventional jet fuel. US wet waste has the potential to replace roughly 20% of the country’s jet fuel consumption, according to a study co-authored by Vardon. At the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Washington state, Corinne Drennan, manager of bioenergy technologies programs, researches the potential of SAF that’s brewed from industrial waste gases. “These waste gases that have carbon in them can come from steel mill manufacturing, from refineries, from landfill gas, from lots of different places,” she said. Carbon-rich gases are fermented into ethanol and converted into a hydrocarbon fuel. Various feedstocks might supply the market for SAF, she said, “and as you aggregate [feedstocks], you begin to build impact.” One of the most hyped fuels for cutting emissions is synthetic fuel, also known as e-kerosene, e-fuel and power-to-liquid fuel. Made with carbon dioxide and hydrogen (produced from water using renewable energy), it can be used in existing fuel systems. “There is potentially an unlimited amount of renewable electricity to use for e-kerosene,” said Andrew Murphy, director of aviation for Transport &amp; Environment, a green campaign group based in Brussels. When created using renewable electricity and carbon capture, synthetic fuel is nearly carbon neutral. In January, KLM flew a plane from Amsterdam to Madrid in what the company called the world’s first flight powered by synthetic fuel. Synthetic fuel made up around 5% of the fuel; the rest was conventional jet fuel, but the company said it was a step towards more widespread adoption. The German airline Lufthansa joined aviation and energy groups including Transport &amp; Environment to write an open letter in July urging the EU to set ambitious goals for synthetic fuel production and has partnered with the transport company Kuehne+Nagel to buy 25,000 liters a year. Yet synthetic fuel is very expensive compared with conventional jet fuel and remains exceptionally limited in supply – and is likely to stay that way for at least the next decade. To scale up would require policy support and huge investment in the expansion of green energy infrastructure to provide enough electricity and carbon. Increasing the production of renewables like solar and wind power to supply synthetic fuel will be “very costly”, said Brandon Graver, a senior researcher at the International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT). A lack of supply continues to be the big challenge to scaling up SAF from all sources, said Graver. “There needs to be a lot more investment,” he added. In the US, SAF production will take decades to scale, according to the Biden administration’s plan. The White House has set a goal of supplying 35bn gallons of SAF by 2050 but the US now produces only about 4.5m gallons a year. Europe’s shift to SAF is also likely to be a decades-long process. A recent report from the ICCT estimated that the bloc has the potential to produce 898m gallons of SAF by 2030 – 5.5% of projected jet fuel demand. The EU is considering a proposal that would require fuel suppliers to blend at least 2% of SAF into conventional jet fuel by 2025, 5% by 2030, and 63% by 2050. But while policymakers pin their hopes on alternative fuels, climate advocates question whether aviation has the tools to decarbonize within the narrow timeframe available. “They haven’t got the technologies for a genuine path to decarbonization,” said Cait Hewitt, policy director at the Aviation Environment Federation, a UK non-profit. Reducing aviation’s carbon impact will require sweeping changes to the industry and aggressive efforts to keep airplanes on the tarmac, she said. While passengers are increasingly given the option of offsetting their flight emissions, a number of investigations have found offset schemes to have serious credibility problems. Flying less often is one of the most climate-conscious lifestyle choices a person can make, according to research from Lund University in Sweden. That’s especially true for the 1% of the global population who produce 50% of aviation emissions. Abandoning air travel is a tough proposal to sell, particularly when many countries lack cheap, efficient and comprehensive rail networks. It’s an “escapist and unrealistic approach”, said Kwasi Adjekum, a professor of aviation at the University of North Dakota. “The reality is that air transportation is an essential part of global commerce and [the] supply chain network for goods and passengers.” But as research increasingly suggests that growth in aviation is incompatible with emissions goals, a growing number of people have committed to staying grounded. Some are driven by guilt; many have been inspired by climate activist Greta Thunberg. The “flight shame” movement Thunberg helped inspire was credited as one reason for a 4% drop in commercial flights in Sweden. It will take years to ramp up SAF production and even longer to develop zero-emissions aircraft, said Murphy from Transport &amp; Environment: “Right now, flying less is the most effective way to reduce aviation emissions.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to clarify that 50% of aviation emissions are produced by 1% of the global population, not “1% of flyers”, as an earlier version said.Dave, the rapper who topped the charts this year with his emotionally rich second album We’re All Alone in This Together, leads the nominations at the 2021 Mobo awards, which acknowledge the best Black music in the UK, Africa, the Caribbean and beyond. Dave is nominated for album, song and video of the year, plus best male act and best hip-hop act. Drill rapper Central Cee has four nominations, capping a breakthrough year in which he released two Top 10 hits, Commitment Issues and Obsessed With You. Four artists score three nominations each: rappers Ghetts and Little Simz, soul singer Cleo Sol, and Arlo Parks, the singer-songwriter who won this year’s Mercury prize and the Brit award for breakthrough artist. The UK’s rap scene is represented strongly elsewhere, with the best male act nominees all rappers – AJ Tracey, Central Cee, Ghetts, Headie One and Potter Payper join Dave – and Shaybo and rapper-singer Bree Runway appearing alongside Little Simz in the best female act category, alongside singers Sol, Parks and Tiana Major9. For the first time there is a separate category celebrating drill rap alongside grime and hip-hop, in the year the genre scored its first UK No 1 single – the remix of Tion Wayne and Russ Millions’ Body, which is nominated for song of the year. The event will also celebrate the best of African music, reggae, jazz, gospel and R&amp;B/soul in distinct categories, plus actors, media personalities, producers and international acts. The ceremony will take place on Sunday 5 December. 2021 Mobo nominations in full Best male act AJ Tracey Central Cee Dave Ghetts Headie One Potter Payper Best female act Arlo Parks Bree Runway Cleo Sol Little Simz Shaybo Tiana Major9 Album of the year Arlo Parks – Collapsed in Sunbeams Celeste – Not Your Muse Cleo Sol – Mother Dave – We’re All Alone in This Together Ghetts – Conflict of Interest Headie One – Edna Song of the year A1 x J1 – Latest Trends Central Cee – Commitment Issues Dave – Clash (feat Stormzy) Enny – Peng Black Girls (feat Amia Brave) Pa Salieu – My Family (feat BackRoad Gee) Tion Wayne &amp; Russ Millions – Body (remix feat ArrDee, Bugzy Malone, Buni, Darkoo, E1, ZT &amp; Fivio Foreign) Best newcomer Arlo Parks ArrDee BackRoad Gee Berwyn Central Cee Enny Joy Crookes Midas the Jagaban PinkPantheress Wes Nelson Video of the year Bree Runway – Hot Hot Fredo – Money Talks (feat Dave) Little Simz – Woman (feat Cleo Sol) M1llionz – Lagga Pa Salieu – My Family (feat BackRoad Gee) Slowthai – Mazza (feat A$AP Rocky) Best R&amp;B/soul act Bellah Cleo Sol Jorja Smith Sault Tiana Major9 Wstrn Best grime act Bugzy Malone Chip D Double E Frisco Ghetts Skepta Best hip-hop act Dave D-Block Europe Fredo Little Simz Potter Payper Slowthai Best drill act Central Cee Digga D Headie One K Trap Loski M1llionz Russ Millions SR Tion Wayne Unknown T Best international act Doja Cat Drake Kanye West Lil Nas X Megan Thee Stallion Polo G Rema Skillibeng Wizkid Young Stoner Life (Young Thug &amp; Gunna) Best performance in a TV show/film Ashley Thomas – Them Damson Idris – Snowfall Daniel Kaluuya – Judas &amp; the Black Messiah Letitia Wright – Small Axe Micheal Ward – Small Axe Best media personality Charlene White Chunkz &amp; Yung Filly Harry Pinero Henrie Kwushue Julie Adenuga Maya Jama Mo Gilligan Munya Chawawa Nella Rose Zeze Millz Best gospel act CalledOut Music Cece Winans Guvna B Kirk Franklin Maverick City Music SO Best African music act Ayra Starr Burna Boy Ckay Davido King Promise NSG Rema Tems Tiwa Savage Wizkid Best reggae act Lila Ike Popcaan Sean Paul Shenseea Skillibeng Spice Best jazz act Alfa Mist Blue Lab Beats Emma-Jean Thackray Jacob Collier Nubiyan Twist Sons of Kemet Best producer Gotcha Jae5 Juls M1OnTheBeat P2J TSBIs there anyone who’s played video games over the last 10 years who hasn’t played Skyrim? When it came out in 2011, this must surely have seemed to the outside world like one of the nerdiest games around: potions and spells, axes and swords, dark elves and giants and, of course, dragons. But Skyrim nevertheless became one of the most widely played games ever, a touchstone in the video game world, for players and developers alike. It has been re-released on every console and platform imaginable, to the point where it’s become a gaming in-joke. It’s still huge on YouTube and TikTok, even with people who were little kids when it came out. At a wedding a few weeks ago, I met someone whose wife had played Skyrim as her first ever game; a decade later, she’s still playing it. Skyrim was made at Bethesda Game Studios by a team of around 100 people – far fewer than the 400-strong team working on its forthcoming game, Starfield. Coming straight from wrapping up development on Fallout 3, a post-nuclear-apocalypse role playing game, the team quickly found a tone and direction that they were excited by. Unlike The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion (2006), a glossy, classical high-fantasy set in the most gilded area of the world of Tamriel, Skyrim is grimy and cold. Its aesthetic is more Nordic: furs and leather, snow and stone. If Oblivion felt like a Roman legend, and its intriguingly weird predecessor Morrowind resembled a tattered novel from an unknown author plucked from the back of the fantasy shelf at your local library, Skyrim is like one of those brutal Scandinavian folk stories where someone always gets an axe to the head. Todd Howard, now Bethesda Game Studios’ director and executive producer, led development on Skyrim, as he had for all the Elder Scrolls games since 2000. Working from a base of a map, concept art and music – “we always do music really early”, Todd says, “I find that’s a really good thing to get you into the mood and tone of a game” – the team began constructing the different regions of Skyrim: mountains, tundra, pine forests, settlements. “We have so much stuff – landmass, locations, quests, themes – and it mustn’t feel like 50 different games, it has to come together. We call that the glue, that’s the phrase we use … Once we’re going, once we have the world and the tone, our designers and everybody else are really in sync about what’s going to be appropriate.” Howard had a statue of Conan the Barbarian on his desk during early development that was a strong design inspiration. “To me that was the feeling of the game,” he says. “We kept using the term ‘epic reality’… it wasn’t super high fantasy, it felt very grounded, that was the tone we were going for. We wanted to ground everything in a reality that you believe, so that when the dragons and magic come in you feel it more.” Partly thanks to the fact that everyone involved had a good sense of what felt right for the world, there wasn’t actually that much that had to be cut as development went on, says Todd – though one element of Skyrim’s world was originally intended to be a much bigger part of it. “There’s a civil war that’s going on in the game, and it was a great idea from our designers to have some backstory and conflict that didn’t necessarily get fully resolved,” explains Howard. “A lot of our games have this main quest, this big threat that gets resolved – and then you keep playing and you’re like, now what? We wanted to have a tension in the game world that didn’t necessarily go away. Originally the civil war was a much bigger thing that you got involved in, with these big battles, and some of it remains, but the battle parts ended up being pretty small. It was constantly on the chopping block for the project. Thematically it works, but what you’re seeing is the simplest version that we could do.” Despite being an epic fantasy, Skyrim isn’t a game that is usually remembered for its characters or its story. Instead, players remember what they did: that time they ended up running all the way up a mountain trying to get away from a frost troll, or when they accidentally dragon-shouted a companion off the edge of a cliff and lost five minutes to guilty, uncontrollable laughter, or discovered the remains of an underground city. Some characters do stand out in the collective memory of Skyrim fandom, though – including, unexpectedly, Lydia, a housecarl who is likely to be your first companion on your journey. Despite having absolutely no memorable features, I can’t tell you the number of times I’ve heard stories from players who cried because “their” Lydia accidentally died in a cave full of wolves. Todd laughs when I mention Lydia. “Everyone got attached to her, but she is a generic NPC!” he says. “None of her lines are written for her … we did not put the time into [Skyrim’s] characters that we do in, say a Fallout, and you can see that. I’m not saying there aren’t really good characters in Skyrim, but I don’t think it’s the reason people play it. At the end of the day, we build these games so that people do tell their own stories. We build the world, but what the player brings to it is the magic of video games … The games I played when I was young, like Ultima, I would go to bed thinking about them – I wonder if I can do this? I’ll try that tomorrow! I want to create that sense of wonder for our players as well. “This is somewhat technical in terms of game design, but one of the things we do that’s unique, even though there are lots of open world games, is that we don’t shut down the world. You can be running 20 quests at once and we let them collide. Development wise, the hardest problems create the most magic on screen. You can be in town doing a quest and then two dragons can turn up and it’s pandemonium. Those are the moments I love the most.” When the team was finishing up Skyrim’s development, they were playing the game all the time, trying out as many different ways of doing things as possible, testing the limits of the world they’d built. For Todd, reading people’s play notes was one of the most fun parts of the whole cycle – “I’d often be wondering, is there a bug here that we need to solve or is this just a fun story someone felt compelled to write down?” But of course when it actually came out and got into the hands of players, they immediately started finding things that the developers did not foresee. “There was a person who figured out that you could put buckets on people’s heads and block their line of sight,” Todd recalls. “There was a great debate as to whether we should fix that. We ended up deciding no, because it’s hilarious.” Once the game came out, it just kept going and going. There was optimisation work to be done – anyone unfortunate enough to have bought the PlayStation 3 version will recall that there was a memory problem that caused people’s save files to corrupt, an issue that took a long time to resolve. But more than that, it became clear that there was enormous demand for the fantasy world that Bethesda had built. “The popularity just didn’t wane, and so the amount of time that we spent on updates and expansions was at the time by far the longest ever,” says Todd. “Usually after a while we’d have moved the bulk of the team over to the next project, which was Fallout 4, but we were still doing Skyrim stuff. We ended up moving Fallout 4 to what was the next gen at the time, and that was partly due to Skyrim’s popularity.” Skyrim came out at a fortunate time, when fantasy as a whole was having a moment, thanks to the emergence of Game of Thrones and a general change in the cultural winds; I bet that there are a few million people out there who gave Skyrim a punt when, a few years previously, they might not have done so because its genre was not in vogue. Todd tells me that at last count, Skyrim has had 60 million total players – millions of whom are still active, every month. On PC, the game has an active modding community who mess with the game in fascinating ways, making their own adjustments from graphical and lighting upgrades to adding in lute-playing bears. This is part of what’s kept it alive, but not all of it, if you ask me. Most of Skyrim’s players never engage with modding; they’re drawn in by the power fantasy that it offers. This is a game that centres you absolutely. Characters reflect back your deeds and accomplishments; the world and everything in it bends to your will in an absolute buffet of fun and challenge. I’ve played a lot of interesting games in the past 10 years that challenge the player’s power, that question our role in the stories we tell through play, casting us as bit-players or nobodies struggling against powerful forces; nowadays Skyrim is almost refreshing in its straightforward hero narrative. You are the Dragonborn, and you can do anything. Todd agrees that Skyrim is absolutely a power fantasy. “In Oblivion you’re playing Lancelot to Arthur. You’re not the anointed one; Martin is. So here, we want you to be anointed in some way, be special in the world,” he says. It’s certainly a game that means a lot to people. Of the 450 people that now work at Bethesda Game Studios, many of them came there because of Skyrim. Some were even plucked from the ranks of modders who adapted the game in creative ways. And as the game ages, it’s still finding new players – including those who were too young to play it the first time around. “My son picked it up on the Switch and couldn’t put it down,” laughs Todd. “He became obsessed with it. My father’s day card basically said: Dad, you’re a great father, but where’s The Elder Scrolls 6?” An anniversary edition of The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim is available now, on pretty much every device that can play video games.20. NYC Ghosts &amp; Flowers (2000) Given short shrift on release, the reputation of the dense, chaotic, beat poetry-infused NYC Ghosts &amp; Flowers has been burnished at least a little by time. The title track, which slowly builds over seven minutes from hushed intro to cacophonous climax, is the perfect example of the dark, bad-dream power the album wields at its best. 19. Shaking Hell (1983) Sonic Youth’s first full album, Confusion Is Sex, was an abrasive leap forward from their awkward, half-formed debut EP. Thrillingly, you can almost hear the band finding themselves as Shaking Hell plays. It starts out like jerky post-punk funk, then suddenly transforms: an unsettling Kim Gordon monologue over brooding, tense, detuned guitar noise. 18. Anti-Orgasm (2009) Sonic Youth’s final album, The Eternal, might have been the most straightforward they ever released, but then again, that’s a relative term. As Anti-Orgasm grippingly proves – spiky, clashing guitars; heaving, monotonal riff; beautiful, off-beam coda – it couldn’t have been the work of anyone else. 17. Sweet Shine (1994) Apparently recorded over the master tape of 1987’s Sister, Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star was a defiantly subdued, refusenik gesture in the wake of the post-Nirvana alt-rock gold rush. Its understated power is exemplified by the languid, Pavement-influenced Sweet Shine, disrupted by Gordon’s sudden shift to throat-shredding howl midway through. 16. Rain on Tin (2002) Sonic Youth’s response to 9/11 offers a simple but affecting plea for unity in the face of horror: “Gather round, gather friend, never fear, never again.” The music, meanwhile, evokes the ghosts of New York’s past: there are moments where the guitars entwine around each other in a way that distinctly recalls Television. 15. Death Valley ’69 (1984) The Manson murders had hung over rock music for 15 years by the time Sonic Youth recorded Death Valley ’69, a ferocious, viscerally powerful song written from the fractured point of view of a Manson Family member: the bloody, zero-budget video – by transgressive director Richard Kern – is the perfect accompaniment. 14. Candle (1989) The lyrics of Candle defy explication – look online and you can find people suggesting they’re about everything from the purity of love to crystal meth addiction – but it hardly matters. The lengthy intro is sublime; the deft switches from something approaching straightforward alt-rock to explosions of noisy avant guitar are stunning. 13. 100% (1992) You can hear the influence of grunge on the riff of 100%, a feedback-strafed eulogy for murdered friend Joe Cole. The brief moment at 1:49, where everything else drops out, leaving drummer Steve Shelley – a talent sometimes under-appreciated in the rush to praise the band’s radical approach to guitar playing – thundering away is just fantastic. 12. Sunday (1998) The band rampaging through Confusion Is Sex or Death Valley ’69 sounded like they might burn bright but fast, but Sonic Youth wore maturity incredibly well, as evidenced by 1998’s careworn Sunday. The Macaulay Culkin-starring video garnered headlines, but you want the full-length album version for the song’s guitar interplay in all its glory. 11. Little Trouble Girl (1995) A fabulous anomaly in Sonic Youth’s catalogue, Little Trouble Girl was both an examination of preconceptions about teenage girls and a song that stripped away the band’s signature sounds in a gorgeous, warped homage to 60s girl groups – most specifically the angst-ridden Shangri-Las of I Can Never Go Home Anymore and Past, Present and Future. 10. Starpower (1986) On one hand, Starpower was Evol’s poppiest moment – the melody and lovestruck lyrics are irresistible – but if it’s pop, it’s a deeply idiosyncratic take on it: sandwiched between the verses and choruses are two minutes of improvised experimentation, including a burst of beatless noise that My Bloody Valentine clearly took note of. 9. Karen Revisited (2002) A fabulous exercise in extremes. Karen Revisited begins as a gorgeous, bittersweet song about nostalgia, sung by Lee Ranaldo, that has something of mid-60s folk-rock about its melody. Then, this being Sonic Youth, all hell breaks loose for the next eight minutes: ear-splitting feedback, abstract echoing guitars, noise that’s alternately churning and spectral. 8. Silver Rocket (1988) The critic David Fricke once suggested that, at full pelt, Sonic Youth sounded like a New York subway train screaming into a station: the ferocious improvised middle section of Silver Rocket proves his point. Plus you get three consecutive killer riffs in the song’s first 30 seconds alone. 7. Kim Gordon and the Arthur Doyle Handcream (2004) Inspired by Mariah Carey’s early 00s public breakdown – the song originally featured her name in its title – Kim Gordon and the Arthur Doyle Handcream offers a withering assessment of the music industry and media’s treatment of women, its furious mood mirrored by the broiling noise in the background. It also rocks. 6. Kotton Krown (1987) The perfect encapsulation of Sonic Youth’s ugly/beautiful aesthetic, Kotton Krown sounds simultaneously blissed out – it’s not entirely clear if the lyrics, sung in unison by Thurston Moore and Gordon, are about love or drugs – and chaotic: the guitars flail around the vocals, the central riff slips in and out of tune, feedback screams. The overall effect is mind-blowing. 5. The Diamond Sea (1995) “If I was the leader,” suggested Moore, “every song would be 20 minutes long.” As it was, The Diamond Sea was the longest song Sonic Youth ever released on their “mainstream” albums. Shifting from atmospheric ballad into drone experiment and ultimately freeform noise, it’s completely captivating for its 19-minute duration. 4. Schizophrenia (1987) 1987’s Sister is such a start-to-finish triumph, it’s tough to pick out highlights, but the album’s opening track is definitely among them: a sweet tune; disturbing lyrics – inspired by Gordon’s mentally ill brother – nonchalantly crooned; a fabulous, chilling vocal cameo by Gordon; pealing, wildly inventive guitar playing; and a lengthy slow-motion fade. 3. Tunic (Song For Karen) (1990) The highlight of Goo was Sonic Youth’s moving tribute to Karen Carpenter – an attempt, Gordon said, to “liberate” the late singer – which dials down the sound of their detuned guitars slightly, focusing the listener’s attention on the lyrics’ astonishing exploration of fame, identity, mental health and posthumous reputation. 2. Expressway To Yr Skull (1986) “Have you heard Expressway To Yr Skull?” enthused Neil Young. “It’s unbelievably good.” He was right. Also variously known as The Crucifixion of Sean Penn or Madonna, Sean and Me, the closing track on Evol remains one of the greatest things Sonic Youth recorded: a hypnotic, surging, euphoric song that gradually dissolves into oddly becalmed, droning noise. 1. Teen Age Riot (1988) You can’t get the full breadth of Sonic Youth’s oeuvre into 20 songs: no room for the experimental recordings released on their own Sonic Youth Recordings label; nor umpteen tracks fans might rightly claim as classics, from Halloween to Kool Thing to Sacred Trickster. Teen Age Riot seems an obvious No 1 – streaming figures suggest it’s by far their most popular song – but that shouldn’t cloud how incredible it is: an anthem devoid of cliche that streamlines their exploratory approach into something joyous and life-affirming without sacrificing an ounce of their originality. Had it been released a few years later, it would have been a huge, possibly over-familiar hit: as it is, it still sounds utterly fresh and vital. Live in Austin 1995 and Live in Dallas 2006 are available now on BandcampWorkers at HelloFresh, the largest meal-kit delivery service in the world, say they are facing an aggressive anti-union campaign led by the company after they tried to organize amid claims of safety issues and poor treatment of workers. HelloFresh has operations in 14 other countries including the US, UK and Australia and employs over 11,800 people worldwide preparing ingredients for delivery for home cooked meals including brown sugar bourbon apple pork chops and kale, cranberry and walnut stuffed squash. During the pandemic its profits soared and now workers at its production facilities in Richmond, California, and Aurora, Colorado, are trying to form unions amid claims they have faced intimidation and abuse. At the Richmond, California facility, the union Unite Here Local 2850 has filed several unfair labor practice charges with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) against HelloFresh, alleging the company has retaliated, intimidated, and bullied union supporting workers over the last several months. Evelin Escobar, a production worker at the Richmond, California, facility, alleged two HelloFresh security guards approached her and requested she turn in her employee badge to them, claiming she was distributing pro-union leaflets in the workplace during work hours, after she and other co-workers handed out leaflets during their lunch break outside the facility. “I do that during lunch and that’s my right, so, I felt very intimidated,” said Escobar. She said co-workers came to her defense and forced the security guards to stop insisting she turn over her badge. Escobar said the union campaign was started in response to safety issues, treatment of workers by management, and working conditions. “One day I was running the production line, and my team lead was yelling at me, telling me to do so many things at once I couldn’t do and while yelling at me called me ‘a Mexican shit’,” said Escobar. “She doesn’t respect any of us. I heard her call someone else stupid. She yells at us. And so that’s why the most important thing for me above all else is that we can win respect on the job. We work eight hours a day and we don’t feel happy going to work, so we’re ready for a change.” Like Amazon and other businesses now facing union drives from unhappy workers, HelloFresh experienced record sales and profits during the Covid-19 pandemic, with the company’s revenue more than doubling in 2020. As demand soared, workers have reported unsafe working conditions, which contributed to workers deciding to organize to form a union. Some 386 workers at the Aurora, Colorado, facility are currently casting ballots by mail, with votes scheduled to be counted on 22 November. Around 850 workers in Richmond are scheduled to receive ballots by 18 November, with their union election votes scheduled to be tallied on 15 December. Ahead of their union election, HelloFresh workers have claimed management retaliated against them for engaging in union activity. Shortly after Denis Guzman and Aindra Hernandez, two workers in the quality assurance department at HelloFresh, were distributing union leaflets outside during their lunch break, the workers were approached by managers and told they were not permitted to do so. Later the same day, Guzman was brought into an office room with other managers who informed him he was being demoted from quality assurance back to production. “I asked them, ‘what is the real reason that you’re doing this?’ And they said, the real reason is because I don’t speak English well enough,” said Guzman, who claimed other workers in the department have similar English proficiency and it was never mentioned as an issue before or during his training. “I felt like they were trying to camouflage the demotion because I had been exercising my rights on my break, and I felt discriminated against when they told me that I wasn’t good enough to be in a department because I didn’t speak English.” When Hernandez found out that afternoon Guzman was demoted, she defended Guzman to one of her managers and asked why the decision was made. Hernandez said she received no answer and the manager told her to clock out and go home without pay, two hours before her shift ended, following her until she clocked out and left. “There have been so many problems with disrespect, with not being given the material we need to work, and injuries happening in the workplace. It’s very unjust that all of this treatment gets so normalized,” said Hernandez. “There are so many people who fear getting sent home early or the managers being upset with them, like I was sent home, and that makes workers very afraid. We need to change that.” Workers at HelloFresh said they were also consistently forced into meetings during work hours with paid union avoidance consultants from Kulture Consulting. The company is spending thousands of dollars a day for the consultants to try to dissuade workers from voting in favor of the union. Alec Woodard, a shipping department worker at the Richmondfacility explained how HelloFresh has responded to the union organizing campaign over the past several weeks, which has included hiring union avoidance consultants who have held several captive audience meetings with workers in an attempt to dissuade workers from voting for the union. “They outright said you might lose money by doing this in the first meeting,” said Woodard. “An executive said they were proud the facility had the largest number of Covid-19 cases in Contra Costa county because that demonstrated the success of their Covid testing program.” He said consultants and management have tried to characterize the union as a business, comparing union organizers to sales representatives who will “trick” workers into joining a union. In the shipping department, Woodard said the department manager has been present a lot more during the union campaign, often making promises that high workloads, understaffing and issues in the department with workers having to stack multiple pallets at a time due to organize them around different shipping carriers would be resolved. “Richmond used to be a strong industrial center and this could be a good job, this facility doesn’t need to run this way,” added Woodard. “If we win, I think it would be a significant step for the city as a whole, not just for the workers at HelloFresh.” A spokesperson for HelloFresh said in an email: “HelloFresh believes that the decision of whether or not to be represented by a union is an important one and we respect each employee’s right to choose or refuse union membership.” They did not provide information on how much the company is spending on union avoidance consultants. In regards to the National Labor Relations Board charges, the spokesperson added; “We take these allegations very seriously, and all such complaints are vigorously investigated and addressed. We have comprehensive anti-discrimination and anti-harassment policies and training programs, and numerous avenues for employees to raise concerns, including a 24/7 hotline for employees to report complaints anonymously. We look forward to refuting these charges with the NLRB, however because this is an ongoing investigation, we have no further information to share at this time about these specific claims.”One GP spells out the risks for patients, and anxiety for health staff, when a patient in urgent need of hospital care ends up spending hours at a GP surgery – or their home – because no ambulance arrives to take them. “In the summer I visited a patient at home who was barely conscious. Their sats [Oxygen saturation levels] were fluctuating between the upper 70s and low 80s. It took five minutes for the 999 call I made to be answered and then another 45 minutes for the ambulance to turn up. The situation is terrifying. “Sadly that wasn’t an isolated experience. A few weeks later a patient came into the surgery with cardiac-sounding chest pain. When that happens generally the concern is that the patient may be having a heart attack. Again I was holding on the 999 line, waiting minutes for an answer. There was a wait of almost an hour before the paramedics arrived. “In this instance, there were other health professionals around who could help if needed and also access to equipment should the situation have suddenly deteriorated, such as oxygen and an automated defibrillator, in case someone ends up with low oxygen levels or in cardiac arrest. I won’t speculate as to whether this particular patient could have died. But if a person has features of cardiac-sounding chest pain, there is the potential for deterioration and maybe cardiac arrest. “My overriding feeling during that hour-long wait was shock that again there was a wait for the 999 call to be answered and a delay for help to arrive. It was at this point that it occurred to me that maybe the delays were becoming more commonplace, rather than being a one-off occurrence. “I think back to my experience with the unwell patient on the home visit. I had no access to oxygen, no defibrillator. I was watching, waiting. I recall adjusting the oxygen saturation probe. If this clinical scenario had been playing out in a hospital, with the patient displaying those vital signs, a crash call would have been put out for a patient in peri-arrest. “If this is frightening for a doctor, I can only imagine how helpless a non-medically trained friend or relative would feel and how frightening it must be for them. “Increasingly, there are stories about relatives calling for an ambulance because an elderly relative has fallen and broken their hip and ended up waiting as much as 12 hours for help to arrive. Aside from the indignity, and the pain that must be experienced, the complications of being on the floor for that long start to stack up: dehydration, pressure sores, pneumonia, hypothermia, the consequences of muscle breakdown on the kidneys. “Although the initial injury may not be life-threatening, the consequences of being on the floor for so long can end up being catastrophic for an elderly person. I wonder how the prime minister or the health secretary would feel if they found themselves in a similar situation with a loved one? “The ambulance service are doing their absolute best in wretched circumstances, as is everyone who works in the NHS. How can you reconcile the emotional impact on paramedic teams that are increasingly finding themselves in situations where time has run out? Being held up outside A&amp;Es, waiting to hand over, but unable to because there is nowhere for the patient to go. “Given that the system was cracking in the summer and by October every ambulance service was at the highest level of alert, I fear what is to come this winter.” As told to Denis Campbell. The GP asked to remain anonymousChinese officials are operating in foreign countries to get Uyghurs deported back to China by creating visa problems and coercing them into becoming informants, evidence given to the international criminal court alleges. The submission by Uyghur representatives is the third attempt to have the ICC investigate Chinese authorities for alleged crimes against humanity and genocide, including the use of forced deportations of Uyghurs back to China. Previous complaints were rejected by the court, which was set up to deliver justice for the world’s worst crimes, as China was not a signatory and is outside its jurisdiction. The ICC left the case open and asked for further evidence. Thursday’s brief was submitted on behalf of the self-proclaimed East Turkistan government in exile and the East Turkistan National Awakening Movement, which said the new evidence met the ICC’s threshold and included “insider witness testimony” from Uyghurs who had been pressured or forced into working with Chinese officials to have Uyghurs deported from Tajikistan, which is an ICC state party. “They can give evidence directly to the ICC about how [Chinese officials] would focus their strategies on coming into Tajikistan and getting Uyghurs detained, arrested and deported out,” said the lead lawyer for the group, Rodney Dixon QC. “So it’s first-hand testimony from witnesses who are now accessible to the ICC to be interviewed, about how Chinese officers are operating on Tajikistan soil.” Witnesses in Tajikistan accused officials of threatening people to get them to work with them or be informers, and creating “problems with visas and paperwork”. “They created a legal problem, and then used that to arrest people and ship them out in small numbers so it’s not noticeable,” said Dixon, adding that family members of people who tried to speak out were also targeted. The group said one witness had provided “cogent evidence” of officials running tactics from late 2016 in Kyrgyzstan, including visa iproblems, Uyghurs receiving phone calls from relatives in China “begging them to go back”, and local police cooperating with Chinese consulate requests to take Uyghurs to the border where they were then deported by Chinese agents. “This is very strong cogent evidence the ICC has access to. It’s not theoretical. They can investigate this,” said Dixon. The Uyghurs are a predominantly Muslim Turkic-speaking ethnic group, primarily from China’s north-western region of Xinjiang, who have been subjected to religious and ethnic persecution by Chinese authorities. About 1-1.5 million Uyghur are estimated to live overseas as a diaspora. The complainants said the new evidence, gathered through on-the-ground interviews in central Asia and Turkey, revealed that the Uyghur population in Tajikistan decreased by more than 85% and in Kyrgyzstan by 87% as a result of forced deportations. The previous submission had included accounts of deportations in Tajikistan, but was dismissed because the ICC found that most of the crimes alleged appeared to have been committed by Chinese nationals in China. It said in its annual report at the time that there was “no basis to proceed” on separate claims of forced deportations from Tajikistan and Cambodia, despite both countries being ICC members and therefore within its jurisdiction. “The office observes that while the transfers of persons from Cambodia and Tajikistan to China appear to raise concerns with respect to their conformity with national and international law, including international human rights law and international refugee law, it does not appear that such conduct would amount to the crime against humanity,” the report said. In the time since the first submission, international condemnation of China’s human rights abuses in Xinjiang has escalated. In January the US state department formally declared the treatment of Uyghurs to be an attempted genocide, soon followed by similar motions passed in the parliaments of Canada and the Netherlands. Legal and human rights groups have found Chinese authorities to be committing crimes against humanity and breaching every article of the UN’s genocide convention. Beijing rejects all accusations and says its policies, including the mass detention network it says includes vocational training centres, are anti-terrorism or anti-poverty efforts. The ICC is not obliged to consider complaints submitted to the prosecutor, which can independently decide which cases to submit to ICC judges. “It has been over a year since our lawyers first submitted this complaint to the ICC and in that time so much evidence has been gathered to show that the ICC does have the jurisdiction to open an investigation,” said Salih Hudayar, the prime minister of the East Turkistan government in exile. “We are really hoping that the prosecutor will see all this evidence and decide to open the case. Our people need justice and they need it now before it is too late.”Marcus Rashford is the star of a new Aldi Christmas TV advert styled on Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol, as the company pledged to donate 1.8m meals to families over the festive period. The England footballer lends his voice to an anthropomorphic root vegetable Marcus Radishford in the animated video, which tells the story of Ebanana Scrooge, a miserable banana who is not a fan of Christmas. Long-term Aldi Christmas mascot Kevin the Carrot returns to remind the banana of the spirit of Christmas. During their tour of the joys of Christmas, the pair encounter Radishford, and by the end of the ad, the changed banana is spreading his own positive goodwill. It ends with the narrator, actor Jim Broadbent, saying: “The moral of the story? The answer you’ll find … for you to be happy, you need to be kind.” Aldi works with Neighbourly, which links businesses to charitable organisations in local communities, to donate its surplus food to local causes. Rashford was awarded an MBE by the Duke of Cambridge this week for his campaign to support vulnerable children. The 24-year-old footballer was recognised for his efforts last summer to ensure no child in need went hungry, which resulted in the government changing policy over its free school meals vouchers during lockdown. He said: “As a family, we relied on the local food bank to get our Christmas dinner. To this day, I remember queueing outside that building with mum, mum feeling embarrassed that she might be recognised … For many children in situations like mine growing up, there is very little expectation around this time of year; add the impact of the pandemic and the very least they deserve is a Christmas dinner.” Sharing the ad on his Twitter page, Rashford wrote: “Well done @AldiUK. This is much bigger than a Christmas ad ( …) might not be Oscar-worthy but glad I could play my part.” Aldi UK’s marketing director, Sean McGinty, said: “Christmas is a time for hope, and we’re privileged to be working with Marcus, who is one of the most inspirational young people in the UK, having done so much in the past 18 months to help provide free school meals for children. “At the same time, it wouldn’t be the festive season without Kevin the Carrot on our TV screens, and we’re thrilled to be bringing him back for the sixth year for his many fans, in what we think is his best Yuletide performance yet.”Police in Sicily are investigating whether human remains found in a secluded cave on Mount Etna are those of a journalist who disappeared more than 50 years ago. The remains found on Tuesday night are of a man believed to have died between the 1970s and early 1990s. Police said the man was believed to have been at least 50, was 1.7 metres (5ft 7ins) tall and had “congenital malformations to his nose and mouth”. He had been wearing long dark trousers, a woollen jumper, a striped shirt and black tie. A bobbled woollen hat and dark green raincoat were found alongside the remains, as were some coins in the old Italian currency, lira, an Omega watch, a comb with its case and size 41 Pivetta shoes. The discovery was made by an officer with Catania’s finance police and his alpine rescue dog during a training exercise in the area. “The area is very isolated, we go there periodically to do our training,” Lt Col Massimiliano Pacetto said. “It was thanks to the sniffer dog that the remains were found.” Pacetto compared the mystery – which the Italian press have nicknamed “the man of Etna” – to something one might read in a book by the late Inspector Montalbano author, Andrea Camilleri. “I’ve never experienced anything of the kind,” he said. “At the moment all theories are valid and nothing is being excluded.” Pacetto said the cave on Europe’s tallest active volcano was extremely difficult to access, and whether the man entered it voluntarily or by force, he may not have been able to escape. According to initial investigations, it did not appear that the man had suffered a violent death. Police have received several calls from the public since the discovery, including from the daughter of Mauro De Mauro, a 49-year-old investigative journalist who disappeared in Palermo in September 1970 and whose body has never been found. Franca De Mauro contacted police after reading that the remains had malformations to the mouth and nose, which her father had because of an injury sustained during the second world war. Investigations into his disappearance followed several different leads, one being that De Mauro was kidnapped and killed by the Cosa Nostra mafia owing to him knowing the truth about the alleged assassination of ENI boss, Enrico Mattei. “De Mauro is one of the theories we are looking into, and also other people who are missing for reasons that might be linked to criminality,” said Pacetto. “But I repeat, nothing at this stage is being excluded.”It’s become an annual TV moment and one of the staples of the holiday season, but this year’s John Lewis Christmas advert is at the centre of a row after a little-known band accused the company of copying their arrangement for its feature song. John Lewis has denied all allegations that it lifted the arrangement to Philip Oakey and Georgio Moroder’s 1985 electro-pop classic Together in Electric Dreams, the song featured in its new advert Unexpected Guest, from the alt-folk husband and wife duo, the Portraits. The ad tells the story of a friendship between a boy and an alien visitor, set to a soundtrack of a slowed down version of Together in Electric Dreams, with vocals by 20-year-old singer Lola Young. According to betting firm William Hill, the track is 20-1 in the race to be the UK Christmas No 1. But a similar version of the song was released by the Portraits – Jeremy and Lorraine Millington – as a charity single last Christmas. Theirs was a slowed down, pensive arrangement also using female vocals (the couple’s teenage daughter) and a choir to highlight “the loss and separation and coming together” of the pandemic. The Portraits song was featured on BBC radio and ITV’s This Morning, and its video compiled photographs of those lost during the pandemic. The group say they contacted John Lewis in March 2021 to ask if their arrangement of Together in Electric Dreams would work for the company’s Christmas advert, but received no response. “We sent them a lovely letter giving all the background to the song with an audio file and asked if they would be interested in using it for their Christmas advert, but we never got a reply,” Lorraine Millington told the Guardian. In a post on Facebook, the Portraits added: “Our version was a fundraising song aimed at supporting bereavement and mental health organisations that have needed the money more than ever during the pandemic … We had a (perhaps naive) dream that we could use a future ad by the company with our soundtrack linked to it to maximise the funds going to those charities. But instead, John Lewis went with the idea and produced a version borrowing the ‘feeling’ and many elements of the arrangement of our version, without even letting us know they were planning to do so.” John Lewis said the person the Portraits addressed their email to left the business in June and was not involved in this year’s Christmas ad campaign. A spokesperson said: “There’s no substance to the claims … The creation of advertising and music is carried out solely by our agency and we are unable to read or consider ideas from other external or internal sources.” While the company maintains that many covers of the original version of Together in Electric Dreams are in the public domain, it’s an uncanny example of creative ideas striking different people within a year of each other. The Millingtons said they don’t want to get into an argument with John Lewis but feel that “justice should be done”. They have asked that the company “make a donation to both of the charities and acknowledge our work”. It’s not the first time John Lewis has been accused of borrowing ideas from elsewhere. In 2017, former children’s laureate Chris Riddell accused the company of “help[ing] themselves” to the story from his picture book about a friendly blue monster who appeared similar to the one in their Christmas advert. The Portraits, meanwhile, are now releasing a follow-up Christmas single, a cover in a very similar orchestral and choral style, this time of Ed Sheeran’s Photograph.Britain’s hopes to grab a slice of the fast-growing market for electric vehicle batteries have been dealt a blow after one of the UK’s biggest chemicals companies said it would give up on developing the technology. Johnson Matthey, a member of the FTSE 100, announced plans on Thursday to exit the battery materials business because it is too far behind rivals who are already making batteries at gigantic scale. The shares plunged 17% on Thursday to their lowest level since December, wiping more than £900m off the company’s market value as it also announced that the chief executive would step aside. To add to its difficulties, supply chain shortages hitting the automotive industry mean that profits will be at the lower end of expectations. Johnson Matthey makes most of its money from producing catalytic converters to clean exhaust emissions from petrol and diesel cars. However, impending bans on internal combustion engines in the UK and around the world have forced the company and many other suppliers to find new ways of making money. Developing lithium-ion batteries with carefully fine-tuned chemistries seemed an obvious choice, and the company had been on track to start building a new factory in Finland to build as many as 300,000 automotive batteries a year. It could now be forced to write down £340m in assets in that business, which employs 430 people. It will attempt to sell all or parts of the unit, although it noted it had found the required investments too expensive to compete with rivals. Johnson Matthey’s decision will also alarm the broader UK industry. Establishing a supply of batteries from the UK or EU is seen as vital to replacing 90,000 British car industry jobs reliant on internal combustion. “From a UK perspective it’s not good news,” said one senior industry source. “We would like to have some champions here who know what they’re doing.” The battery industry is dominated by Asian companies such as China’s Contemporary Amperex Technology (CATL) and BYD, South Korea’s LG Chem and Samsung, and Japan’s Panasonic. Just eight Asian companies control 58% of global battery supply, according to Benchmark Minerals, a data company. Electric car projects involving Johnson Matthey have received at least £14.4m in British government funding, ranging from lithium air battery chemistry that could have increased energy density dramatically to working out how to power air conditioning without using waste heat from internal combustion engines. Johnson Matthey will instead focus its investment on projects involving hydrogen and decarbonising chemical production. That includes work on cathodes used in the electrolysers that break down water into “green” hydrogen, as well as other technology for producing “blue” hydrogen made from fossil fuel gas paired with mostly untested carbon capture and storage. The company’s hydrogen and decarbonisation were also at an early stage, wrote Charlie Bentley, an analyst at Jefferies, a US investment bank, in a note to clients. Johnson Matthey had an “EU diesel car catalyst franchise that is going to zero”, Bentley said. “Its ability to be a supplier to the automotive chain over the longer term remains a key long-term question for the business.” Robert MacLeod, Johnson Matthey’s chief executive, said: “While the testing of our eLNO battery materials with customers is going well, the marketplace is rapidly evolving with increasing commoditisation and lower returns. We have concluded that we will not achieve the returns necessary to justify further investment.” MacLeod’s retirement on Thursday means a strategic review of the whole business is likely. He will be replaced in March by Liam Condon, an executive at the German chemicals company Bayer.A lobster fisherman in Maine has caught an incredibly rare, one in a 100m “cotton candy” lobster that he has called Haddie and has now saved from being put in a cooking pot. In a Facebook post, Get Maine Lobster, a seafood company, said Bill Coppersmith found the rare cotton candy lobster during a recent day of fishing. Its purplish, blue-mottled coloring is incredibly rare. “The odds of a cotton candy lobster being caught is one in 100m! Because of this, we want to preserve her,” the company said. Appealing for interested aquariums to get in touch, the company added: “Currently, Haddie is hanging out in our tank at the wharf. We want to make sure she lives the rest of her life in safety and comfort since rare colored lobsters have a harder time surviving in the wild.” Haddie is the name of Coppersmith’s granddaughter.If you weren’t an actor and you had to work in the film industry, what would you like to do? avishagfink I would like to be a ceramicist. I still want to be a ceramicist while also being an actor. A functional ceramicist. My grandmother was a sculptural ceramicist and she was very brilliant, but I’d like to make plates and pots and mugs. I’m a big fan of Ian Godfrey and I’m very fortunate to have a couple of his pieces. Lucie Rie and Hans Coper I really like; Richard Batterham, very much. I’m really into the work of Sara Flynn and also of Akiko Hirai, who’s a really amazing Japanese ceramicist who makes moon jars: half-ceramic, half-porcelain, with sort of trunks coming out with them. They’re extraordinary. Mothering Sunday is about survivor’s guilt. Is that a remote concept for lots of people these days? How did you tap into it? bumble1 I don’t know if it’s a remote concept; I imagine it’s very real for many people in countries that are still suffering from war and famine. In terms of tapping into it, I suppose in the same way as anything else: you do a lot of reading. I don’t know that the film necessarily is about survivor guilt. But in the time between the first and second world wars, I think, for young men who were left behind, there must have been a sense of this generation who were wiped out [in the first world war]. What that did to the male psyche – and the national psyche … Did you find returning to intimate work such as Romeo &amp; Juliet difficult after the pandemic? Alexxe Everyone is wearing masks and you take them off just before you do your scene and you’re tested all the time and keep apart from each other. For a lot of the crew, who have to carry extremely heavy equipment and do extremely hard work, doing that with a mask on is probably quite frustrating and difficult. But apart from that it’s pretty much just the same as filming normally: very fun and there’s lots of nice people. We all just felt so lucky to have been working at that point. There wasn’t an awful lot going on. Everyone was just very happy to be there and getting paid and doing their job. You feature in Mothering Sunday alongside Olivia Colman [with whom he co-starred in The Crown]. What have you learned from her? And from Bill Nighy [with whom O’Connor worked on Hope Gap and Emma]? bumble1 Loads. I feel like I’ve learned more about Olivia as a kind-hearted friend than anything else. She’s an extraordinary actor and whenever I get to do anything with her I’m just like a sponge. I still don’t really understand how she does it. But how she is as a person is even more spectacular. And I learned most from that, I think. I would say the same thing about Bill. He’s one of the greatest people I know and he is a very loyal friend and has a great mind. He’s obviously a terrific actor and I learned lots from him, but he’s similar to Olivia in the sense that some of the most brilliant lessons I’ve learned in life have been from seeing how he goes about in the business. What advice would you give to your 21-year-old self? RubyMatthews32 My advice would probably be: find a therapist. I’m a great believer that therapy is the best thing you can do as an act of kindness to yourself. It’s just such a brilliant investigation into your psyche and your health. Therapy is just great work, a great way of accessing an understanding of brains and all personalities and all history. I just feel like it’s one of the greatest things I’ve ever done. Who are your dream collaborators? Sanktiasha There are so many. I’d love to work with my very great friend Francis Lee [the director of God’s Own Country] again. Alice Rohrwacher. Luca Guadagnino. Christopher Nolan. Noah Baumbach. Jane Campion. Do you watch your own films or TV shows? Angymorton I never used to, only because I would see myself and be horrified and I wouldn’t be able to judge the work in a reasonable manner at all. All I’d see were the problems and the insecurities. But I’ve got better at it and I think it’s really important to be able to celebrate your friends and your colleagues. So I do watch stuff now, but I will never really watch it more than once. And I will kind of squint when I’m on screen. I noticed that you’re a bit of a dandy at premieres and events. Do you have any style heroes? MartGray Tilda Swinton is very stylish. So maybe her. When I was younger, I would basically search for people like Bob Dylan or Pete Doherty and see what they were wearing. I was so mainstream; I would open up a music magazine and just copy what everyone else was wearing. Now, I just think it’s quite fun dressing up. Normally, I’m quite relaxed and chilled, but there is something kind of theatrical about red carpets. There’s an aspect of having to play a role. You don’t really want to give too much of yourself, but you are on show and it is part of your job. So putting on a mask or a costume is quite helpful to slightly remove yourself from things. What’s something odd, interesting or unexpected you can tell us about Cheltenham and growing up there? EditorialJoe There’s a cheese-rolling competition held every year on Cooper’s Hill, which is in Cheltenham, though people from Gloucester will argue it’s in Gloucestershire. A big wheel of cheese is rolled down this steep hill – and when I say steep, it’s so steep that people get very badly injured. People launch themselves off the hill after it and whoever gets down first wins the cheese. It’s so quirky and ridiculous and English. I know there was a time when it was illegal and I think people still did it anyway. When I was a kid, I thought: I’d love to do that, because it must just feel like rolling down a hill. But then I went to it once and there’s no chance. It is so terrifying. People who take it seriously end up with broken arms, ribs, shoulders. The less hardcore people will go down on their bums and even they get into trouble. It’s so dangerous, but I absolutely love it and it’s something I’m very proud of. What film have you seen recently that moved you or affected you in some way? If not a film, then anything at all. Sanktiasha I was very lucky to see a film that’s not come out yet called Lamb, which has Noomi Rapace in it. I found it hilarious, tragic and scary, all in one film, which is pretty miraculous. I read a lot of gardening books. I was reading something recently about growing things that are specifically localised, about planting things that are relevant to and will grow in your area, as opposed to going into the garden centre, buying some plants and sticking them in your soil. It’s more about the origins of seeds and stuff like that. Do plants move me? Yeah. A hundred per cent. I find trees incredibly moving. This time of year is the best time to go to the Westonbirt arboretum, quite near Cheltenham. The colours are just extraordinary; I find that an extremely emotional place. There’s also a tree in Cheltenham that is my favourite. I would say to my mum and dad: “That’s my tree. It’s the most important tree to me and only me. I’m the only one that finds it important.” And then, about three years ago, I went back to visit my family and we went on the same walk to the top of this hill, where the tree is very windswept and bent over – it looks like its hair is blowing out. It’s kind of sculptural. And they’d built a bench around it with about 500 plaques for people who have their ashes spread beneath. So it turns out it was everyone’s tree. My favourite trees are rowans, because of the beautiful, bright-red berries, and monkey puzzles. I actually don’t like them to look at very much, but they seem sort of sturdy and grounded, but also quite scraggly. I identify with that. I think sometimes I feel quite grounded, but inside the wind is blowing me and I’m sort of wobbling. • Mothering Sunday is released on 12 NovemberThe British Museum’s landmark show Peru: A Journey in Time has been a decade in the making and enables the museum to foreground objects from its own collections and present them alongside treasures from Peru seen for the first time in the UK. Its opening coincides with the 200th anniversary of Peru declaring its independence from Spain, with the UK being one of the first countries to recognise the new nation’s sovereignty. But the neatness of this chronology is perhaps, to a western audience, almost the only familiar aspect of a show that consistently challenges the most basic notions of how the world works and how it can, and should, be lived in. Not the least of these challenges is to the concept of time itself. The subtitle of the exhibition is both a prosaic description of a chronological examination of many different cultures over 3,500 years, but also an introduction to how Andean time was experienced. “We generally think that we’re in the present, the past is behind us and the future is ahead of us,” explains its co-curator Jago Cooper. “Whereas in Andean societies, the past, present and future are parallel lines happening contemporaneously. So the past isn’t dead, it’s happening at the same time as the present, which can therefore change it. And it is by accepting the interrelationship between the past and present that you can best plan for the future.” Other points of divergence in ancient (pre-Columbus) Peru include a lack of a script-based writing tradition or a system of monetary exchange. “There is also the extreme diversity of the environment,” explains Cooper’s fellow curator, Cecilia Pardo. “Negotiating life on the Pacific coast, or in arid deserts, the high Andes or the rainforest all required deeply sophisticated and sustainable innovation and technologies that prompted unique ways of societies being successful.” Evidence of this success comes in a wide range of stunning artefacts on display: from remarkably well preserved textiles, some of them more than 2,000 years old, to wooden sculptures that cast a new light on ritual killings, extensive collections of ceramics and intricate uses of precious metals. With the economic underpinning of societies not reliant on the arbitrary valuation of currency, it was systems of reciprocal obligation that largely powered progress and production. “People had an obligation to maintain and sustain each other and the world around them,” says Cooper. “That had profound implications for the way resources were managed and also how things were made. Textiles and other small items were made communally but large structures were also built communally and voluntarily, and not by slave labour as in other parts of the world.” And without a written culture, the objects themselves acquired a heightened importance as carriers of cultural knowledge, ideas and beliefs. Many of the pieces in the show have survived as a result of them being funerary offerings preserved in sealed graves, and they cast light on belief systems and practices. But, as Cooper reminds us, at the heart of the show is an acknowledgment that this is a culture in which the past is alive and only created in the present. There is so much more to learn, adds Pardo: “It is likely that fewer than 10% of potential sites have been excavated in Peru. Many more digs are under way with both Peruvian and foreign archaeologists studying different aspects of this very long story. This exhibition offers a wonderful snapshot of what has been found and what we know now, but the curators are both humble and excited about what the future might bring. The remarkable history of these cultures is still being made.” Out of the past: four ancient Peruvian artefacts Large red mantle This funerary blanket is one of the oldest artefacts in the exhibition and was used by the Nasca people who traditionally buried their dead in a sitting position, wrapped in layers of cloth. The repeated figure, wearing feline masks and carrying human heads, is embroidered on to the cloth and is probably a representation of an ancestor who would take care of the deceased in the afterlife. The burial would have taken place in the arid deserts of southern Peru and the lack of humidity has allowed the survival of the textile for close to 2,000 years. Bound prisoner A wooden sculpture found on an island off the coast of Peru and preserved in layers of guano. It depicts a high-ranking figure, bound by rope, before his ritual execution. There was comparatively little warfare in ancient Peru but instead more ritualised confrontations – resulting in far lower levels of bloodshed than in European conflicts of the era. These would end with the capture of prisoners and the public execution of representatives of the defeated side. These deaths, which perversely honoured the importance of human life as opposed to generalised slaughter on the battlefield, would often also be recorded in public murals. Vessel of a man and woman copulating (pictured top) This ceramic stirrup pot depicting a couple having sex – her tattoos indicate it was made towards the end of the Nasca period, which finished in AD800AD – would have been very inefficient for carrying liquid and was not made for daily use. Instead, it was a funeral offering, which are often found in separate pieces within the grave. The body and the stirrup spout were in different locations, indicating it had been purposely broken during a ceremony before the grave was closed. The depiction of women in ceramics didn’t begin until some time after AD400, and usually indicated a connection to fertility. Earplug A decorative plate, about 1,000 years old and measuring more than 10cm. This would be attached through the ear lobe by a large spool and worn as illustrated. It is made of wood, metal, mother of pearl and other precious shells. The delicacy of the inlay work and the diversity of the materials used reveals it as the product of a sophisticated and wealthy society. The red material, spondylus, a spiny bivalve known as the thorny oyster, was particularly valued and as well as being used for decorative purposes was also ground into powder and scattered on the ground to create something analogous to a red carpet for dignitaries. Peru: A Journey in Time is at the British Museum, WC1, to 20 FebruaryIn a stirring speech at the opening of the Cop26 world leaders summit, Mia Mottley, prime minister of Barbados, asked: “When will leaders lead?” The problem she identified is that “both ambition and needed faces are not present in Glasgow”. The over-representation of white men in climate change decision-making processes is stifling for both the imagination and the implementation of transformative solutions. Globally, only 26 women serve as heads of government and state. At the last Cop summit, held in 2019, approximately 80% or 155 of the 196 heads of delegation were men. Progress has been made to increase women’s participation in Cop events, but gender parity in climate leadership is estimated to be achieved only in 2068. The global climate change agenda has met with not only political inaction, but resistance in the form of populist denialism that threatens to derail or undo existing efforts. For example, studies on “conservative white males” in the US and Norway have highlighted the connections between climate change denialism, patriarchal beliefs and rightwing nationalism. People who directly benefit from the status quo are more likely to feel threatened by the kind of political, economic and societal overhaul that solutions to climate change require. Rather than an aberration, Donald Trump’s withdrawal in 2020 from the Paris agreement is arguably the conservative white male effect writ large. The United Nations framework convention on climate change (UNFCCC) came into force in 1994. Since then, the convention has generated complex global governance processes, institutions and actors, with gender equality now widely recognised as core to the climate change agenda. The first reference to gender balance appeared in the outcome document of Cop7 in 2001. By Cop25 in 2019, states had agreed to strengthen efforts toward gender-responsive climate action. However, women are still underrepresented in climate change negotiations, as shown in a UNFCCC secretariat report presented at Cop26. As well as finding that women remain in the minority and are less likely to lead a government delegation, it also analysed speaking times at selected Cop25 meetings to provide insights on active participation. It found that “men were overrepresented in terms of presence and tended to speak more than women”. Women tend to do better in terms of representation and participation in the civil society sector. Research shows that “women occupy a larger share of NGO representatives to each Cop than their government delegate counterparts”. Allowing civil society groups to play a direct role in climate negotiations creates space for diverse perspectives and forms of expertise. This is important because when decision-making processes incorporate gender perspectives, and meaningful participation by women, solutions are often more comprehensive and durable. One study found female representation in national parliaments across 91 countries correlates with more stringent climate change policies and lower carbon emissions. This reinforces evidence that gender equality improves societal outcomes in relation to the environment and peace-building efforts. The point here is not that female leaders are necessarily naturally pro-environment, but rather that female participation indicates a better quality of political representation. Rethinking who leads us in addressing the climate crisis, and how, requires recognition of expertise and leadership from the most climate-affected parts of Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific. Environmental factors already limit the participation of people from these regions. Emerging accounts show female community leaders struggle to participate in climate activism due to weather, distance and transport needs in addition to their care responsibilities. Cop26 is likely to be the most exclusionary summit yet given the compounding economic costs and visa restrictions for participants from the global south. We cannot afford for decision-making spaces to be closed off to women and global south voices at the time we need their participation the most. I have found in my own recent research that the lack of diversity at UN climate summits is both a cause and effect of the “securitisation” and “scientisation” of climate change. Dr Sherilyn MacGregor of the University of Manchester argues that climate change has been represented both as a scientific problem and as a threat to security. Science and security have been traditionally male domains, where knowledge production and validation have been seen as the territory of a very narrow and male-centric set of “knowers”. For instance, the participation of female scientists in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) – the authoritative international body responsible for assessment on all scientific information relating to climate change – has gradually increased but remains low, with women making up just 32% of authors of a recent report. Unless the way our global leaders frame the climate crisis changes, we will continue to force women’s participation to fit within very rigid sets of expertise, procedures and diplomatic styles that do not lend themselves to creating radical global and systemic change. And we will continue to witness global leaders lagging far behind the monumental task of ensuring humanity’s survival. Dr Maria Tanyag is a research fellow and lecturer in international relations at the Australian National UniversityOn Wednesday, the US labor department announced that the consumer price index – a basket of products ranging from gasoline and health care to groceries and rents – rose 6.2% from a year ago. That’s the nation’s highest annual inflation rate since November 1990. Republicans are hammering Biden and Democratic lawmakers over inflation – and attacking his economic stimulus plans as wrongheaded. “This will be a winter of high gas prices, shortages and inflation because far left lunatics control our government,” Marco Rubio, the Republican senator from Florida posted on Twitter Thursday. A major reason for price rises is supply bottlenecks, as Jerome Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, has pointed out. He believes they’re temporary, and he’s probably right. But there’s a deeper structural reason for inflation, one that appears to be growing worse: the economic concentration of the American economy in the hands of a relative few corporate giants with the power to raise prices. If markets were competitive, companies would keep their prices down in order to prevent competitors from grabbing away customers. But they’re raising prices even as they rake in record profits. How can this be? They have so much market power they can raise prices with impunity. Viewed this way, the underlying problem isn’t inflation per se. It’s lack of competition. Corporations are using the excuse of inflation to raise prices and make fatter profits. In April, Procter &amp; Gamble announced it would start charging more for consumer staples ranging from diapers to toilet paper, citing “rising costs for raw materials, such as resin and pulp, and higher expenses to transport goods”. But P&amp;G is making huge profits. In the quarter ending 30 September, after some of its price increases went into effect, it reported a whopping 24.7% profit margin. It even spent $3bn during the quarter buying its own stock. It could raise prices and rake in more money because P&amp;G faces almost no competition. The lion’s share of the market for diapers, to take one example, is controlled by just two companies – P&amp;G and Kimberly-Clark – which roughly coordinate their prices and production. It was hardly a coincidence that Kimberly-Clark announced price increases similar to P&amp;Gs at the same time P&amp;G announced its own price increases. Or consider another consumer product duopoly – PepsiCo (the parent company of Frito-Lay, Gatorade, Quaker, Tropicana, and other brands), and Coca-Cola. In April, PepsiCo announced it was increasing prices, blaming “higher costs for some ingredients, freight and labor”. Rubbish. The company didn’t have to raise prices. It recorded $3bn in operating profits through September. If PepsiCo faced tough competition, it could never have gotten away with this. But it doesn’t. To the contrary, it appears to have colluded with Coca-Cola – which, oddly, announced price increases at about the same time as PepsiCo, and has increased its profit margins to 28.9%. You can see a similar pattern in energy prices. If energy markets were competitive, producers would have quickly ramped up production to create more supply, once it became clear that demand was growing. But they didn’t. Why not? Industry experts say oil and gas companies saw bigger money in letting prices run higher before producing more supply. They can get away with this because big oil and gas producers don’t operate in a competitive market. They can manipulate supply by coordinating among themselves. In sum, inflation isn’t driving most of these price increases. Corporate power is driving them. Since the 1980s, when the US government all but abandoned antitrust enforcement, two-thirds of all American industries have become more concentrated. Monsanto now sets the prices for most of the nation’s seed corn. The government green-lighted Wall Street’s consolidation into five giant banks, of which JP Morgan is the largest. Airlines have merged from 12 in 1980 to four today, which now control 80% of domestic seating capacity. Boeing and McDonnell Douglas have merged, leaving the US with just one large producer of civilian aircraft: Boeing. Three giant cable companies dominate broadband: Comcast, AT&amp;T and Verizon. A handful of drug companies control the pharmaceutical industry: Pfizer, Eli Lilly, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Merck. All this spells corporate power to raise prices. So what’s the appropriate response to the latest round of inflation? The Federal Reserve has signaled it won’t raise interest rates for the time being, believing that the inflation is being driven by temporary supply bottlenecks. Meanwhile, Biden administration officials have been consulting with the oil industry in an effort to stem rising gas prices, trying to make it simpler to issue commercial driver’s licenses (to help reduce the shortage of truck drivers), and seeking to unclog overcrowded container ports. But none of this responds to the deeper structural issue – of which price inflation is a symptom: the increasing consolidation of the economy in a relative handful of big corporations with enough power to raise prices and increase profits. This structural problem is amenable to only one thing: the aggressive use of antitrust law. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comWriter, campaigner and model Munroe Bergdorf and Drag Race UK finalist turned fashion week favourite Tayce are the impossibly glamorous co-hosts of Queerpiphany (MTV), a short, sweet and bingeable new series in which British LGBTQ+ celebrities discuss the pop culture moments that influenced their queer identities. Across six bite-size episodes, the pair are joined by DJ Nick Grimshaw, singer-songwriter Becky Hill, writer Florence Given, drag queen Tia Kofi, broadcaster Riyadh Khalaf and playwright Travis Alabanza. For Grimshaw, it was the documentary In Bed With Madonna that was his lightbulb moment, in particular “the representation of daily gay life” provided by her dancers. In Hill’s case, she reflects on the lesbian storyline between Willow and Tara in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, and the impact of seeing lesbian representation that was more romantic than overtly sexual. As well as dissecting the personal impact of these moments, guests also plan a fictional party in honour of their Queerpiphany: Khalaf would invite Michelle Obama and Davina McCall to a soiree dedicated to Lady Gaga. The histories that emerge – from Madonna’s Aids advocacy to personal stories of sneaking into gay clubs – stir nostalgia and provide insights into what makes each guest tick, while also alluding to wider themes. Khalaf describes the process of explaining to his father why Gaga’s Monster Ball tour was such an important experience for him, while also trying not to inadvertently disclose his queerness, highlighting the energy-sapping self-editing that the closet demands. It’s something that Hill is also cognisant of as she reflects on the happiness she feels being able to openly define as queer. Even when the subject matter is heavy, the conversations remain upbeat and the vibe is proudly camp. Even the set design is dragged up, with ancient Greek pillars and giant pink lilies. Equally fabulous is the fashion: in one episode Bergdorf is a blushing bride in white feathers and lace, while in another, Tayce conjures a modern Anne Boleyn, complete with bedazzled headband and matching gown. The pair also make for charming and switched-on hosts who know when to interject and when to let their guests take the lead. Both score laughs with their quips and one-liners, and the conversations feel authentic, as if they’re happening over a vodka-Red-Bull in a hazy smoking area at the back of a gay club with a stranger who has become your best friend for the night. With the LGBTQ+ community as diverse as it is, there will always be experiences or perspectives that can’t be squeezed into six 10-minute episodes, but it was a shame to not see any trans women or darker-skinned black people in particular being interviewed. Diversity can always go further, especially on a show that celebrates representation. That said, with the British LGBTQ+ community feeling particularly embattled at present, media that is queer by design is much needed, and Queerpiphany is a dose of positivity that champions queer history at a time when the news cycle feels particularly bleak. Do the specific “a-ha” moments speak to all queer experiences? Absolutely not, as the LGBTQ+ community is way too broad to be captured comprehensively. But, at their heart, these “queerpiphanies”, and the euphoria of coming to understand yourself as a young queer person, speak to LGBTQ+ people of all ages and backgrounds. “The power of representation” may be a cliche these days, but the stories here show that seeing yourself reflected on screen can be truly profound. Queerpiphany premieres on MTV UK’s YouTube channel on 11 November at 7pm, with new episodes available on ThursdaysComedy audiences, we’re told, are too sensitive these days. Not so, says Alfie Brown: they’re righteous, which isn’t the same thing. True sensitivity would be openness to nuance, to the grey areas between the black-and-white pieties of our age. Step forward this 34-year-old contrarian, raging for a decade now against woolly thinking and moral squalor with the devilish twinkle of a man who absolves himself of neither. Sensitive Man is one of his best sets yet, a without-fear-or-favour grapple with our current moment that comes, if not to slaughter sacred cows, then to give them a little tenderising. The show is also a status update on the life of Alfie. We get bulletins from his family life with fellow comic Jessie Cave, whose characterisation here is hijacked by a devious running gag about the politics of performing other people’s accents. We get a splendid tirade about youth being wasted on the young, that finds Brown looking askance at complacent twentysomethings “ostentatiously waving around wads of time”. What a phrase! And there are more elsewhere, and more knotty thinking too, in a show whose material often feels fresh and under-explored. Sometimes that’s because it’s bespoke to Brown – like the routine about his relationship to Cave’s devoted fans. Sometimes it’s because Brown is taking on, as others might choose not to, the creeds of our present moment. One section interrogates the popularising of the term gaslighting. Another finds him infuriated at the cult (as he sees it) of male mental health and what Brown, bipolar himself, depicts as the devaluing of the currency of depression. Part of the thrill is how counter these routines run to right-thinking orthodoxy, without (to my mind) shading into the reactionary. It helps that Brown’s act-outs and image-making are so vivid. A further routine, about white privilege, threatens something equally provocative, then runs aground – although he later revives the idea to teasing effect. Imperfectly integrated into all this, a subplot about his need for the audience’s love, compounded by the Covid lockdown, feels tacked-on: vulnerable is not Brown’s most persuasive mode. Twisty and thoughtful social satirist, though: on this evidence, few do it better. At Soho theatre, London, until 13 NovemberNew Cop26 pledges announced on methane, coal, transport and deforestation could nudge the world 9% closer to a pathway that keeps heating to 1.5C, according to a study by the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition. Climate Action Tracker says the sectoral commitments announced in Glasgow represent potential cuts of 2.2 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide, which is equivalent to the emissions of Germany, Japan and the UK combined, or 20,000 fully loaded aircraft carriers. This is in addition to measures previously outlined in national climate plans. However, this is dependant on governments keeping their climate promises, which almost none have done until now, and it still leaves the world heading towards ever more dangerous levels of heating. Niklas Höhne of the NewClimate Institute – a partner of Climate Action Tracker – said the figures were low but could improve if more nations signed up. “It is not surprising that the effect of the Cop26 sectoral initiatives beyond national climate targets is initially small. These initiatives are designed for those that do not sign immediately. The pressure of being put on the spot will help to grow the membership of the initiatives and enhance the effect beyond national climate targets in the long run.” Many more modest projects have been agreed at Cop26, but the standout four initiatives and their potential impacts are: Glasgow leaders’ declaration on forests and land use So far 137 global leaders have signed up to a pledge “to halt and reverse forest loss and land degradation by 2030”, which was announced at the beginning of Cop26. Many signatories had already agreed to this goal in a similar earlier declaration in New York, but there were some important new signatories including Brazil and China. If this promise is kept, it would be one of the biggest achievements of Cop26. Climate Action Tracker estimates this initiative could reduce emissions by 1.1 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent, rising two or threefold if others sign up. However, there are grave doubts about the credibility of this declaration. Indonesia has already signalled a change of heart and Brazil is weakening rather than strengthening forest protection. The global methane pledge So far, 108 nations, including the US and the EU, have signed up to this initiative, which aims to reduce human-caused methane emissions by 30% between 2020 and 2030. That will require tighter controls on gas well and pipes, as well as actions on livestock and municipal landfills. Climate Action Tracker says these commitments are likely to reduce emissions by about 0.8 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. That figure will increase as more countries sign up. It does not include China’s plan, made on Thursday, to reduce its methane output. Global coal to clean power transition statement Forty-six nations have joined this initiative to phase out coal power at varying speeds. Signatories to clause 2 are committed to “transition away from unabated coal generation” in either the 2030s for major economies or 2040s for others. Clause 3 is a promise “to stop new construction for any planned coal plants which have not already achieved financial closure”. Climate Action Tracker says these actions are likely to reduce emissions by about 0.2 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent, which is far from on track for 1.5C, but they note that if all OECD nations and major coal users can be persuaded to sign up, then the impact could be 10 times higher. Declaration on accelerating the transition to 100% zero emission cars and vans At the time of Climate Action Tracker’s analysis, 22 countries had signed a pledge to reach a 100% share of sales of new cars and vans being zero emission by 2035 for leading markets and 2040 for other regions. Unfortunately, most of the major vehicle-manufacturing nations – Germany, Japan, the US, China, and France – are absent. As a result, the coalition estimates this initiative will reduce emissions by less than 0.1 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. If the missing nations later join, this could rise more than sevenfold.Xi Jinping’s grip on power has received a big boost after the ruling Communist party (CCP) passed a rare “historical resolution” praising the president’s “decisive significance” in the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. It is only the third resolution of its kind in the party’s 100-year history. The two previous resolutions were passed under Mao Zedong, who led the Communists to power in 1949, and Deng Xiaoping, whose reforms in the 1980s turned China into an economic powerhouse. The official summary of the resolution from the meeting said that under Xi’s leadership, China had “made historic achievements and undergone a historic transformation”. It praised Xi, Mao and Deng for leading the country to achieve “the tremendous transformation from standing up and growing prosperous to becoming strong”. Analysts said the resolution was designed to elevate Xi’s status to the level of Mao and Deng and to help secure his political future, after the party removed presidential term limits in 2018. “The party central committee called on the entire party, the entire army and people of all ethnic groups to unite more closely around the party central committee with comrade Xi Jinping as the core, to fully implement Xi Jinping’s new era of socialism with Chinese characteristics,” said a Xinhua readout of the meeting. The official summary – or communique – of the meeting said: “Establishing comrade Xi Jinping’s position as the core of the central committee as well as of the whole party … was of decisive significance in advancing toward the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” The summary also said that the party central committee finished “many major tasks that weren’t finished before and promoted historic achievements and historic changes in the cause of the party and the country”. The resolution was passed after a major shift of power dynamics at the top of the CCP in recent years, and was aimed at convincing party officials as well as the wider population about the progress made under Xi’s leadership, said Ling Li, an expert who studies the CCP at the University of Vienna “The resolution serves two purposes: first, it justifies the path to power of the winner of the power struggles by passing verdicts to those who lost; and second, it builds a case about the distinctive performance of the party under the winner,” she said. Yu Jie, a senior fellow on China at the London-based thinktank Chatham House, said Xi was not taking all the glory. “Instead, he admitted and recognised the foundation established by his predecessors in different periods,” Yu said. When term limits were removed, Chinese officials and experts said Xi might need more time to implement his agenda. “Don’t change pilot right after takeoff … [He] can reduce uncertainty for China, as the country enters a decisive period of development. I see no problem with that,” said one high-profile state broadcaster. Xi faces no obvious rivals, but critics say an attempt to stay in power has the potential to alienate younger party figures, who might see their chances for promotion diminished. Political scientists also point to the experience of other countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America, where long periods of one-person rule have resulted in a worsening of decision-making and poor economic performance. As well as confirming Xi’s strongman status and demonstrating the party’s supremacy, the document also told party members to “be absolutely certain that we make no disruptive mistakes on fundamental issues”. Those fundamental issues included party legitimacy, economic reform and opening up, and territorial integrity, said Yu. “It implies that China will only charter a path led by the party,” she said. The resolution comes as Beijing’s relationship with many western capitals is deteriorating over issues including the situations in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Xinjiang. The communique said the world was undergoing “great changes unseen in a century”, intertwined with the Covid pandemic. It admitted that, internally, China was facing an “extremely arduous task” in controlling Covid and developing its economy and society. Associated Press and Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportConcerns have been raised about a letter sent to thousands of asylum seekers in Glasgow advising them not to take part in policed protests during the Cop26 summit. The letter was sent by the private housing provider Mears, which has the Home Office contract to house asylum seekers in the city, the UK’s largest dispersal area. It warns recipients that there will be road closures, more visitors and an increased visibility of police officers in Glasgow during the conference. Describing the summit as “an exciting and busy time in our city”, the letter advises people to plan ahead when making journeys, continue to follow Covid guidelines and adds: “We would discourage you from taking part in any protest that may result in police presence.” Police have been present at all organised protests during Cop26 as a matter of course. Mears said the letter was intended to protect vulnerable service users who may not speak English well from getting unwittingly caught up in unsafe situations. On Saturday, more the 100,000 took part in the Climate Justice march, which Police Scotland described as “good-natured” with only 22 arrests. But Ruth Ann McCalla of the immigrants’ rights group More Glasgow said a number of asylum seekers had expressed concerns about the letter from Mears. “People felt quite threatened by it, like they were being told if they came out to join a march they would be penalised in some way, or it might cause problems for their application,” she said. Aamer Anwar, a leading Scottish human rights lawyer, said the instruction was “totally bizarre”. “It’s none of their [Mears’] business. It’s unacceptable that a group that deals with housing is giving advice on participating in protests. Glasgow is home to many asylum seekers who have fled countries where they did not have the right to protest,” he said. Kat Hobbs of the the Network for Police Monitoring said there was no reason someone with an insecure visa status should have their right to protest threatened. “For Mears Group to ‘discourage’ people, many of whom are climate refugees, from joining the Cop26 climate justice protests is outrageous,” she said. A Mears spokesperson said: “We wrote to all service users with practical advice about arrangements during Cop26 including advice to avoid protests where a police presence is involved, so as not to be in a situation that could become difficult or unsafe. “It is important to recognise the context of this advice, which is that our service users include many vulnerable people and many who do not speak English well, while being in the centre of the city at what is an unprecedented time. Our service users are of course free to participate in Cop26 activities as they wish.” On Thursday morning, grassroots immigrant support groups marched from Kenmure Street – where crowds prevented an immigration raid earlier this year – to the Home Office centre on the south side of the city, chanting “climate justice equals migrant justice”.Boris Johnson’s former communications chief was warned he could be seen as offering “unfair” access to government, after a consultancy he set up shortly after leaving No 10 took on clients including the national lottery operator, Camelot, and the Premier League. Lee Cain incorporated a PR consultancy called Charlesbye in February, three months after leaving office. Official disclosures show that Acoba, the body that offers guidance to former ministers and civil servants seeking private sector work, rubber-stamped the plan and also said he could advise a series of commercial clients. While Acoba imposed conditions on Cain’s work that it said would mitigate the risk of any impropriety, a Labour MP said the advice given to the spin doctor when he sought guidance from the watchdog on the appointments demonstrated the need to strengthen its guidelines. Acoba rules forbid MPs and civil servants from lobbying for two years after leaving office. A Charlesbye spokesperson said: “Charlesbye has fully complied with the rules and regulations as laid out by the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba).” Two of Charlesbye’s clients are subject to major regulatory and policy decisions. Camelot faces stiff opposition to win the next 10-year licence to operate the lottery, with the department for digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) expected to make a decision on the lucrative contract in February next year. Cain also sought guidance on accepting work for the Premier League, which is among the subjects of a review of football governance led by the former sports minister Tracey Crouch. The part-time role will include dispensing advice on communications, Acoba documents say, from responding to trending Twitter topics to long-term strategic messaging. Cain told Acoba he did not expect the job to involve contact with government. Acoba said Cain’s work at No 10, in a role that he left in November last year, did not involve working closely with the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, which oversees football and the lottery. The committee also noted that he had left office eight months before seeking to work with Camelot and 10 months before the Premier League job. But Acoba imposed conditions on Cain, warning there was “a risk it could be perceived your network and influence might assist Camelot unfairly”. The committee made similar warnings about Cain’s general consultancy work, saying he “will have had sight of a wide range of information and policy that may provide an unfair advantage to a broad range of organisations; further, there are risks attached with his access to contacts within government”. Acoba told Cain it would be “inappropriate” for him to use contacts or knowledge gained in office to the advantage of his new clients. He was also ordered not to lobby the government or any of its arm’s length bodies for two years after he left his job, and to seek advice from Acoba before accepting any commissions. An independent committee on standards in public life recently recommended that Acoba be strengthened. It said the two-year moratorium on lobbying should be able to be extended to up to five years, and that any work for a lobbying firm should be included in the ban, rather than just a prohibition on direct lobbying. “Those working at the heart of government should not be taking on roles with private companies who could stand to benefit from insider knowledge,” said the Labour MP Nadia Whittome, who worked in a care home (during the first wave of the pandemic) alongside her role in parliament. “We must end the revolving door of special advisers, lobbyists and consultants, and that means that Acoba guidance must be much stricter.” The Acoba disclosures also reveal that Cain plans to work for Orcadian Energy, which drills for oil at four fields in the North Sea, and the Kurdistan regional government (KRG), which administers the oil-rich semi-autonomous region of northern Iraq. Acoba imposed similar conditions on the work and said Cain’s political career had not included work or given him access to information that might be of specific use to those clients. The disclosures state that Cain’s work for the KRG will be short term and involve “liaising with UK journalists and setting up interviews”. • This article was amended on 14 November 2021 because an earlier version said that Nadia Whittome works in a care home alongside her role in parliament. In fact the MP worked in a care home during the first wave of the pandemic.The EU’s Brexit commissioner will tell David Frost that negotiations over Northern Ireland are doomed to fail unless he drops an “unattainable” demand over the role of the European court of justice. At a meeting in London on Friday, Maroš Šefčovič will warn the UK’s Brexit minister, Lord Frost, that Downing Street needs to “take a step” towards the EU for the talks to be “meaningful”. There is growing concern in Brussels that Boris Johnson has already decided to trigger article 16 of the protocol on Northern Ireland in the coming weeks in order to suspend the post-Brexit arrangements and impose his own vision. Brussels is preparing a “ladder” of retaliatory options, up to suspending the trade deal agreed last Christmas Eve, while seeking to convince the UK of the virtues of its approach. “We think that the objectives set out by the UK are unattainable,” said a senior EU official. “The UK position is that the role of the EU’s institution needs to go … As long as that remains the UK position, I don’t see what we can do.” The talks over the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland are in their fourth week. A protocol in the withdrawal agreement Johnson signed keeps Northern Ireland in the single market and draws a customs border down the Irish Sea in order to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland. In October, the EU offered to drastically reduce the number of checks on goods coming from Great Britain to Northern Ireland in recognition of the political and economic disruption being caused. But the UK is insisting that the protocol needs a more fundamental redrafting including the removal of the European court of justice from its role as arbiter of EU law. Brussels has countered that Northern Ireland cannot maintain single market access without the ECJ remaining as the chief arbiter of EU law. “The UK wants us to engage in intensive talks and we are happy to do so,” an EU official said before Friday’s meeting. “But then the UK must take a step towards us to ensure that the talks are meaningful. If the UK wants these discussions to succeed, then the major step that we took on 13 October needs to be reciprocated. On questions around governance and the court of justice we have always made clear that we think that the objectives set out by the UK are unattainable.” Brussels believes the UK is being too dogmatic in its approach, raising concerns about the sincerity of the prime minister’s desire to find a solution. EU officials point to attempts to answer concerns over the collection of VAT in Northern Ireland. Downing Street has complained that evolution in the EU law book that applies in Northern Ireland could put traders there at a disadvantage compared with those based in the rest of the UK. An EU official said: “There is a specific provision in the protocol, which gives a role to the joint committee for finding solutions where the application of VAT principles under the protocol creates issues in Northern Ireland. It’s one of the sub-paragraphs of article eight. “On that point, for example, we say why don’t we use the mechanisms specifically provided for in the protocol to see how far we can go. And yet the UK having never tried that calls for a radically different approach to VAT which would require a renegotiation of the protocol.” France’s EU affairs minister, Clément Beaune, suggested Northern Ireland had been benefiting from its access to both the EU and single market, describing Brexit as “a failure” instead for the rest of the UK. He said on Thursday: “Brexit is a failure, it’s clear … Brexit has an impact on the British economy more negative than Covid, it’s written black and white. “We’ve seen the shortages taking place in Great Britain, the problems in Northern Ireland are better because they have access to the European market.” Speaking in the House of Lords on Wednesday, Frost urged the EU to “keep calm”. “In my view, this process of negotiations has not reached its end,” he said. “Although we have been talking for nearly four weeks, there remain possibilities that the talks have not yet seriously examined, including many approaches that have been suggested by the UK.” The Labour party called on Johnson to reach a deal with the EU over the Northern Ireland protocol and end the “poison of division” it says the government has provoked. The shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, said the Conservative party had been “reckless” in its approach to Northern Ireland, where a fragile peace has held for more than 20 years. In a speech to the Senator George J Mitchell Institute for Peace in Belfast, she urged the prime minister not to provoke “further poisonous instability” in the weeks ahead. Haigh said: “The Conservatives’ reckless custody of the Good Friday agreement has sown division and undermined stability. This is not a partisan point, nor one that gives me any satisfaction. Peace in Northern Ireland is too precious to be a plaything of partisan politics. “The Labour party recognises and pays tribute to the work done by John Major, who helped lay the ground for the Good Friday agreement. But we cannot ignore the damage that has been done.”Nobody really wanted to be trip-hop. The stoner beats of Nightmares on Wax’s 1995 Smokers Delight album were era defining, but it carried the prominent legend: “THIS IS NOT TRIP HOP”. James Lavelle’s Mo’ Wax label flirted with the term after it was coined by Mixmag in 1994, but quickly switched to displaying it ostentatiously crossed out on their sleeves. Ninja Tune did print the phrase “triphoptimism” on a king size rolling paper packet in 1996, but only as a joke about escaping categories. “I always disliked the term,” says Lou Rhodes of Lamb, “and I would always make a point in interviews of challenging its use in regard to Lamb.” Mark Rae of Rae &amp; Christian similarly says: “I would give a score of 9/10 on the lazy journalist scale to anyone who placed us in the trip-hop camp.” And Geoff Barrow’s ferocious hatred of the term – let alone its application to Portishead – has become the stuff of social media legend. The distaste is understandable. The template of crawling beats, cinematic strings and dubby basslines, usually with a female vocalist and weed-smoking signifiers, became one of the most ubiquitous sounds of the late 90s. The phrase itself stretched to become a catch-all for any and all downtempo music, from wafty supermarket-checkout budget CD “chillout” to highly crafted UK soul. It very quickly became the object of snobbery, called “coffee table music” by those who found the idea music could be comforting or domesticated an anathema. But whatever you call it, the specifically 90s downtempo vibe abides. Nightmares on Wax’s new album, Shout Out! To Freedom …, shows producer George Evelyn as committed to cosmic beats, and as inspired, as ever, and Smokers Delight got a deluxe reissue treatment last year. Martina Topley-Bird’s Forever I Wait (featuring several productions by Robert “3D” Del Naja of Massive Attack), the reformed Sneaker Pimps’ Squaring the Circle, and even Saint Etienne’s mostly instrumental I’ve Been Trying to Tell You all meander moodily in classic trip-hop style. Jhelisa, whose albums in the 90s easily bridged the gap between trip-hop and acid jazz, is back and on spectacularly trippy form with 7 Keys V.2, too. And perhaps even more significantly, younger musicians are channelling the sound. Some of the most high-profile acts in the world – Billie Eilish, Lana Del Rey, Lorde – are unabashed in these 90s references. Alicia Keys’ new single, Best of Me, couldn’t be more trip-hop if it was made in a smoky Bristol basement in 1995. In the leftfield, acts such as Young Echo, Tirzah and Space Afrika explore some oddly familiar dark, dubby spaces, the latter citing Tricky as a key precedent. A lot of the new UK soul and jazz, from Jorja Smith through Children of Zeus to Moses Boyd and Sault, is distinctly trip-hoppy; Arlo Parks’ Mercury prize-winning album is steeped in it, as is tattooed, cosmic dub-soul provocateur Greentea Peng. Homebrew “lo fi” remixes of anime and game themes, which could easily pass as trip-hop, regularly clock up tens of millions of streams on YouTube, as do streams of trip-hoppy “beats to study/chill/sleep to”. Even UK drill is demonstrating a connection, in the album False Hope by Tara Mills, with music by drill and road rap producer Carns Hill. “It’s interesting that whole era’s come round again,” says Evelyn, remarking on the extraordinary Afghan-German producer Farhot’s similarity to DJ Shadow. “Then of course you start thinking: am I that old?” To understand the durability of these sounds, it’s worth looking at some of the objections to the way they were labelled. Evelyn grew up with reggae soundsystem culture and was a hip-hop and electro fanatic, who breakdanced competitively as a teen. He regarded his early rave tunes as hip-hop collage in the tradition of instrumentals by Mantronix, Marley Marl, DJ Red Alert and co. “But,” he says, “in the UK we’re really good at taking something and making it our own, and when I think about that whole 90s period, it was exciting: we were doing that whole downtempo thing, but fused with all that other exciting electronic shit that was happening at the same time. The drum’n’bass thing, the jungle thing, that was all born out of the same set of influences. I do think about the 90s a lot. It was exciting; it felt like a new sound was coming out of the UK every three days.” Rhodes, too, took inspiration in the breakbeat collage of rave. “Our background was nights at the Haçienda and Manchester pirate stations,” she says, remembering Peter Bouncer’s vocal over Shut Up and Dance’s breakbeats on the 1992 rave track Love Is All We Need. “My mum was a folk singer, and I felt the pull to write songs that danced around those fucked-up beats. That was the impetus for Lamb.” The closeness to techno, rave and electronica was embodied in labels such as Warp, Ninja Tune and Mo’ Wax, where Squarepusher, Autechre, Roni Size and Carl Craig would sit alongside – or remix – downtempo acts. It’s a lineage explored in the 2020 book Bedroom Beats &amp; B-Sides by Laurent Fintoni, which also explores how trip-hop influenced the likes of Flying Lotus (an avowed Portishead fan), and thus the experimental “beat scene” and 21st century hip-hop more broadly. The other vital precursor was the UK’s unique soul lineage. “Sade, Cymande, Soul II Soul,” remembers Evelyn, “that was the foundation of our whole thing too. Even when we were rocking [reggae] soundsystems, you’d always have that half-hour or so when they’d play street soul or rare grooves. That all influenced all of us; I’m sure someone like [Massive Attack’s] Daddy G would say the same thing.” Through the late 80s and early 90s, acts such as Smith &amp; Mighty, the Sindecut, Young Disciples and, of course, Soul II Soul and Massive Attack made a very distinctly British laid-back breakbeat sound ubiquitous from charts to underground clubs. The acid jazz movement overlapped with this, too: it’s the scene Mo’ Wax emerged from, and Liam Howe of Sneaker Pimps recalls, around 1993, “taking our white labels around the record shops of Soho, where you might bump into [acid jazz movers] Kevin Beadle, Gilles Peterson, James Lavelle and Patrick Forge … we were making peculiar, laid-back dance stuff that at the time we referred to just as ‘head music’.” Jhelisa Anderson is one of the more obvious connections to the soul/jazz world, but also one of the few musicians who fondly embraces “trip-hop” as a term. Mississippian by birth, she relished British eccentricity and independence, as compared with a US industry that “would’ve had me trying to copy Janet Jackson”. She found, in Portishead, Tricky and Topley-Bird, “a version of modern blues, a depth and darkness” that drew a line from 60s and 70s soul, but also had a connection to “something old and pagan that I heard in Thom Yorke and shoegaze, a different kind of ancient expression of feeling blue, of being dark”. That conception of a kind of specifically British blues isn’t so far fetched. Tara Mills wasn’t born when Massive Attack’s Unfinished Sympathy came out, but cites it as one of her favourite songs: “I’ve cried to that song, I’ve driven home too fast, upset, in the middle of the night, to that song.” And she found precisely the right darkness in Carns Hill’s drill beats to “make you feel something in that same way”. And the moodiness and melancholy have permeated through to a new generation in many other ways. Rhodes hears “a kind of bloodline running through James Blake and the xx” to Billie Eilish and co. Her son Reuben, who releases downtempo beats as Joseph Efi, connects the “Bristol sound” of Portishead and Massive Attack to the ineffable sadness of Burial. “There’s something about the melancholia of those Bristol tunes,” he says, “that could’ve only come from the depths of a small British city. Music dug up from under the earth or heard in the pouring rain on your walk home at night.” This mood has gradually spread around the world. As well as through electronic and hip-hop artists such as Flying Lotus, and ubiquity of tracks such as Rob Dougan’s Mo’ Wax hit Clubbed to Death in Hollywood soundtracks, the British moodiness found its way into big pop exports. Mark Rae notes that “our production and writing of the track The Hush by Texas-influenced Dido, and the domino effect is created when that language is taken to the mainstream successfully”. It’s not a big leap to hear trip-hop echoes in Mark Ronson’s work with Amy Winehouse and Adele – and there are direct connections, too: Howe, for example, has passed on the trip-hop gene as a writer and producer for the likes of FKA twigs, Lana Del Rey and, indeed, Adele. It seems like the further we get from its origins, the less toxic the phrase seems. Even Topley-Bird, who never accepted it at the time “because I thought we felt pretty unique”, says “in America people talk about trip-hop without any sense of shame or embarrassment, which is endearing … And a few friends are telling me that artists like Billie Eilish sound like me – which can’t be a bad thing. I came back with new music at the right time!” Nightmares on Wax’s album Shout Out! To Freedom … is out now on Warp. Mark Rae’s novel and soundtrack The Caterpillar Club is out now on Mark’s Music. Sneaker Pimps’ album Squaring the Circle is out now on Unfall. Jhelisa’s album 7 Keys V.2 is out now on Dorado. Martina Topley-Bird’s self-released album Forever I Wait is out now. Tara Mills’ album False Hope is out now on CL Management. Joseph Efi’s EP Candour is out now on Lowlife.Hello, and happy Thursday, As states undertake the high-stakes, once-a-decade redistricting process, several places are testing new ways to prevent partisans from rigging the maps. The news does not sound good. There have been heated meetings that have devolved into tears. Officials have quit and walked out of meetings in protest. A Republican governor acknowledging that his own party could be acting in an unconstitutional way. It would be easy to conclude that reform is failing. But as I spoke to supporters of the reforms in Virginia, Ohio and Michigan over the last few months, I heard a much more nuanced story. Yes, reformers are frustrated with the deadlock they’ve seen so far. But they also believe that despite the deadlock, things are better now than they were in previous redistricting cycles. That’s true even in Ohio, where Republicans are brazenly ignoring reforms that are supposed to bring bipartisanship and fairness to the mapmaking process. Despite new rules that set stringent fairness requirements for maps and empower a bipartisan commission to draw the lines, Republicans have maneuvered around the process to pass state legislative maps that give them a supermajority. And they have suggested a congressional plan that would give them as high as a 13-2 advantage. That’s staggering in a politically competitive state that Trump won with just over 53% of the vote in 2020. But because of the reforms, the fate of the maps is likely to be decided by the Ohio supreme court, which will decide whether the plans violate a constitutional amendment prohibiting districts that “unduly favor or disfavor a party or incumbents”. “I think it’s really easy to think, ‘We’ve had this experience. This means this doesn’t work,’” said Catherine Turcer, who works for the good government group Common Cause. But “it could be that the courts step in”. Or “it could be the reform works well in stopping bad actors who act badly”. It’s a similar story in Virginia, where a new bipartisan commission reached a stalemate and was unable to pass any maps. Democrats say they’ll now be disadvantaged when the state supreme court, which has a majority of Republican-appointed justices, draws the maps. But reformers argue the process now is better than if lawmakers continued to be able to draw maps behind closed doors. “Everyone in Virginia could agree that the problem they all wanted fixed was one party drawing maps, in the dark, in secret, and this was a solution to that. I mean, Virginia has moved past that problem,” said Liz White, the executive director of OneVirginia2021, which strongly supported creating the commission. In Michigan, the state’s new independent redistricting commission faced heavy scrutiny when it initially proposed maps that eliminated districts where African Americans comprised a majority of voters. But after residents voiced concern at a series of public hearings, the commission took their input and released a new proposal that includes majority-Black districts. “The commission, what it’s struggling with right now is to draw maps that reflect communities of interest while achieving partisan fairness,” said Nancy Wang, the executive director of Voters Not Politicians, which helped create the commission. “I don’t think they were having these discussions behind closed doors when they were gerrymandering.” Readers’ questions Alex writes: As a Brit, I am confused as to why voting rights legislation is mired. Presumably this was part and parcel of the Democratic mandate prior to election? The people voted the Democrats into power, therefore … the bill should pass fairly quickly with the minimum of changes? How is it that the losing side sets the pace of bill ratification and passing? Even though Democrats have complete control of government in Washington, the main obstacle standing in their way is the filibuster, a rule in the US Senate that requires 60 votes to advance most legislation. Democrats control 50 seats in the chamber, but have a majority because Kamala Harris, the vice-president, casts the tie-breaking vote. There are calls, louder than ever now, to get rid of the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. While the rule was designed to forge compromise and ensure the minority party has a say, Democrats argue that it no longer serves that purpose. Instead, Republicans are weaponizing it in bad faith to block policies they don’t like, preventing the majority party from governing. It’s unclear, however, if Democrats will be able to marshal enough votes in their own party to get rid of the filibuster, as two key Democrats, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, have indicated they do not support such a move. Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on Twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … Two ballot measures to expand voting access failed in New York last week, stunning voting rights advocates. I reported on how that happened. I interviewed Georgia’s secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, about his efforts to push back against Donald Trump.Last year, Alexandre Kantorow released a recording including Brahms’s Piano Sonata No 2 alongside works by Bartók and Liszt, and announced himself as a Brahms interpreter of unusual insight and distinctiveness. This new all-Brahms disc follows on where that left off, with the four Ballades, Op 10, the Piano Sonata No 3 and the composer’s left-hand-only piano arrangement of JS Bach’s violin Chaconne in D minor. In the Ballades it’s the dark, gothic, almost supernatural side to the pieces that comes through especially strongly. Several times, Brahms sends the pianist’s left hand far down the keyboard, either echoing or working against a melody heard at a much higher pitch, and in Kantorow’s playing these bass-line mutterings come across as something unsettling, even subtly disruptive. In the loudest passages he makes the instrument ring, drawing the maximum resonance out of all those vibrating strings yet somehow still maintaining clarity and definition in each line. In the softest ones, his playing has a beguiling, sometimes dreamlike sweetness. The first two movements of the sonata are whole worlds in themselves, and Kantorow’s interpretations reckon fully with their scope; his pacing of the shorter fifth movement rounds the work off in a way that’s completely convincing. His liking for spreading out chords from bottom to top might be a bit much for some listeners, especially when coupled with the way in which he creates a rhythmic tug back and forth between the playing of his right and left hands, making a tiny discrepancy in where the beat falls, but it’s all in the service of some wonderfully fluid and mercurially expressive playing. After this, you might think a one-handed piece would be an anticlimax, but Brahms’s brilliantly realised arrangement of the Chaconne sounds powerful in its comparative austerity. Kantorow’s pause on the fulcrum chord when the music turns back into the minor key has the stark effect of leaching the major-key fullness and vibrancy from the sound. It’s a typically telling touch from a pianist with a real affinity for this composer. This week’s other pick French pianist Nicolas Horvath reveals (Grand Piano, two CDs) more of the music of Hélène de Montgeroult, the pianist, composer and teacher whose background influence on such seminal figures as Chopin and Schumann – and quite possibly Brahms – is only now being acknowledged. Horvath makes appealingly light work of her nine keyboard sonatas, several recorded for the first time.The former UK foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt has said that practicalities, not principles, are holding back the payment of a £400m British debt to Iran, seen as a precondition of the release of British-Iranian dual nationals held in Tehran, including Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. How did the debt arise? In the mid-1970s the UK sold more than 1,500 Chieftain battle tanks and 250 repair vehicles to its close ally the Shah of Iran. Iran paid £600m for the tanks in advance, but the UK, through its arms sales export subsidiary International Military Services (IMS), in February 1979 refused to deliver the remaining weaponry when the shah was deposed and replaced by a new revolutionary and theocratic regime. Only 185 tanks had been delivered. What happened next? After years of private negotiations, in 1990 Iran made a claim for its money back for the undelivered weaponry by taking the UK to international arbitration in The Hague. The UK made a counterclaim in 1996, but in an arbitration in 2001 the UK lost both claims. Iran then sought to have the award enforced in the English courts, something Britain resisted until IMS in 2002 put £350m into the UK court as security. The UK, after getting the award’s size reduced once in The Hague finally seemed to have run out of options when its final appeal was dismissed in 2009. So why was the payment not made? In June 2008 the EU made Iran’s defence ministry a sanctioned entity, meaning no payment could be paid. Iran nevertheless returned to the UK courts to get a declaration in a British domestic court that the money was owed. Over the next five years the case morphed into a dispute over interest. The UK argued it was not required to pay interest on the principal from the moment sanctions were imposed. Iran eventually lost the case, but the issue for the first time was aired in public in May 2019 after an application by the Sunday Times. Separately Iran applied to a Treasury body for a certificate for the money to be paid to the central bank of Iran, as the bank was not a sanctioned entity. That application has never received a formal response. Iran has since deferred successive high court applications for a UK judge to hand over the money. How directly is the debt linked to the fate of dual nationals? As dual nationals from other countries that do not owe money to Iran have also been arrested, it is wrong to say UK dual nationals have been captured only as a ransom to extract the money. But it is evident to ministers in both countries that the payment of the debt has over time become almost a precondition for their release. What reason does the UK give for the non-payment of the debt? The initial reason was that the payment would be in breach of UN sanctions. There was also the implicit threat that any UK bank that helped transfer the cash would be vulnerable to US Treasury secondary sanctions or fines. Privately some ministers are opposed giving £400m to any military body in Iran. Has the UK changed its view? The advent of Jeremy Hunt as foreign secretary led to a greater focus on the debt, and he came to view this not as an illegitimate ransom demand, but an issue of a legally acknowledged debt. The new defence secretary Ben Wallace, who as a backbencher campaigned for the payment of the debt, also secured a breakthrough when he was given authority to write in September 2020 to the lawyers of Richard Ratcliffe, the husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, to say that the UK had a debt that had to be paid. So why has the debt still not been paid? Ministers and officials refuse to say, which has caused intense frustration of the families, who believe they are entitled to the information since their lives had been ruined purely by virtue of being British citizens, and not because of anything they have done. They say, and havedone for three years, that the equivalent sum could be paid to Iran in medicines, or that the Iranian foreign ministry could give an undertaking that the money would not be used on armaments. The UK post-Brexit, they add, is now in charge of its own sanctions policy. Why will the Foreign Office not disclose its thinking? It is arguable that public discussion could upend hugely sensitive negotiations. But the families have lost patience long ago with what they regard as a deep and debilitating culture of secrecy in the Foreign Office. After nearly six years, Richard Ratcliffe’s faith in the Foreign Office’s mastery of quiet diplomacy with Iran has evaporated. Are the Americans a factor? Iranian sources, partly backed by British, say a humanitarian deal including the payment of the debt, and a prisoner swap involving American, British and Iranians, was within 24 hours of being sealed this summer. The bank account into which the money would be paid had been agreed. The deal broke down because of a US disagreement about one of the Iranians due to be released. Ratcliffe’s view is that complex prisoner swaps with many moving parts and countries are inherently more likely to fail.Six of the seven runners in the televised Grade Two Ballymore Novice Hurdle at Cheltenham on Friday were winners last time out and it promises to be one of the most informative novice events over timber in the first half of the winter campaign. Paul Nicholls’s Gelino Bello, who recorded a comfortable success on his hurdling debut at Aintree last month, heads the market but the memory of Ireland’s dominance at the Festival in March is still fresh and Off Your Rocco (3.30) and Blazing Khal both promise to be stern opponents. At the likely odds, Gordon Elliott’s makes most appeal. A defeat at Galway in July during the trainer’s six-month ban is the only blip on his record to date, and he improved for the step up to Friday’s trip at Limerick last time out. Cheltenham 1.45 Magic Saint was successful in this race last season off the same mark of 152 and Paul Nicholls has given him a very similar prep as well, with a run at around two-and-a-half miles to put him straight. On the prevailing ground, however, two miles is very much his trip, and the inconsistency which made him a dubious betting proposition a couple of seasons ago seems to be a thing of the past following wind ops over the last two summers. Cheltenham 2.20 A match for a £13,000 first prize is not quite the spectacle that armchair punters might hope to see, and one bookmaker suggested on Thursday that it is “a waste of terrestrial TV coverage” when two handicap hurdles on the card are not included on the ITV4 schedule. It could be an intriguing and informative contest with an eye to the future, however, as My Drogo, one of last season’s best novices over hurdles, launches his chasing career against Gin On Lime, a Grade Three winner over fences last time out. Neither has jumped an obstacle at Cheltenham before and while My Drogo has the physique to be a top-class chaser, Rachael Blackmore is likely to make this a real test for the favourite and is a fair bet at around 5-2 to make her partner’s experience count. Cheltenham 2.55 Balko Des Flos unseated Blackmore at the Cheese Wedges on his debut over the cross-country course at the Festival in March but followed up with an impressive run into second place in the Grand National at Aintree. He is set to carry top weight here as a result but this former Ryanair Chase winner has the class to give a stone or more to Friday’s field if he can adapt to the cross-country course’s unusual test.Scientists attending Cop26 have sent a clear warning to policymakers: get a move on, because every moment of delay, every extra fraction of a degree of global heating will have dire consequences. That message has been reinforced at Glasgow with reports, forums and discussions, but those involved in channelling the science to the world’s leaders are frustrated that words are still not being matched by actions. Peter Stott, a climate scientist at the Met Office’s Hadley Centre who has been attending Cops since 1998, said he was marginally more optimistic than he had been before the Glasgow summit. “I have mixed emotions. I feel relieved that things have started to move, but I am concerned about the speed,” he said. “The scientific message we have talked about for 25 years is being acted on. That is a vindication. We might be starting to turn the corner. But I feel a strong sense of anxiety I haven’t felt before. I want to see the policymakers get a move on. In the next two years we have got to cut emissions rapidly.” He said the success or failure of this Cop would not be determined by speeches and targets but by geophysics. “We will know Glasgow had an effect by measuring the carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere. That is what scientists are looking for. And now it is acknowledged internationally that these concentrations need to go down. In that sense, science has done its primary job.” New studies continue to underline the risks. This week the Hadley Centre released a report showing that 1 billion people would be at risk of extreme heat exposure if global warming reached 2C. Katharine Hayhoe, the chief scientist for The Nature Conservancy, feels humanity is getting closer to a collective epiphany – an “oh shit” moment – when people finally realise climate impacts pose a far greater threat than the solutions, and decarbonisation can be ramped up to the necessary scale of a Manhattan Project or a moon race. “I don’t think we have arrived there yet but it’s building,” she said. “I think leaders are listening to what is already happening in this world. Fifteen years ago you had to be up in the Arctic or in a low-lying island to experience climate change. Today, wherever we live we are seeing the impacts and governments are responding.” The costs are also becoming more apparent. In the 1980s, US insurers had to pay out fora $1bn disaster every three months. Now, Hayhoe says, it is every two and a half weeks. Samantha Burgess, the deputy director of the Copernicus Climate Service, said EU satellites were increasingly monitoring record fires, temperatures, and extreme rainfall events leading to floods. “We have overwhelming evidence that the costs of inaction are orders of magnitude greater than the cost of action.” Compared with the start of the conference, Burgess said she was a little more hopeful about reaching the 1.5C target because the direction of travel was clearer. “I think the motivation of everyone I have interacted with is very high in the transition to a net zero future.” But she was cautious about putting too much faith in long-distance goals. “There is a big difference between the policies drafted and the policies implemented,” she said. “Currently we are not on course for 1.5C. We need to see more political ambition on the pledges to align with the urgent changes described by the scientific evidence.” How much of a difference Cop will make is fiercely debated. Last week the International Energy Agency said the promises made in Glasgow could put the world on track to limit warming to 1.8C by the end of the century, if every country lived up to its long-term net zero commitments. This optimism was hosed down by a subsequent assessment by Climate Action Tracker, the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition, which showed how weak short-term goals were likely to push global heating to at least 2.4C. In negotiations, the most vulnerable states are now battling with big emitters to try to hold on to the 1.5C target, which is the most ambitious goal of the Paris agreement. Glasgow will almost certainly fall short, so one of the biggest challenges remaining at Cop26 is to keep that possibility alive with as much progress as possible and a more aggressive ratchet mechanism in the future. Stott feels 1.5C is difficult but worth fighting for. “It’s probably going to be almost impossible to stay below it completely. We may find a way where we briefly go above 1.5C and then come down again. But what is at stake is so enormous that even if we get close that would still be a massive prize.” Ed Hawkins, of the National Centre for Atmospheric Science at the University of Reading, concurred on the need to fight for every fraction of a degree. “Every tonne of CO2 matters. Every bit of warming matters,” he said. “There is an understandable focus on 1.5C or 2C, but there is no cliff edge. It’s a slope we are sliding down. The quicker we get off, the less bad the consequences will be.” Hawkins is the scientist behind the “climate warming stripes” that can be seen on walls, pavements, scarfs, ties and dresses in Glasgow. He is encouraged by last week’s announcements on reducing methane, coal and deforestation, but he wants policymakers to act more quickly. “Every tree chopped down and burned ends up in the atmosphere. Setting the target to end deforestation by 2030 leaves the door open for another decade of deforestation. It would be helpful if action could be brought forward.” He said warming would only stop when the world reaches net zero carbon, but emissions were heading in the wrong direction. Since the first IPCC gathering in 1988, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has increased from 352 to 410 parts per million, and continues to rise. “Over the past 30 years, the physical science that explains the dangers of our interference with the climate system has become ever clearer. Yet our ability to tackle the problem seems to have stood still,” he said. “Climate needs to be part of everyday conversations. That will inspire small actions and motivate politicians to act when they see these actions are popular.”Like all elite athletes, Julia “Hurricane” Hawkins has a ruthless streak. So, despite setting a 100m world record on Sunday at the Louisiana Senior Games, she still wants to go faster. “It was wonderful to see so many family members and friends. But I wanted to do it in less than a minute,” the 105 year-old said after the race, where she recorded a time of 1:02.95, a record for women in the 105+ age category. When someone pointed out that 102 is less than her age and asked if that made her feel better, Hawkins answered: “No”. The retired teacher is no stranger to athletic excellence. She started competing at the National Senior Games when she was 80, specialising in cycling time trials, and won several gold medals. She eventually ended her cycling career saying that “there wasn’t anyone left my age to compete with”. When she turned 100 she took up sprinting. In 2017 she set the 100m world record for women over the age of 100 with a time of 39.62. When her record was broken in September by Diane Friedman, Hawkins decided to compete in a new age category. “I love to run, and I love being an inspiration to others,” Hawkins said on Sunday. “I want to keep running as long as I can. My message to others is that you have to stay active if you want to be healthy and happy as you age.” Several age records for the 100m have tumbled this year. In August, Hiroo Tanaka of Japan blazed home in 16.69 to set the male record in the 90 and over category. In women’s competition Australia’s Julie Brims broke the 55+ record in a time of 12.24, while American Kathy Bergen crossed the line in 16.26 in the 80-and-over category. Bergen has also broken age records in the high jump, 60m and 200m. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021 to correct several instances where track times were rendered incorrectly.Uber is to increase its fare prices by 10% in an attempt to encourage more drivers to use the app and meet the growing public demand for taxis since Covid restrictions were relaxed. If you are a driver working with a ride sharing app such as Uber or Bolt, we would like to know how your job has changed during the pandemic. What is the situation like now? Have you left your job as a driver for a ride sharing app, or considering to leave? What would make you come back or stay? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.After the game had finished, the crowd filtered away and press duties were completed following England’s painful elimination from the T20 World Cup, Eoin Morgan climbed on to the team coach outside the Sheikh Zayed Stadium in Abu Dhabi, sat down next to Chris Silverwood and started to talk about the next one. With the merry-go-round still spinning in the United Arab Emirates it is only 11 months until England climb on board again. And though he is now 35 and this year has seen a precipitous decline in his returns with the bat, Morgan seems determined to cling on for the ride. The squad for the 2022 T20 World Cup will look very different to this one – should the five senior players who missed the defeat to New Zealand (and in some cases the entire tournament) through injury be selected, at least a third of the 15 that ended this competition will have to be left behind – but it will have the same figurehead. “He’s a very strong leader for this group, has been for many years now, and I still think he’s got a lot of years in front of him that he can give to this team,” Silverwood said. “I think with him we’re a stronger unit, and for me the longer he’s there the better. He probably hasn’t got the runs he’d have wanted, but the value he brings as a leader outweighs that. That’s how I see it. What he brings to the team from a tactical point of view and a motivational point of view, I think he brings so much more than just the batting.” But the key lesson of New Zealand’s narrow yet handsome victory on Wednesday is that even if there is no change in captain, the captain probably needs to change. At least in public England are insisting they got all their tactical decisions right, but in a game of small margins some marginal calls did not come off. We knew before the tournament that England prefer to chase almost irrespective of conditions. Morgan has now captained England in 70 T20s, won the toss 36 times, and chosen to bat first on only eight occasions – and not once in the past five years. So it is no surprise that when they came to a World Cup where conditions have tended to favour the side batting second they have coped poorly with being put in. “I don’t think it’s given us a lopsided approach,” Silverwood said. “We do like chasing, there’s no doubt about it. We are good at it and we enjoy it. When you’re chasing you know what your target is, you can pace yourself and know when to press the button. We’ve stuck to our strengths, stuck to our gameplan, and I’m perfectly happy with what we did.” Perhaps, however, England might have sacrificed a few less important matches to better prepare for a hypothetical situation in which they lose the toss and must bat first in a crucial game, maybe even a World Cup semi-final. England were put in only twice in their six World Cup games, and the same criticism can be made of both innings: that time was wasted in the middle overs protecting wickets that, given the team’s batting-heavy lineup, did not require protection. Against Sri Lanka Jos Buttler rescued the situation with a phenomenal late surge, but Moeen Ali faced only two balls and Liam Livingstone none at all. Against New Zealand there was no late surge and Sam Billings, drafted into the team after Jason Roy’s injury as the designated finisher, had less to do than in any of England’s previous games – and on those occasions he was only carrying drinks. Meanwhile after Tymal Mills’s injury England went into matches with only one bowler recognised as a death-overs specialist in Chris Jordan. Throughout the tournament Chris Woakes has been a complete menace in the powerplay, but while his 17.3 overs in other phases of the game went at a miserly 5.4 runs each, opponents averaged 19 from his three at the death. England’s strategy resulted in spare batters kicking their heels on the touchlines while they ached for more bowling depth. “I’ve got no regrets at all. The approach we took got us to the top of the group and kept us there,” Silverwood said. “I think we’ve had plenty of bowling options.” What England did have was a group of players that went into a World Cup semi-final as favourites, and very nearly won it, while significantly depleted by injury. “To get here without some of those players does show the talent we have, which is very encouraging,” Silverwood said. “At the same time we’ve got a group of lads that’s hurting. To get so close, touching distance, and then have it snatched away – we had the game under control for a lot of the time, then Jimmy Neesham came in and took it away from us. We’ve got to give them credit, but as players and coaching staff you wonder what you could have done differently.” The question is what they will do differently in future. At least there is not long to wait before we find out.The opposition leader who hopes to topple Hungary’s autocratic ruler, Viktor Orbán, has vowed to introduce a new constitution and “restore the rule of law” if he wins next April’s elections. Péter Márki-Zay, a small-town mayor who became the surprise choice as prime ministerial candidate of six opposition parties, made the comments during a visit to Brussels, where he is meeting senior EU officials and politicians, with the message that his priorities are democracy and European integration. “There is no democracy, no freedom of the press, no rule of law in Hungary, we have to start everything from scratch,” Márki-Zay told reporters. He said the opposition alliance was drawing up a new constitution that would be put to a referendum if they were victorious. “It’s a regime change, we are talking about regime change, not government change,” he said. Márki-Zay, a churchgoing Catholic father of seven, also promised to delete Orbán’s “homophobic” anti-LGBT law and introduce same-sex marriage. While noting he was against divorce, he promised not to change Hungarian laws permitting divorce and abortion. A former supporter of Orbán’s Fidesz party, Márki-Zay said he wanted a Hungary built on love and peace, contrasting himself with Orbán’s campaigns against minorities and diatribes against the philanthropist and financier George Soros. “What we are fighting is a one-party state built by Orbán; it’s hate campaigns against different minorities: the LGBT community, the Roma community, but also Jews and different other minorities and certain persons,” he said, naming Soros. Since Orbán returned to power in 2010, he has won three straight elections, victories that have allowed him to rewrite Hungary’s constitution, fill courts and public bodies with Fidesz party loyalists, and put the squeeze on independent media. After nearly a decade in power, Hungary in 2019 became the first EU member state to be ranked as “partly free” by the US monitoring group Freedom House. A recent poll shows Márki-Zay has pulled four points clear of Orbán, raising the prospect of a serious electoral challenge. Márki-Zay hopes to repeat on a national scale his triumph in the south-eastern Hungarian town of Hódmezővásárhely, where he was elected mayor in 2018, defeating the Fidesz incumbent on an anti-corruption campaign. Márki-Zay, wearing a blue ribbon to signify his fight against graft, attributed his success to increasing the turnout of anti-Orbán voters and persuading the undecided to choose him. A political independent, he was elected last month as the prime ministerial candidate for an alliance of six political parties, spanning the far left to the former far right. Márki-Zay said the six parties agreed on “more than 80%, probably more than 90%” of issues facing Hungary. While the parties had disagreements on taxation, he said they agreed on four basic principles: democracy, the rule of law, a market economy and European integration. He insisted that Jobbik, the onetime far-right party, supported this agenda. “Jobbik has changed a lot … Racism and intolerance towards minorities, based on the colour of their skin, based on their sexual orientation, their origin is unacceptable. We are very much building a Hungary that is based on love and tolerance and acceptance towards people with different skin colour, backgrounds.” One of his top priorities is to clamp down on corruption, after investigations into the unexplained wealth of Orbán’s friends and family have gone nowhere. If he wins, he promised to ensure that all corruption would be investigated, with wrongdoers prosecuted. Corruption linked to the ruling party would be prosecuted, he told the Guardian, adding, “and opposition as well. We will make sure that all corruption cases will be and should be prosecuted.” If he was prime minister, he would ensure Hungary joins the EU’s new public prosecutor, something Orbán (with a handful of other EU leaders) has shunned. Any narrow opposition victory could raise questions about his top priority: changing Hungary’s constitution, which requires a two-thirds majority. Márki-Zay said Orbán’s changes to the constitution were invalid, suggesting the opposition did not need to be bound by the two-thirds majority rule. “Everything that Fidesz did in the last 10 years to make his power irreplaceable, to make Orbán undefeatable is invalid,” he said. “It doesn’t have anything to do with 51% or 67%. It’s a fact that it’s unconstitutional and of course we will have to come up with a new constitution, yes, and approve it by a referendum.” A Márki-Zay victory would certainly be unofficially welcomed in Brussels, as will his declaration that the EU’s problems “can be solved by more Europe”. That warmer attitude to Brussels and other EU capitals would come with a cooler approach to Russia and China. “We respect these powers, we respect these nations. But Hungary has not been dealing with these nations on an equal basis,” he said, citing the Chinese-backed Belgrade to Budapest railway, funded with loans from Beijing, which he said were above market rates and not in the interest of Hungarian taxpayers. He also criticised Orbán’s decision to allow Russia’s International Investment Bank to use Budapest as its headquarters, a move seen as blunting Hungary’s resolve to counter any security threat from Moscow. “Orbán is a security risk to Europe,” he argued, citing the IIB move and the Hungarian authorities’ use of Pegasus spyware against independent journalists and political critics. But not everything would change. One point of continuity with Orbán would be a tough stance against irregular migration. Márki-Zay said the opposition parties had agreed that Orbán’s border fence would stay. “I think it’s a legitimate tool of controlling illegal migration, so he was probably right in defending European borders. He was not right on many other issues on migration.”A year ago Boris Johnson warned of an “invisible mugger” threatening our country’s way of life and institutions. He was talking of Covid-19 – but, as I wrote at the time in the Guardian, the real mugger destabilising the nation is more likely to be the prime minister himself. What we’ve seen in parliament over the last week is more symptom than cause. It’s clear that a prime minister who lacks integrity or conviction while possessing a large parliamentary majority will always be tempted to test our fragile, outdated democratic machinery of government to its limits. With innumerable business and media chums, and underscored by self-interest and a lust for power that began at the age of 10, Johnson cannot resist ravaging our mother of all parliaments and our somewhat limited democratic checks and balances. However, despite my expectations, I confess to being astonished at the depth, speed and wholesale nature of the mugging, which makes me think there is even worse to come. Not only are the Conservatives willing to change the rules whenever they are caught out by them, but shameless grandstanding, justification of U-turns and reworking the facts all appear to be the new normal of our politics. I am reminded daily of the observations of Anthony Trollope, who, writing of a dysfunctional London in the 1870s, said: “A certain class of dishonesty … has become at the same time so rampant and so splendid that there seems to be reason for fearing that men and women will be taught to feel that dishonesty, if it can become splendid, will cease to be abominable.” Is that where we are now? Johnson and co have been trashing our democratic institutions and norms though divisive messaging and the introduction of ideologically driven legislative reforms: the elections bill; the higher education (freedom of speech) bill; the police, crime and sentencing courts bill; the judicial review and courts bill; the nationality and borders bill; and the envisaged human rights bill. Together they are set to diminish our rights and voices in the courts, in the media, on the streets and at the ballot box. Johnson appears to believe that if he can’t get his own way, he can either ignore or change the rules with total impunity. The arrogance he displayed in relation to the Owen Paterson lobbying scandal was breathtaking. One can only surmise he is now refusing to back Geoffrey Cox in order to deflect from his own questionable behaviour and save his own skin. These antics just confirm people’s worst fears about politicians and further diminish already dire levels of trust, recklessly damaging people’s belief in our institutions of parliament and in democracy. These may not be perfect, but we have a representative democracy, and it better serves the people to defend, improve and strengthen it. Of course, it is naive to believe that people in public office will naturally behave with honour, or that principles and codes are enough. During the spring no fewer than 11 ministers were reportedly found to have broken the ministerial code and should by rights have resigned; but the kind of honour, principles and integrity that saw MPs resign (with varying levels of pressure) in the past now appear to be extinct. And, however outraged we are about the dubious behaviour of politicians such as Cox – who appears not to have broken the rules, as he says the chief whip approved him going to the Caribbean while the Commons sat – many of them get away with it because the rules are so weak. It was only a matter of time before someone exploited our unwritten constitution. After the parliamentary expenses scandal was exposed in 2009, there was a general agreement among the main political parties that our politics needed to be fixed. There was a real attempt to empower voters by allowing the recall of MPs but, absurdly, it was ultimately up to MPs themselves to decide how long erring members could be suspended; and, worse, in terms of members of the cabinet, it is the prime minister who has the final say on whether behaviour is unacceptable. In May, Johnson claimed people didn’t care if a Tory donor was asked to pay for a nanny for the prime minister’s baby son; but the reality is, we do care. The committee on standards in public life found that three-quarters of respondents surveyed agreed that ethical standards in government are important for making democracy work – and for preventing people using power for their own ends. We have to stop politicians marking their own homework, and bring in legal frameworks that deter bad behaviour. We need a legally binding agreement between MPs and those who elect them, to ensure that all understand what is expected. Working hours, disciplinary policy, harassment, discrimination, expenses, misconduct, conflicts of interest and outside jobs should all be covered. I believe this reform would change the culture, calibre and cost of politics overnight. After three decades as a transparency campaigner, it makes me angry knowing the utter waste of time, effort, and money that those in positions of power spend defending the indefensible and peddling morally and intellectually bankrupt arguments. It’s time to fortify our machinery of government and public office so the good are rewarded, the bad are sanctioned, and safety nets are put in place to control the actions of any unscrupulous person who ends up holding the reins of power. MPs can then get on with what they’re paid to do: to take on their legislative responsibilities and look after those who elected them. • Gina Miller is a transparency campaignerBoeing has admitted full responsibility for the second crash of its 737 Max model in Ethiopia, in a legal agreement with families of the 157 victims. Lawyers for the families said it was a “significant milestone” for families to achieve justice. The legal stipulation, filed in Chicago on Wednesday and awaiting court approval next Tuesday, states the aircraft manufacturer accepts responsibility for the crash of Ethiopian airlines flight 302 in March 2019, having “produced an airplane that had an unsafe condition”, and would not seek to blame any other party, specifically including the pilots. It paves the way for families of all victims of the crash, from 35 countries, to seek compensation in the US under Illinois law, in return for not seeking punitive damages against Boeing, limiting the potential financial liability for the manufacturer. The Ethiopian Airlines 737 Max crashed soon after takeoff from Addis Ababa for Nairobi. It was the second 737 Max disaster in six months after a Lion Air plane in Indonesia crashed in October 2018, killing 189 people. Investigators identified faults in the sensors and new flight control software that had not been explained to pilots. The model was grounded worldwide but has returned to service this year, with airlines including Ryanair taking deliveries of the aircraft. The lead lawyers for the families, Robert Clifford, Steven Marks and Justin Green, said: “This is a significant milestone for the families in their pursuit of justice against Boeing, as it will ensure they are all treated equitably and eligible to recover full damages under Illinois law while creating a pathway for them to proceed to a final resolution, whether through settlements or trial. “We are confident that this historic agreement and the compensation to be paid to the families of the ET 302 tragedy will serve to hold Boeing fully accountable … and help bring their families a step closer to achieving some measure of closure for the loss of their loved ones.” Boeing agreed a $2.5bn (£1.86bn) settlement in January with the US Department of Justice in fines and compensation, which included a $500m fund to compensate families of the 346 victims of both 737 Max crashes. Experts say settlements are more likely than executives being brought to court. James Healy-Pratt of Keystone Law, who has acted in similar cases, said the agreement was “welcome news”, adding: “In all probability, these claims will be privately mediated to resolution.” A Boeing spokesperson said: “Boeing is committed to ensuring that all families who lost loved ones in the accidents are fully and fairly compensated for their loss. The agreement filed with the court today is an important step forward in that process. By accepting responsibility, Boeing’s agreement with the families allows the parties to focus their efforts on determining the appropriate compensation for each family.” British relatives of one of the victims welcomed Boeing’s admission of liability. Mark Pegram, the father of Sam Pegram, an aid worker who died in the crash, told the BBC: “The main positive for us is that Boeing is admitting liability, and not diverting blame onto Ethiopian Airlines or the pilots ... we wanted them to hold their hands up.” The family said they would use any compensation to set up a charity in Pegram’s name.The sale of plastic straws, cutlery and polystyrene cups and food boxes is to be banned in Scotland next year as part of measures to reduce waste and pollution. The Scottish government said the ban would cover all single-use polystyrene food containers and their lids, as well as plastic stirrers, balloon sticks, plates and coffee stirrers, and would come into force on 1 June. The measures parallel similar bans in force or planned around the UK, and it expected to lead to a boom in compostable and paper-based packaging. However, there are doubts about how effective it will be. Single-use plastic straws, cotton buds and drink stirrers were banned in England in 2020. The UK government is consulting on banning single-use plates, cutlery and polystyrene food packaging for England in several years’ time, but no target date has been given. Because of the delay, Scottish ministers fear their measures could be undermined by the UK government’s internal market rules, which are intended to harmonise the movement and sale of goods within Britain post-Brexit. Lorna Slater, a Scottish Green party minister, said that because there was no similar action in England, Scotland’s ban could be sidestepped by people buying or moving single-use plastics from England. Slater is writing to ministers in Westminster to see whether the UK-wide measures would be changed to ensure Scotland is able to enforce its policies. The internal trade rules have already forced the Welsh government to delay its plans to ban single-use plastics, first announced last year, because of the extent of cross-border travel, trading and recreation with England. Cardiff is now planning to charge for single-use plastic items until UK ministers clarify the internal market rules. Although charges for plastic bags and a ban on microplastic in washing products are in force UK-wide, and a new tax on plastic packaging will be introduced next year,, anti-waste campaigners say all four of the UK’s governments are taking“snail’s pace” action on single-use plastics. The EU banned single-use plastics in July across all 27 member states. It is estimated the average person uses 18 throwaway plastic plates and 37 single-use knives, forks and spoons each year. A study last year found businesses and consumers in the UK and US produced more plastic waste per head than any other major economies. “Every year, hundreds of millions of pieces of single-use plastic are wasted in this country,” Slater said. “They litter our coasts, pollute our oceans and contribute to the climate emergency. That has to end and this ban will be another step forward in the fight against plastic waste and throwaway culture.”Daniel Lee, the designer credited with revitalising the luxury fashion label Bottega Veneta is leaving the brand. A statement announcing the news says it is a “joint decision to end their collaboration”. But it is a shock to the fashion industry. Lee, who joined Bottega Veneta in July 2018, has quickly made it one of the world’s hottest brands. During his tenure, designs had been worn by Rihanna, A$AP Rocky and Mary J Blige, and accessories including the “pouch” bag and woven leather “Lido” sandals became highly sought-after and much imitated. Sales rose 2.2% to nearly €1.2bn (£1bn) in 2019 and kept growing in 2020, despite the rest of the luxury market falling by 23%. In the third quarter of 2021, revenues rose 8.9% year on year. Fashion’s rumour mill has already suggested various reasons behind the split. Lee previously worked at Celine under Phoebe Philo and, with Philo’s own brand making its much-anticipated debut next year, industry insiders are speculating he may be joining her. “Welcoming all theories,” wrote Diet Prada on its Instagram post announcing the news. “Ours? LVMH has poached him back to work under Phoebe Philo’s yet-to-debut eponymous brand lol.” Women’s Wear Daily suggests Lee’s ways of working had been difficult, with lots of staff members leaving Bottega Veneta. It quotes a source saying: “There’s no denying his talent, but on a personal level, handling relations is another matter – also given his working hours, often at night. So many people left, it was a revolving door.” A presentation in Detroit last month, and the stress involved putting it together, may be the event that led to Lee leaving the brand. Teo van den Broeke, Style Director at GQ, also speculated that the working culture may be the culprit. “Did something untoward happen within the airy ateliers of Bottega Veneta’s Via Privata Ercole Marelli headquarters in Milan?” he wrote. “Chances are we’ll never know, but there’s little doubt that a seismic event occurred in order to precipitate such change at such speed.” Lee’s Bottega Veneta had a disruptive approach to communication. Social media accounts, now a given for luxury brands, were deleted by Bottega Veneta at the start of 2021. While this was hailed as radical – and has since been copied by other brands – other pivots have been less successful. Bottega Veneta did not engage with digital fashion shows during the pandemic, and has since employed invite only salon-style presentations in London, Berlin and Detroit. An after-party in Berlin in April – during lockdown in the city – was criticised on social media. “This is so fucking immoral, we are in a MF lockdown here in Berlin,” wrote influencer Loona Hamilton. In the brand statement announcing the split, François-Henri Pinault, the chairman of Kering, the luxury group that owns Bottega Veneta, said: “I am very grateful to Daniel for having brought his passion and energy to Bottega Veneta. His singular vision made the House’s heritage relevant for today and put it back to the centre of the fashion scene. I would like to personally thank him for the unique chapter that he has written in the long history of Bottega Veneta.” Lee commented: “My time at Bottega Veneta has been an incredible experience. I am grateful to have worked with an exceptional and talented team and I am forever thankful to everyone who was part of creating our vision.” While the statement ends with a note that “a new creative organisation for the House will be announced soon”, it is unclear who will take Lee’s place. Women’s Wear Daily suggest that the brand might promote a member of the design team, such as design director Matthieu Blazy. This strategy has been employed at Gucci, another Kering brand. Alessandro Michele, previously part of the design team, has had great success since becoming creative director in 2015.As the government’s vaccine mandate for care home workers comes into effect, about 50,000 care home staff have not been fully vaccinated in England and will not be allowed to work from Thursday. On Wednesday, care leaders asked Sajid Javid for a reprieve, urging the health secretary to allow unvaccinated carers to keep working until at least next April when NHS staff face mandatory vaccines. There is concern that staff shortages could prevent thousands of patients leaving hospital. Three care workers share their views about how the mandate will affect them. ‘I love my job and would like to continue’ Sarah*, a long-term private care home worker from Bedford, is still refusing to get vaccinated. “I’m going to get fired, I will be leaving my job. I’m not an anti-vaxxer, I believe Covid is real. But I want more information before I put a vaccine into my body. I know several people who said they had menstrual problems after having it, and I don’t want a medical procedure when we don’t know the long-term effects.” This sentiment, she says, is shared by several of her co-workers. “There’s other colleagues who will be leaving too. The residents are going to suffer. I’m certainly not in this job for money, I love my job and would like to continue. But I will have to find a different career, I might be stacking shelves at Lidl.” She would consider having the jab in future, she says, but feels the mandate is not the right approach and she also has concerns about contradictory messaging during the pandemic. “I’ve followed every single rule this government has put in place, I still wear my mask all the time – while nobody else is wearing theirs because the government won’t make it mandatory again,” she says. “Communication has been very inconsistent about transmission, risks, vaccine efficacy and so on. I have no trust in this government, who are now making thousands of people unemployed. “This bullying tactic – ‘No jab, no job’ – is absolutely appalling. Matt Hancock got all the care homes into a mess by discharging residents from hospital without testing, amid a lack of PPE, and the list goes on. I’ve worked all the way through this pandemic, had not one day off and have been extremely careful throughout with regular lateral flow testing before shifts and a PCR twice a week. It is really not fair.” ‘We’ve had a significant drop in applications’ Claire, 47, from Norfolk, worked as a carer for 20 years, and is now a manager of a private care home. She has reluctantly agreed to have the vaccine and is now double-jabbed, but is very unhappy about the situation. “I object strongly to being vaccinated. Having the jabs was pretty straightforward and quick, but I don’t want to have any injections at all, and this was forced upon me. I’m worried about side-effects, long-term effects, and think it’s a shocking violation of human rights. “Visitors are allowed in our home unvaccinated, but care team workers are being forced to have the jab. In the end everybody’s had the vaccines in my care home, and had to bring in evidence.” Claire says she does not personally deal with patients face-to-face on a daily basis but works in the back office most of the time, and everyone wears full PPE when in contact with patients. The staff, she says, did not really have a choice in whether to have the vaccines or not, as jobs are scarce in the area, which might be different in the big cities. “The job situation is very hard here, you often can’t pick and choose where you work. Despite this, we do have staff shortages, and in the last six months our recruitment has been affected. We’ve had a significant drop in applications and currently have six jobs waiting to be filled, although they’ve put up the hourly pay.” ‘The mandate is necessary’ Damian, 41, originally from Poland, lives in London and visits six people in their own homes as a carer. “I am fully vaccinated, and am in full support of compulsory vaccines, equally for NHS and social care workers,” he says. Damian feels its his duty as a care worker to protect patients and their families as much as possible, including being fully vaccinated. Nevertheless his understands that others are more nervous. “My own partner is science sceptic, and I’ve seen a lot of genuine fear about the vaccines in my sector and elsewhere. I’m not judging anyone. “If a carer is struggling to take the vaccine, they should be motivated to gain knowledge of what the vaccines are, and given time to rethink. If they’re then still hesitant, they should leave the profession. “I know [the mandatory vaccines policy] can cause significant staff shortages, but it’s necessary.” *Name has been changedThere was a moment in the opening concert of this year’s London international festival of early music when soprano Lucy Crowe looked up towards the ceiling of St Michael &amp; All Angels church, as if watching her final note disperse into the tall nave. The audience was enchanted – and no wonder: Crowe knows how to work a room. Her delivery of two 17th-century French songs was simultaneously refined and bawdy, her ornamentation unfussy yet expressive. Her tone tended at times towards keening, its ebb and flow precisely tailored to the acoustics of the space. But the magic was soon dispelled. The song, explained Liam Byrne – viola da gamba player extraordinaire and, in the absence of a programme, our ultra-softly spoken MC – is about a lovesick shepherd who’s jealous because his girlfriend “also likes the dog”. A suite by French baroque viol virtuoso Marin Marais – in performance all supple phrasing and daring exploration of dynamic extremes – was apparently “from his third book from 17 … I’m going to say … 11” (cue forgiving chuckles from the crowd of early music specialists). And there were cheerful digs at Byrne’s duo partner, lutenist Jonas Nordberg, who had to retune between each item. Such swings from enchantment into deadpan demystification characterised the entire concert. Whether you’re irritated or charmed will depend on how you like your French baroque served: straight up in concert dress? Or more like an intimate acoustic set from an indie band? In the latter mode, Byrne and Nordberg cannot be beaten. For those who prefer the former, Crowe’s more direct musical communication may have been a welcome respite. Some kind of compromise – and a refreshing plunge into an alternative soundworld – came with the world premiere of Errollyn Wallen’s Angel Waters, which emerged, growling, from the depths of Byrne’s viola da gamba. Like the preceding suites of dance movements, the piece is episodic, spotlighting beautiful effects on each instrument in turn: a sequence of lute harmonics; a flurry of harsh viola da gamba bowing. Above all, though, Angel Waters showed Byrne and Nordberg at their best – revelling together in the piece’s graciousness and swagger, its generous sense of musical space. • Available on Marquee TV in from 6 December.A top executive at one of the UK’s biggest fashion magazines has been suspended by the company after more than a dozen women accused him of sending sexually inappropriate messages. Max Clark, fashion editor at i-D magazine, is a prominent figure in the industry and has been employed by the influential publication, which is owned by Vice Media, since 2014. He has also worked as a high-end stylist on promotional shoots for brands such as Prada, Burberry, Ralph Lauren, Nike and Supreme – working at events such as London fashion week. Messages reviewed by the Guardian show women claiming Clark made unwanted advances towards them, with the separate alleged incidents taking place over several years. Many of the women were relatively junior employees, working in fashion or the media, who said they received unsolicited explicit messages from Clark over social media in the early hours of the morning. Their claims were collected semi-anonymously via Instagram before being passed to Vice’s human resources department, prompting the company to launch a formal investigation and suspend Clark last week. The allegations have led to the comments section on i-D’s social media posts being flooded with people asking about the investigation. A spokesperson for Vice, which bought i-D magazine a decade ago, said: “We are taking these allegations extremely seriously and are handling them according to our established standards and processes. We retained an independent, outside investigator to investigate the claims and in order to not compromise the integrity of the investigation, we are fairly limited in what we can say at this stage. “What we can unequivocally say is that we strive to maintain a work environment in which all individuals are treated with respect and dignity, and as such, we immediately took the appropriate steps to ensure we are providing a safe working environment for our employees and partners.” Clark’s listing on the website of his management company Artistry has also been removed, with details of his fashion shoots and big-name clients removed from the internet. A spokesperson for the agency said: “We operate a zero-tolerance policy for any allegations of this nature and we will not represent/promote any person under such serious investigation.” In a statement, his lawyer said: “Mr Clark denies any allegations of sexual harassment or any other form of sexual misconduct in the strongest of terms and will use all legal avenues available to him to clear his name.” Vice, which built its name as irreverent publication aimed at then-youthful millennials, has had historic issues with allegations of sexual harassment in the company. This culminated in a 2017 New York Times investigation into the company’s internal culture at the height of the #MeToo movement which resulted in the departure of a leading executive. Soon afterwards Vice’s founder, Shane Smith, also stepped down as chief executive, handing day-to-day control to Nancy Dubuc, who promised to change the company’s internal culture. The company was valued at $5.7bn as recently as 2017 but this has since plummeted, with the company instead raising money from existing investors in a bid to reach profitability.Controversial plans to build a 305-metre high tower in the City of London have been thrown out by the government. The surprise decision, announced by the Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities, ends a long-running saga of contradictory decisions on the fate of the planned tourist attraction – designed by Foster + Partners and called the Tulip – at 20 Bury Street in London’s financial district. Ministers cited the impact it would have on the Tower of London, and “the highly unsustainable concept of using vast quantities of reinforced concrete for the foundations and lift shaft”, among the reasons for rejecting the scheme and called it “a muddle of architectural ideas”. If built, it would have become the tallest tower in the City, and the second-tallest in London, just 5 metres smaller than the Shard on the other side of the river. Its striking design included a 12-storey glass dome on top of a concrete pole, with observation decks open to the public, bars and restaurants, as well as glass slides and bridges inside. The decision was made by the housing minister Christopher Pincher on behalf of the secretary of state, Michael Gove, and followed the recommendation of planning inspector David Nicholson to reject the scheme, following a public inquiry held last November. Gove’s predecessor, Robert Jenrick, was due to make the final decision on the tower in September but was removed from his post. “The Tulip proposals exude extremes,” Nicholson wrote in his report. “The honed detailing and exquisite presentation are quite exceptional for this stage of any scheme. Conversely, the chosen purpose, form, materials and location have resulted in a design that would cause considerable harm to the significance of the Tower of London, and further harm to other designated heritage assets. “It would do so for the gains that a new visitor attraction would provide to the economy, tourism and education, which are relatively modest by comparison with the City as a whole and with other nearby provisions.” Turning to sustainability, Nicholson noted that the building would not be carbon neutral. The news was welcomed by Historic England. Its chief executive, Duncan Wilson, said: “We have long been of the opinion that the ‘Tulip’ would be visually intrusive and highly incongruous from key viewpoints of the Tower, detracting from the experience of visiting the site for millions of tourists and Londoners.” London City airport had also raised concerns about the impact on its radar system. Plans to build the skyscraper right next to the Gherkin, also designed by Foster + Partners, were submitted in 2018 by the Brazilian banking dynasty Safra Group. Headed by Brazil’s wealthiest man Joseph Safra, the firm had bought the Gherkin site for a reported £726m in 2014. The tower was initially approved by the City of London Corporation in the spring of 2019, but the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, threw out the plans just months later, saying it would result in “very limited public benefit” and dismissing the design’s “insufficient quality” and resulting “harm to London’s skyline”. An appeal was launched by the developer, Bury Street Properties, backed by Safra Group, followed by a public inquiry during which Bury Street Properties argued that the building would give the capital a much-needed boost following the pandemic. The developer said on Thursday: “We are disappointed by the UK government’s decision to refuse planning permission for the Tulip. In our opinion, this project represented a unique opportunity to reaffirm London’s world-leading reputation in architecture, culture, education, and tourism.” Lydia O’Hagan, associate at the London law firm Charles Russell Speechlys, said: “Gove’s decision may be a sign of more difficult times to come for tall buildings. Steering tall buildings through the planning system is likely to become increasingly difficult with the recent adoption of the new London Plan and upcoming developer taxes.”AGAINST ALL ODDS Alex McLeish. Paul Lambert. ‘Tactics’ Tim Sherwood. Rémi Garde. Roberto Di Matteo. Steve Bruce. Aston Villa’s track record with managerial appointments is about as reliable as The Fiver’s predictions. But we’re prepared to stick our necks on the line once again, and predict that their next manager will be … $tevie Mbe! Sorry, what was that? Already announced? When? [fumbles on to Big Website] Ah. Well, it still counts. Mainly because it saves us the thankless and frankly tiresome job of guessing whether or not $tevie will succeed at Villa Park, a venue yet to develop a tolerance for mediocre management. $tevie appeared to have the sweetest of gigs up at the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers, with a guaranteed title race and a bit of Big Vase fun to pass the time until Jürgen Klopp checks out at Liverpool. $tevie’s O’Rangers contract ran until 2024 – just like big Jürg’s at Anfield – and his new deal with Villa reportedly has the same expiry date. Liverpool even took it upon themselves to post this entirely normal update on Social Media Disgrace Twitter upon his appointment. It was all lined up, until – much like a DJ refusing to put on any more Phil Collins, $tevie decided to risk it all. “Aston Villa is a club with a rich history and I am immensely proud to become its new head coach,” $tevie trilled at his unveiling. “The owners have ambitious plans and I am looking forward to helping them achieve their aims.” The Fiver still has questions. Are former Big Cup winners Villa being used as a stepping stone? What would success look like for $tevie at Villa? And are they really a bigger club than O’Rangers? The Fiver also, for once, has answers: 1) Yes 2) Ninth and 3) honestly, who cares? With Mbe barely settled into his new office, former O’Ranger Giovanni van Bronckhorst had already muscled his way to the front of the queue to replace him. Meanwhile, rumour has it that Norwich City are close to rebranding as Frank Lampard’s Norwich City for the rest of the season. So, as Lampard might ask with a trademark chuckle – is there space for both former England midfielders in the same relegation zone? No, but seriously, at least one of them will be relegated. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Niall from 7.45pm GMT for hot clockwatch coverage of the latest Human Rights World Cup qualifers. QUOTE OF THE DAY “[It] might not be Oscar-worthy but glad I could play my part” – Marcus Rashford pops up as a radish [see what they did there? – Fiver Marketing Ed] in this year’s Aldi Christmas advert. FIVER LETTERS “Your article about Shelter’s #NoHomeKit campaign – and the league’s characteristically constipated response (yesterday’s Fiver) – got me thinking about where this ‘away kit’ thing came from. In the days when football was about Tommy Smith kicking George Best, Norman Hunter kicking Kevin Keegan, etc, teams had a first kit which they wore at home and for most away matches, a second kit which they wore for away matches only if their first kit clashed with their opponents’, and a third kit for away matches where both their first and second kits managed to clash with their opponents’. Whether there was a clash was decided by the referee, and didn’t necessarily take account of how kits might appear to viewers with black and white TV sets, as a memorable early-70s televised clash between Coventry (light grey shirts and dark grey shorts) and Wolves (light grey shirts and black shorts) demonstrated. Now, in the days when football is about marketing opportunities, there is an automatic assumption that teams will wear different kits for home and away matches. Why?” – Gordon Dent. “Re: #NoHomeKit. The clubs could still participate. What’s the worst that league officials will do, fine them? This league isn’t all about mon … oh, never mind” – Andrew Wolf. “Thank you for the evocative reference to the ‘Dukla Prague away kit’ (yesterday’s Fiver). On a holiday to Prague in late-1990, my friend and I decided our challenge was to acquire said sporting-wear. After numerous enquiries fell on deaf ears, we retired to a basement bar for a beer or five, where we met a bloke called Miroslav, who described himself as Dukla Prague’s only fan. We had stupidly not realised they were the army team and hugely unpopular. Miroslav kindly called the club and arranged for us go there the following morning, and we were presented with brand new shirts from the first-team changing rooms; mission accomplished!” – David Newton. “West Ham now have an interesting melange of owners. I was surprised you failed to mention (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs) that Daniel Kretinsky is CEO and 94% owner of the largest energy group in central Europe, largely based on coal and gas-fired plants. No doubt plans will be in train shortly for a net carbon zero game at the Boris Bowl” – John Weldon. “When I read the article ‘has a player’s name been too offensive to be broadcast’ in The Knowledge (yesterday’s Still Want More?), it reminded me of the time Princess Anne visited Iran many years ago. ‘Anne’ in Farsi means ‘sh1t’. The newsreaders clearly had a problem so they pronounced the a more like an o and called her Princess Onne” – Nader Ahmadzadeh. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … David Newton. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Eddie Howe has predictably sidestepped the elephant in Newcastle’s boardroom at his first press conference. “For me it was a football decision,” he trousered. “My focus is football – that’s all I’m going to concern myself with.” In Asian qualifying for HR World Cup 2022, Australia are three points adrift of group leaders Saudi Arabia after being held to a flamin’ soggy goalless draw. “The” Lebanon, meanwhile, led Iran 1-0 into the 90th minute, only to lose 2-1. Jonas Eidevall reckons the 500-strong away contingent was inspirational in Arsenal’s 5-1 Women’s Big Cup win at HB Køge. “It’s so good for the belief of the players,” he cheered. Xavi is cracking the whip at Barcelona. Among the disciplinary measures imposed on players at Camp Nou, fines will be imposed for lateness and will multiply per offence, while “risky activities (such as surfing) are prohibited during the season”. And because the local carnival is back, Cologne’s players and management have rocked up to training in fancy dress. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s Football Weekly Extra. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Has $tevie Mbe really earned the Villa job, muses Ewan Murray. Manchester City’s Janine Beckie gets her chat on with Louise Taylor about faith, football and feeling both Canadian and American. Karen Carney on England players’ loss of form and why it’s not a surprise. Gareth Bale is set to earn his 100th Welsh cap. Some teammates pick their favourites of the previous 99. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! SOME CLASSIC YOUTUBE TOOHeigh-ho it’s off to the metaverse we go – if Walt Disney gets its way. The home of Mickey Mouse and Princess Elsa has revealed it is planning to join the likes of Mark Zuckerberg and Microsoft in the metaverse. The new tech concept, a blending of the physical and digital worlds where people can interact virtually, is becoming a multibillion-dollar fixation for Silicon Valley executives, including the Facebook founder who is staking his company’s future on its success. And now Hollywood is taking note too, according to the Disney chief executive, Bob Chapek, who said on Wednesday the company was preparing to take the leap into virtual reality. Referring to Disney’s history of innovation in storytelling, which includes the Mickey Mouse cartoon Steamboat Willie, one of the first to feature synchronised sound, Chapek said: “The Walt Disney Company has a long track record as an early adopter in the use of technology to enhance the entertainment experience.” Disney’s former executive vice-president of digital, Tilak Mandadi, wrote a LinkedIn post in 2020 about creating a theme park metaverse, where the “physical and digital world converge” through wearable devices and mobile phones. The metaverse concept also includes augmented reality, where elements of the digital world are layered on top of reality, such as the Pokémon Go game, which is played on mobile phones or Facebook’s recent smart glasses tie-up with Ray-Ban. Speaking during the company’s quarterly corporate results call, Chapek added: “Our efforts to date are merely a prologue to a time when we’ll be able to connect the physical and digital worlds even more closely, allowing for storytelling without boundaries in our own Disney metaverse.” Chapek gave no specific details of Disney’s plans on the results call, in keeping with a concept that is still very much in its early stages across the tech industry. But he indicated in a further interview on CNBC on Wednesday that the company’s Disney+ streaming service would be involved. In the interview, Chapek said he saw it as an extension of Disney+, through the “three-dimensional canvas” he envisions for new types of storytelling, which could involve a cast of characters that ranges from Mickey Mouse to Snow White, Iron Man and Luke Skywalker. Disney+, which has 118 million subscribers to Netflix’s 214 million, has already launched a number of hit franchise spin-offs such as Star Wars adventure The Mandalorian and the Avengers series Wandavision. However, that subscriber total represented a shortfall on market expectations, with analysts anticipating Disney+ would reach 125 million users in its latest results. Netflix has also reported slowing subscriber growth as the relaxation of lockdown measures renews the appeal of out-of-home entertainment – and forces executives to consider new ways of boosting sign-ups. However, some of Disney’s digital ventures have struggled. Its online children’s social network, Club Penguin, was closed in 2017 a decade after its launch. Its $563m (£420m) purchase of Playdom in 2010, which marked the company’s entry into social gaming, had its value written down. Disney also struggled with Maker Studios, a YouTube network it bought for $500m in 2014. The metaverse elsewhere Mark Zuckerberg has been the most prominent exponent of the metaverse. His notion of the concept, revealed last month in a presentation where he announced the rebranding of Facebook’s corporate name to Meta, is of avatars – or digital representations of people – meeting in the virtual realm by donning VR headsets (Meta owns the Oculus VR headset business). His executives, including PR chief Nick Clegg and product boss Chris Cox, now take their weekly team meetings in the metaverse, via the company’s Horizon Workrooms product. But the company has made clear that a fully fledged virtual world, where friends can meet to try on clothes or attend pop concerts, is a decade or more away. Microsoft is introducing a metaverse for office workers via its Teams product, whose services include hosting video meetings. In the first half of next year Teams users will be able to appear as avatars in online meetings – appearing as a cartoon in their bit of the screen if they so wish. Teams is used by 250 million people once a month, which gives Microsoft an influential role in shaping the corporate metaverse. Game-makers Roblox and Epic, the producer of Fortnite, are also working on their own metaverses and Zuckerberg envisages the metaverse as an array of virtual worlds that are meshed together, with people’s individual avatars wandering between them.A retired police officer who is suing a man over the murder of PC Yvonne Fletcher outside the Libyan embassy has spoken of 37 years of pain, guilt and anger at the authorities over his friend’s death, in moving testimony at the high court. John Murray, 66, said he had been left with no other option than to launch a civil claim for the nominal sum of £1 against Saleh Ibrahim Mabrouk because “the authorities were not going to act”. Giving evidence in central London on Thursday, he said that on the day of Fletcher’s murder, on 17 April 1984, the two officers had been swapping positions as they spoke to people protesting against Muammar Gaddafi’s regime outside the embassy. “If I had changed places with her once more, it would have been me,” he said. “But if I’d been shot I might have survived – she was shot and she died … I felt very ashamed. She died in my place as far as I was concerned... “I still have very bad dreams. I see Yvonne every day, I know she’s with me here – I know that. She was one of my best friends and I let her down. I still feel responsible for what did happen to her.” Murray said Fletcher, who was 25, was about three yards away from him when he heard what he thought was a firework before turning to see his stricken colleague on the ground. He said as he cradled her head in his hands he promised he would bring her assassin to justice. Recalling having to formally identify her at the hospital and staying for the postmortem, Murray said: “I can remember she was lying in the mortuary – cold, naked, frightened. I couldn’t do anything to help her. It was too late, I wanted to do something but I couldn’t.” He said he had to get the tube home from hospital and never received any treatment for the trauma he suffered. Murray told the court he sent hundreds of letters to the prime minister, home secretary and Metropolitan police commissioner asking about the investigation into Fletcher’s killer but got no response. He said that when Tony Blair went to see Gaddafi in 2004, Murray was told in advance that Fletcher would be “top of the agenda” and even asked to accompany the prime minister but was met with a refusal. Murray said he was “disgusted” to find out “it wasn’t discussed. The purpose of the meeting in the desert in the tent with Gaddafi was for business deals, oil deals, construction deals, nothing to do with Yvonne”. Blair later told MPs that Fletcher was “part of the conversation”. Murray said his hopes were raised when Mabrouk was arrested by Scotland Yard in 2015 only to be dashed two years later when detectives said they were dropping the investigation because key evidence could not be used in court for reasons of national security. Explaining his current claim against Mabrouk for assault and battery, Murray said: “If he authorities were not going to take any action, then the only option was for me [to do so].” Mabrouk is not accused of firing the shots that killed Fletcher but of being a “key participant” in the decision to use violence. He has denied any involvement but is not participating in the trial, which is expected to conclude on Friday.“Rebel dykes” is a new term for an old mood. It was coined retrospectively to describe a sprawling group of acquaintances who partied and protested their way through London in the 1980s. And it is now the title of a raucous feature-length documentary about them. The film begins at the Greenham Common peace camp in the early 80s, takes in a lesbian S&amp;M club night which became a flashpoint for “the raging sex wars” between radical feminists and “leather dykes”, tells of gay pubs and clubs, punk bands and friendship groups, anti-section 28 protesters who abseiled into the House of Lords, censorship, discrimination and, ultimately, liberation. It is a fabulously joyful and celebratory testament to community and resilience during difficult times. “Back in the day, I was a rebel dyke,” says Siobhan Fahey (not the one from Bananarama). “I was living a wild life,” she says, fondly recalling her time in London from the ages of about 18 to 25. “I was a punk girl, I was a sex worker, I lived in squats, I went travelling a lot. And then after that period, we all went on with our lives.” The people she ran with grew up, moved away, moved on; Fahey eventually became a nurse and now lives in Glasgow. But she started to notice that nobody really knew about the rebel dykes and their community. “It was like that period had never happened! It was just lost.” Now it has been found again. Some of the people from that time had stayed in touch in a private Facebook group, and, around 2014, Fahey had the idea of taping them to ensure there was a record of their experiences. “As soon as I started collecting the stories, I realised it was something bigger, something beautiful,” she says. She turned it into “a sort of audiovisual cabaret thing” and began to perform it around the UK. “The film obviously concentrates on the cute girls in leather,” says Fahey, with a smile, “but in my head, it was all of the outsider dykes. You know, whether they were sex workers, reggae girls, squatters, all the ones who didn’t fit in.” In Manchester, where she was living at the time, Fahey approached Harri Shanahan and Siân A Williams, whom she knew from the city’s DIY music and queer scenes, about turning it into a video presentation. They had some experience of film-making, having made videos for their friends’ bands, though this would turn out to be their first feature film. “It was too big a subject matter not to do it justice,” says Williams. They were familiar with some of the figures in the film already. “It was all the genre of music that I’m massively into, and why I was in a band in the first place. But the erotic photography side, and that S&amp;M subculture, that was my home, too, and where I was making art.” Some of the film needed animation, so Shanahan, who had a degree in film, did an MA to learn the skills. “I was a bit naive about what it would take to create that much animation, having not previously made any … so that was a bit cocky of me,” they laugh. But that DIY, can-do spirit suited the ethos of the rebel dykes perfectly. “We’re used to basically making it up as we go, and I guess that’s how it started,” says Williams. They never thought it would end up being shown in cinemas, much less doing the international festival circuit and winning awards. “Now it’s got bigger than our wildest dreams.” The animation is part of a clever approach made necessary by a lack of footage of the time. Partly that’s because cameras were not the ubiquitous presence then that they are now. Partly, it’s that the rebel dykes didn’t think to document themselves. “These are the people who weren’t holding the doctorates or working in the local council. They were working doing other things, or a lot of them were unemployed,” says Shanahan. “These are the people who move around from place to place, don’t have places to store stuff, don’t have money to buy cameras, don’t think to record themselves. And so those are the people who needed the spotlight on them. If you want to hear what other people had to say, they’ve probably said it somewhere.” “And we were very young,” says Fahey. “For lots of us, our lives were tough, we were often thrown out of home, so a lot of people only did their education later in life. And partly, we got on with our lives.” Shanahan and Williams had to be smart about it. Some of the scenes that look like real archive footage are recreations. When they were unable to use the real footage – such as of the lesbian activists storming the 6 O’Clock News in 1988 in protest at section 28, which banned the “promotion” of homosexuality in schools – there is a cheeky, arty performance of it using masks instead.“I loved the Maggie Thatcher with the mask!” says Fahey, laughing. Section 28 was repealed in 2003, which might seem like a world away to younger LGBTQ+ people watching the film. The directors are 38, while Fahey is 56. “Me and Harri are that middle generation between the rebel dykes and the younger generation now,” says Williams, “and I guess a lot of people younger than us won’t be aware of how bad it was. But section 28 was in place for the entirety of my and Harri’s schooling, and it had a very damaging effect on me personally.” That’s one of the reasons why it was so important to them to share the story of the rebel dykes with the younger generation. “So that they know exactly what the rebel dykes were fighting for on our behalf. That’s why we owed it to the older generation to try and make a good film for them. Because they did so much for us.” Pejorative words that have been reclaimed, such as “queer”, can be controversial; many still dislike the term, while others wear it proudly. Has anyone objected to the word “dyke”? All three of them are momentarily silent, and then Fahey jumps in. “So, when I set up my community-interest company [a special limited company that benefits communities rather than shareholders], Rebel Dykes History Project, Companies House wouldn’t let us have the name!” They had to appeal, and Fahey did her research. “Dyke is older, as a reclaimed word, than queer. There have been court cases about it in America. And of course, on Facebook and Instagram, it’s basically banned. Some of the contributors [who did not appear in the film] didn’t feel that, at this point in their lives, they wanted to be associated with the word. You know, it’s a strong word. But it’s a powerful word. I like it.” They won their appeal, becoming the first UK company to have the word “dyke” in its name, used in that way. When even registering a company name required a bit of rebellion, what more can we learn from the rebel dykes today? “One thing I’ve come across, in taking the film out in the world, is that young people in particular are incredibly moved by it,” says Fahey. “It’s very common to have people in tears, saying they feel seen for the first time. A lot of people think that the youngest queers, the Zs or whatever, have got it all. But there’s a lot of isolation and loneliness. So I think that the whole community thing is a great message to take from it. To go out, do things with each other, make films, put on nights, become an activist.” “I’ve heard of younger people calling themselves rebel dykes,” says Shanahan, smiling. “And that’s amazing. We made a place for people to hang their coats, we made a space for them. They’ve got like a word they can call themselves now. So that feels really nice.” It has changed Shanahan and Williams’s lives completely. “Now we’ve got this growing confidence, like, bloody hell, we can be film-makers,” says Williams. “I always say: forget having the confidence of a mediocre white man. Have the confidence of a rebel dyke who spaghetti-wrestles on a Tuesday night.” • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. The Greenham Common peace camp was set up in the early 1980s, not late 1970s as stated in an earlier version. • Rebel Dykes is in UK and Ireland cinemas on 26 NovemberWhen in trouble, Boris Johnson flees to his comfort zone. Just as Brexit havoc made him, so Brexit mayhem may yet save him. Johnson may hope to turn up the heat under that cauldron to provoke retaliatory action from the EU, which he could then blame on Brussels and President Macron. But this will be nothing more than a seductive distraction from his battalion of troubles. This week, Johnson may have felt intimations of political mortality as his loyal press turned on him over charges of government corruption: it was not just the Daily Mail and Sun, but even the Express. Today the Spectator’s editor excoriates Johnson’s “court of chaos”. Johnson sent Tory MPs out to shame themselves by voting for sleaze in parliament and sewage in the rivers. Now, they may not obey him so readily. He has already betrayed those on his party’s right and left with his machinations, leading his MPs through 43 dizzying U-turns. His popularity is at a record net -27 low, and his party’s lead has been lost. So where does he turn? Johnson has no happy place in any area of policy. The NHS is boiling over, with a hard winter and flu season yet to come. The social care crisis is blocking NHS beds (though didn’t Johnson say his tax levy would fix it?). He won no kudos for his leadership of the G7 or Cop26. The cost-of-living crunch bears down on households, while those who have lost universal credit suffer outright hardship. As the PM gazes at his dumb obedients round the cabinet table, each one fronts a department in trouble. But Johnson will always have Brexit. After a month of fruitless talks, Lord Frost yesterday told the House of Lords that suspending the Northern Ireland part of the Brexit deal will be the “only option” if negotiations fail. Frost says the threshold to trigger article 16, suspending the agreement, has already been reached – a claim that is tantamount to a declaration of trade war. Speaking to EU ambassadors after those tortuous talks, the European commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič warned of “serious consequences”. Ursula von der Leyen emerged yesterday from the White House with presidential support for retaliation if the UK upends the Northern Ireland protocol. Frost likes to provoke. What effrontery to admonish the EU to “stay calm” and “turn away from confrontation” while accusing the bloc of protecting “their own interests” ahead of “supporting the peace process and the people of Northern Ireland”. Peace in Northern Ireland rates low in Johnson’s thinking, but if he did stoke real trouble the blame would land squarely with him. A trade war takes time to unfurl. The triggering of article 16 would be followed by a one-month cooling-off delay and then talks and more talks. It takes a whole year before a trade deal can be rescinded. That may feel like a pleasingly long time for belligerent war-play from a PM who never thinks beyond one day. Johnson hasn’t many weapons, so he has already thrown out a self-harming threat to withdraw from joint EU Horizon research programmes, taking out the UK’s £15bn, to the horror of UK scientists, who fear being cut off from the mainstream. Why would the French, with an upcoming election, politely stick to Britain’s trade-war timetable? They could quite legally slow traffic at our ports with increasingly thorough lorry checks, causing queues halfway up the country. Maybe Johnson wants such retaliation to stir up outrage against France and the EU, in order to reassemble his old alliance of leavers for a second Agincourt of plucky little Englanders against the massed EU ranks. But this might become yet another policy landmine, rather than useful distraction. What if supply chains are snarled up, and people start to connect wage stagnation and price rises to the 4% loss of GDP that the OBR has blamed on Brexit? What if most people are just sick to death of a never-ending Brexit, which they thought had already been “done”? Current polling gives an insight here. NatCen’s What the UK Thinks asks, “How well or badly do you think the government are doing at negotiating/handling Britain’s exit from the EU?” To that, 57% say badly; 31% well. “Do you think Brexit is having a generally good or bad impact on the economy as a whole?” Here it’s 44% saying bad, 25% good. “In hindsight do you think Britain was right or wrong to vote to leave the EU?” This time it’s 39% right, 48% wrong. Of course, this could all swivel in a patriotic anti-French hullabaloo, but the numbers suggest a growing understanding of Brexit untruths. If Johnson ignites this turmoil, Keir Starmer’s “make Brexit work” promise could begin to get traction. Against a backdrop of Brexit mayhem, letting the grown-ups sit down to smooth out trade obstacles might seem an attractive prospect. For as long as the UK doesn’t fall below EU food and safety standards, we could let trade flow. The “sovereign” option to set our own rules would remain, but who wants them lowered anyway? We could strike a deal to let our musicians and performers sell their wares on the continent. This would all require tiptoeing gently; any suggestions of rejoining the single market would have Labour remoaners accused of a backdoor Brexit in name only. But over time, UK businesses looking across the Irish sea will be able to see Northern Ireland flourishing by staying in. Indeed, the industry body Manufacturing NI tells me of a 61% increase in sales to the Republic and order books brimming with sales diverted from the British mainland. Johnson’s trade war increasingly looks like a Labour opportunity. Wiser voices warn the PM to step back. If article 16 is triggered, expert observers, such as Anand Menon of The UK in a Changing Europe, think a limited deal can still be struck on some trade obstacles. But it’s legally impossible to reverse the UK’s signature to the agreement that the European court of justice will be the arbitrator of trade disputes. On this, Johnson has backed himself into a corner: will he make a humiliating compromise, or fight on for the political fun of it, whatever the damage, and whatever the risks to peace in Northern Ireland? Loudmouthed Frost goes back into talks tomorrow. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021. The UK hosted the G7 summit this year, not the G20 one as stated in an earlier version. The latter took place in Italy. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistA student has been convicted of murdering his 94-year-old step-grandmother three years after an inquest ruled she was the victim of an accidental house fire. Mary Gregory was discovered under a table in the conservatory of her smoke-filled bungalow in Heysham, Lancashire, in May 2018 and died four days later in hospital. An investigation by Lancashire Fire and Rescue Service concluded the most probable cause was a dropped or carelessly discarded cigarette and ruled out any third-party involvement. This led a coroner to later record a verdict of an accidental death. However, police reopened the case in May 2019 after a confession made by Tiernan Darnton, 21, during a counselling session. He said he had killed Gregory – his stepfather’s mother – by setting fire to a curtain at her home. Darnton had made a similar confession several weeks after Gregory’s death, during a game of truth or dare with two friends, Preston crown court heard. “I have a secret I haven’t told anyone. I may have killed someone,” he told the pair. When pressed, he said he started the fire because he did not want Gregory to suffer any longer from dementia, the court heard. He told a counsellor in May 2019 about a friend “who could send me to prison cos of what he knows”. The female counsellor ended the session by saying to him: “I’m not really clear what you’re saying but I think you’re trying to tell me you’ve killed someone,” to which Darnton mouthed “Yes”. A week later he told the counsellor and his stepfather, Chris Gregory, 66, that he had started the fire, the court was told. The counsellor then informed the police. Darnton closed his eyes briefly after the jury foreman returned a unanimous guilty verdict. The court heard that an examination of his mobile phone and laptop found internet searches made after the fire including “I’m a murderer”, “I’m a monster and I’m going to hell”, “I want to cause evil” and “Urge to kill again”. Giving evidence at his trial, Darnton, a former student at Kendal college and Lancaster &amp; Morecambe college, said the case was “all a big misunderstanding” and his confessions were false. He said he only wanted to impress his “edgy” friends in the truth or dare game and felt he had to say something believable, although he knew it was “messed up”. Darnton said his comments to the counsellor were “attention-seeking” and denied saying he had set his step-grandmother’s house alight. He claimed his Google searches were related to his interest in killers and true crime, and said he did not even understand at the time the true definition in law of murder. A fire examination expert for the prosecution said the chances that the fire was caused by a cigarette were “extremely remote”. He said it was most likely started by naked flame ignition near the front bedroom window of the property. The Crown said attempts were also made to hamper any escape by Gregory, with a table placed in front of the conservatory doors, the unplugging of a phone cable and the dismantling of a smoke alarm. A packet of Tunnock’s teacakes and a can of Coca-Cola, bought by Darnton from a nearby service station less than two hours before the fire, were discovered at the scene. Evidence shown to the jury also included drawings found at Darnton’s home address, outlining the floor plan of Gregory’s bungalow. They contained labels including “good hiding place” and “quick exit”, as well as references to needing a “good alibi”. Sentencing will take place on Friday.When Boris Johnson stepped off the train as he returned to Glasgow for the final days of Cop26, he was met with boos at the city’s central station. Many people were unhappy at his decision to return to the conference on Wednesday, and felt he was doing so more to escape the sleaze scandals enveloping his party in Westminster rather than out of any strong desire to help save the planet. “I don’t think Boris really cares [about Cop26]. I’m not sure what he cares about really, other than his own ego,” said Simon Worth, 48, a performance and wellbeing coach who lives in Glasgow. “He’s not very good at facing up to any responsibilities I think. But he’s very good at smoke and mirrors and deflecting attention.” Worth said he felt there was some public anger at the sleaze allegations dominating parliament this week, but doubted it would be enough to create significant change. “I think the problem is, most of us don’t pay enough attention. We don’t kick up a fuss, so they just carry on doing it,” he said. Worth said that if Johnson’s visit to Cop26 was sincere then it would be a boost to the conference, but he urged him to “stop deflecting attention and just address it head on”. Just outside the entrance to the SEC, where the talks are taking place, Sue Hillman, 76, a retired producer, was also frustrated to hear Johnson had returned. “He likes to be in the limelight,” she said. “He’ll do anything to divert the attention from what’s really happening in this country. There is no getting away from it, the Tory party has become so embedded in sleaze and corruption. I don’t see how anybody in the UK can’t see what’s happening.” She was also frustrated that the media used his press conference on Wednesday to ask questions about sleaze when the focus should have been on the climate. “I begin to despair, really, about how the world is operating,” she said. A keen supporter of Cop26, Hillman was waiting outside the venue to meet the Kenyan delegate who has been staying with her for the duration of the conference, after many people struggled to find affordable accommodation in the city. “We get lots of nice words occasionally coming out of Boris Johnson’s mouth, but he doesn’t actually do what he’s asking everybody else to do, does he?” she said “He flies on his private jet to go for dinner in the Garrick, so I’m not impressed.” There were some who had more faith in the prime minister. “I don’t think he’s that committed to Cop, but I think he has to be here otherwise it will go terrible for him,” said Euan Warnock, 19, a college student. “And I thought he was genuinely here for that reason, I don’t think he’s running away.” Warnock said he wasn’t surprised Johnson got a bit of a frosty reception when he arrived in Glasgow, though. “Most people see him not as a politician but as a businessman who is looking after himself,” he said. Like many on the streets of Glasgow, Warnock said he hadn’t heard much about progress inside Cop, despite it being on his doorstep. “To be honest, I’ve not heard of anything big that they’ve done. If they had done I feel like we all would have heard about it. Everything is still targets for the 2030s or 2050s, it’s still so far off.”Black women are still four times more likely to die in pregnancy and childbirth than white women, according to new data that has reignited calls to tackle racial inequality in maternal healthcare. The findings show a slight drop in the maternal mortality rate for black women, but remained the same for mixed ethnicity women and Asian women, which was two times higher and almost twice as high, respectively. The report published by MBRRACE-UK (Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through Audits and Confidential Enquiries across the UK) has deepened calls for action to tackle longstanding inequalities. Tinuke Awe, the co-founder of Fivexmore, a campaign group set up to improve black maternal health, said: “It’s outrageous that these inequalities have been allowed to exist. Groups like ours and activists have been raising the alarm for over 30 years. Things should be dramatically improving with the advances in technology, but these disparities have remained. There’s something happening in the UK that we need to look at, as significant improvements have been made in other countries. “As a campaign group we welcome the ever so slight decrease in black maternal death. Every life saved is good progress, but the fact of the matter still remains that the disparity between black and white women is still very large. The time for action is now.” According to the report, 191 women, of the 2,173,810 giving birth, died during or up to six weeks after pregnancy between 2017 and 2019; 495 during or up to one year after their pregnancy. The report notes pregnancy remains very safe in the UK, with 8.8 women per 100,000 dying during pregnancy or up to six weeks after childbirth or the end of pregnancy. The study found a small, but not statistically significant, decrease in the overall maternal death rate. Heart disease, epilepsy and stroke were the leading cause of maternal death during or up to six weeks after the end of pregnancy. Sepsis and thrombosis and blood clots are the third and fourth most common causes. An inquiry by the charity Birthrights found that black, brown and mixed ethnicity women reported feeling unsafe, their concerns being ignored or dismissed, denial of pain relief due to racial stereotypes, and pervasive microaggressions causing harm or distress. Their testimony was backed up by healthcare professionals. Amy Gibbs, the chief executive of Birthrights, said: “While there has been a small drop in the maternal mortality rate for black women in recent MBRRACE reports, this bleak picture has not changed in over a decade. We remain deeply concerned that black and brown people’s basic human rights to safety, dignity and equality in pregnancy and childbirth are not being protected, respected or upheld.” Last September, Fivexmore announced the launch of an all-party parliamentary group on black maternal health to tackle institutional racism in the UK healthcare system. “As well as the focus placed on mortality, we need to look at all the other women who have suffered harm in some way, suffered from illness, or suffered substantial injuries because they’re pregnant or want to have a child. “There’s currently no way to quantify the issue. We can count the deaths but we don’t know how terrible things are.”Seth Meyers Seth Meyers lauded a significant blow to Donald Trump’s attempts to skirt accountability for the 6 January attack on the Capitol on Wednesday’s Late Night, one evening after a federal judge denied Trump’s petition to keep certain White House records secret. The judge ruled that a list of records compiled by the National Archives including handwritten notes specifically about 6 January, call logs between Trump and Mike Pence, White House visitor logs and daily schedules must be made available to the House’s 6 January select committee. “I’m shocked to learn there even was a daily schedule,” Meyers said. “Remember when we found out most days it said ‘executive time’ and that was just code for Trump not wanting to leave the bedroom? He’d just spend the morning in his PJs calling in to Fox &amp; Friends while viewers waited for them to blink to make sure they’re still alive? “Maybe that’s why Trump didn’t care about the pandemic – he was the first president to work remotely,” he added. “And even when he did show up to the office, I’d be shocked if there were ever actually records or official documents in that White House. “Do you think anyone ever took notes in a meeting with Trump?” he wondered. “When they finally subpoena those notepads, they’re just going to be filled with random doodles and inscrutable comments like ‘ingest bleach, maybe?’” Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert also celebrated federal judge Tanya Chutkan’s denial of Trump’s attempt to shield records from the committee. “That is the worst denial for the former president since anytime he tried to hold his wife’s hand,” the Late Show host joked. In the court filing, Trump argued that he maintained a “residual right” to executive privilege even while out of office. “You don’t get to keep any part of a job you lost!” said Colbert. “It’s all gone! That’s why you didn’t see Christian Bale playing Dick Cheney in a Batman suit.” Chutkan wrote in her ruling that Trump’s request for executive privilege was “outweighed by President Biden’s decision not to uphold the privilege” because “there can be only one president at a time.” “Presidents are not kings,” she wrote in what Colbert called a “knockout blow”, and “Plaintiff is not President.” “I have not seen such a brutal attack on an elected official since January 6th,” Colbert quipped. Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah riffed on the uproar in Congress over Representative Paul Gosar of Arizona, who posted a photoshopped anime video depicting him killing the progressive representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Joe Biden. Gosar defended the video as a “symbolic cartoon” that wasn’t a “targeted attack” on either Ocasio-Cortez or the president. “Get the fuck out of here. It’s ‘symbolic?’” Noah fumed. “Just admit you posted the thing for a laugh! “I’ll be honest with you guys, I know we’re supposed to put on our concerned faces and wag our finger at him for threatening violence, but I don’t know about you, it’s hard to watch that cartoon and see it as a real threat,” he continued. Pointing to a picture of Gosar, he noted, “does he look like he can pick up two swords at once? It’s clearly a fantasy. “On the other hand, though, it’s harder to believe that Gosar didn’t intend a targeted attack when he supported a targeted attack on January 6th,” Noah added. “You can do memes, or you can plot an insurrection. You can’t do both.” Samantha Bee And on Full Frontal, Samantha Bee celebrated the passage of Biden’s $1.2tn infrastructure bill, which she called a “major victory”. “The bipartisan bill will positively impact so many people,” she explained. “It addresses hugely pressing problems that we’ve been trying to fix for years,” from protecting water infrastructure from climate change and cyber-attacks to removal of pollution from soil to repairs and replacements for 45,000 bridges in poor condition. Besides being a much-needed win for the president, the infrastructure bill is also a victory for the Democrats, and especially the Congressional Black Caucus and the speaker, Nancy Pelosi, who wrangled progressive support with calls and voicemails. “I feel like maybe half of them signed on to avoid getting more voicemails from Nancy Pelosi,” Bee mused, “but still, it worked.” The bill also received rare bipartisan support: 13 GOP House members and 19 Republican senators signed on, bringing the total number of supportive votes in the Senate to 69. “And if that number doesn’t say mutually beneficial, I don’t know what does,” Bee said.Teachers are being targeted by abusive and humiliating TikTok accounts set up by students, prompting a warning from schools that parents may face police action over offending posts. Officials at the Department for Education have said they are engaging with the social media giant after headteachers complained of dozens of cases of teachers being targeted. The Association of School and College Leaders, which represents most secondary school heads, said it had received mounting complaints from its members. A spokesperson for the DfE said it was never acceptable for teachers or other staff to be harassed or intimidated using social media. “We are engaging with TikTok on the steps being taken by them to address this issue involving teachers. “We are clear that social media companies need to take action against harmful content on their platforms and we are introducing laws which will usher in a new era of accountability for these social media companies,” a spokesperson for the government said. A number of schools have already written directly to parents, warning that the police would be involved in cases where pupils are found to have set up accounts identifying or purporting to belong to a teacher. Plantsbrook school in Sutton Coldfield told parents it was “aware of a current ‘challenge’ circulating on TikTok encouraging school students to make dummy accounts and post unpleasant content that vilifies teachers at their school. “We are aware of at least two accounts that are currently targeting Plantsbrook teachers. This is happening in other Birmingham schools too and the police are aware and involved in some cases already.” Headteachers told Schools Week that complaints to TikTok about abusive posts or accounts rarely received a response, with no action taken in most cases. Geoff Barton, general secretary of ASCL, said his union had received more than 50 complaints about TikTok accounts, but said it was likely to be a much larger problem that could lead to pupils being excluded from school. “These posts are often defamatory and offensive, and some are homophobic. Schools tell us that they have asked TikTok to remove them but TikTok has often failed to act despite these posts clearly breaching the platform’s community guidelines,” Barton said. “TikTok has replied to us to say it is investigating the issue and that it is using a combination of technologies and moderation teams to identify and remove content or accounts that violate its community guidelines. It says it has acted against a large number of accounts already. It has also offered to meet with us to discuss its response in more detail. “We welcome this action and hope this matter can be resolved swiftly.” A spokesperson for TikTok said: “Our community guidelines make clear that we do not tolerate content that contains bullying or harassment, statements targeting an individual, or hateful speech or behaviour, and we remove content that violates these guidelines.”The brakes have been put on summer road trips with Australians who decide to holiday at home facing rental car prices up to double pre-pandemic rates. The worldwide car shortage that has hit new and used car retailers has also jacked up rental prices by hundreds of dollars a week. A shortage of electronic chips means some new cars will take months to be delivered. That shortage has pushed up the prices of used cars, which are 36% higher in Australia than before the pandemic began. Australia’s international borders have reopened, while some state borders are still in place. But with many Australians still reluctant to leave these shores – whether out of fear of Covid or because of the complications it brings – Tourism Australia is continuing its Holiday Here This Year campaign to support domestic tourism. But those without wheels, and those wanting to fly and hire some, can expect to pay more than $1,000 a week. Rentals are most expensive in Tasmania, where prices have reached $169 a day – that’s $1,183 a week, assuming no discounts. No state has an average price of less than $100 a day. Kayak, the travel search engine, collected the data for car rental searches between 1 December this year and 31 January 2022. The number of people searching for rental cars more than doubled in most states compared to last year, and as demand increased so did prices. In the Northern Territory, Queensland and Tasmania, prices have more than doubled since 2019. Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries’ (FCAI) public affairs manager, Doug Wylie, said automotive shortages aren’t caused by the shipping logjam that has affected other products including building materials, or the pallet shortage that is slowing the distribution of groceries. “It is primarily due to the global shortage of semiconductors and the flow-on impacts to vehicle manufacturing,” he said. “The issue with the semiconductor chips varies across car brands, and is a problem for the manufacturing sector in general. Carmakers are dealing with it, as are whitegoods manufacturers.” Chip manufacturers slowed down production as lockdowns began, and were unprepared when demand for chips soared as people bought electronic goods to keep them entertained or to work from home. A storm and a fire in separate manufacturing facilities compounded the problem. It takes time and money to establish new factories, Wylie said, so there will be car shortages until next year. “The rental market in many respects is a snapshot of the car market. You have luxury models, hatchbacks and family cars,” he said. “The shortage varies across brands and models greatly.” “[When buying a new car] there are some cars you can purchase off the lot today, some you’ll purchase and they’ll be delivered in a week, some can take months.” FCAI’s data shows car rental companies are trying to make up for the shortfall. They have bought almost 891,000 cars so far this year, compared with just over 726,000 at the same time last year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Consumers in general need to be doing their research on what models are available here and now. They need to be prepared for possible wait times on some models, especially if they’re looking for particular specs, colours, and trims,” Wylie said. “Despite the apparent shortage, we have about 86 brands operating in Australia. With this level of competition consumers can still get a good deal within reasonable timeframes.” The Kayak data shows the last week in January is the cheapest in the holiday period to rent a car (the average price is $92 a day), while the week from 27 December to 2 January is the most expensive, with an average price of $157.Borders are open! Lockdowns are over! We can reunite with our families! But after almost six months apart, my parents looked aghast, not delighted when they saw me. “Your eye wasn’t just bloodshot, it had blood in it. And your complexion was grey – like cement,” observed my mother a week later. “We were worried about you.” Soon after arriving at their house, I took to the bed in the downstairs guest room, where I stayed for a week and emerged only for meals. My parents were impressed at the amount I was sleeping. “It’s like you’re in an induced coma,” said my mother. In a way, I was. I couldn’t stay awake for more than a few hours at a time. As I spent long hours down there in a hectic, vast dreamscape, I hoped that I was healing. A few days earlier I had sustained a concussion climbing into a troop carrier (don’t ask why I was in a troop carrier – that’s for another time). Hoisting myself into the back of the vehicle with too much energy, I shot into the roof at great velocity. “Oof,” said everyone in the back of the troopie as I hit the roof. “Yeah, yeah, I’m OK,” I said. After half an hour with a plastic bag of ice on my head that was leaking over my face, in what looked like a grotesque parody of tears, I thought I had recovered, and carried on as usual. But that night back in Sydney I started feeling off. At Una’s restaurant – carving through their schnitzel the size of a placemat – I had a sudden urge to be sick. My head didn’t feel right. I had to go home immediately. The next day was woozy and slow. I interviewed the writer Christos Tsiolkas, and listening back to the tape, my voice was on half-speed, my speech disjointed. I sounded stoned. After being given the all-clear by doctors in the emergency room at St Vincent’s (I had concussion. It would heal in its own time), I flew back to Victoria. I even attended a gig. But all was not well. By the time I got to my parent’s house I had a blood eye and a cement head. I needed to rest. **** Spending a week in bed – mostly sleeping – feels strange. This is the thing we crave and fear. To do nothing, to experience nothing, to have nothing to talk about at the end of it, to have produced nothing but a few grains of dreams (and even the dreams themselves were without substance, forgotten minutes after waking, spirits faded into morning air – except for a tone that lingered then disappeared with that first sip of coffee). But then also to sleep! To let your body and brain with its brokenness and fatigue lead you to a place where a mysterious healing takes place – that is almost a delight, a compensatory benefit for the pain and inconvenience of injury. I had walked out of St Vincent’s with no treatment plan or prescription, just the advice to take it easy and rest. In my week of deep rest, whole days passed where nothing happened. I could scarcely register them as “days” as they merged in with the nights, and then into the following mornings. Without anything to do or anywhere to be, I could just follow the pull of sleep back down to the timeless place. My waking life was also featureless – as plain as vanilla ice cream. Concussed, I couldn’t handle stimulation, confusion or too much information. I found looking at the fall of tweets down my phone too much. Twitter suddenly just seemed an absurd place to spend time and energy. Why would I want to read people’s complaints to their electricity provider or about their dislike of a television presenter? The platform suddenly seemed like a place for the truly unhinged. It was easier just to deactivate the app. And my 14-year relationship (addiction, whatever) with Twitter ended just like that … News on the internet, particularly live blogs, were also too overwhelming. Another hourly, daily addiction just gone. My brain just wanted white walls, silence, dreams. Executive functioning was also shot. The day after I got concussed, I purchased three tickets to the wrong destinations or the wrong dates while booking flights back to Melbourne. But on the upside, I look forward to taking a random flight to Avalon airport on 4 December. Two weeks on, I am getting better and require less sleep. But I miss the nourishment of deep rest (and also the permission to rest) and now have an appreciation for the protagonist of Ottessa Moshfegh’s 2018 novel, My Year of Rest and Relaxation. She attempts to sleep for a year by taking a cocktail of prescription drugs. Far from being a waste of time, to her, sleep “felt productive. Something was getting sorted out.” Like death but less permanent, sleep is also a holiday from life – a break from the conscious mind that can drive us insane with all its demands, stresses and chatter. Rest is the antidote to burnout - yet we resist it. To rest for 18 hours a day is to be unproductive. Even if you can financially afford to rest – not to read, not to watch anything, not to consume, not to do – feels radical in these times.The issue of whether the contraceptive pill – the first choice of birth control among Australian women using contraception – should be made available over the counter has divided the medical community. Other countries have already made access to the pill easier. In New Zealand, some oral contraceptives have been sold over the counter after a consultation with a pharmacist since 2017. The pill is also available over the counter in China, Greece, India, Turkey and other countries. But the Australian drugs regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), made an interim decision in October not to approve over-the-counter access to the pill. A final decision will come before Christmas; final submissions on the topic closed on 1 November. The last time the TGA considered the issue, in 2015, it also rejected making the pill accessible over the counter. ‘The safety of the status quo’ On one hand, the Pharmacy Guild’s national councillor, Natalie Willis, says failing to make oral contraceptive pills available over the counter with safeguards in place, including consultation with a pharmacist first, would be “a sad moment for women in Australia”. “Allowing pharmacies to sell the pill in certain situations would take the pressure off GPs and increase its accessibility for women,” she said after the latest decision. “It’s merely improving convenience for women to the same level as men, who can pop down to the shops and take care of their contraceptive needs very easily, whereas women have to jump through all these hoops. Rather than making a sensible and progressive decision in the interests of women, this interim decision is a retreat into the safety of the status quo.” The president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, says pharmacists are not qualified to make clinical assessments, and by being required to see a GP for a pill prescription, women can discuss whether it is the right contraceptive option for them. While the pill is widely used, there is concern women are unaware of improved access to more effective and long-acting reversible contraception such as implants and intrauterine devices, and by seeing a GP they can be advised of these other options that a pharmacist can’t administer. “Taking the oral contraceptive pill is not without risks, and people need to talk to their GP about which contraceptive option is right for them,” Khorshid says. “It can take a long time to determine which contraceptive pill is appropriate, and this is best done under the advice of a doctor. GPs often pick up health issues and conduct preventative health checks.” The TGA is considering two different proposals. One is to make pills containing norethisterone, levonorgestrel and ethinylestradiol available over the counter to patients, as long as they have been given a prescription by their GP within the previous two years. Prescriptions generally expire after one year. The other proposal is similar and says requiring yearly prescriptions from a GP creates issues around accessibility to a widely used medication. It suggests reclassifying 11 substances used in contraceptives so that pharmacists can dispense pills containing those ingredients directly, but patients must have been using the products for at least one year and have initially been prescribed the pill by a doctor. ‘Not a clearcut case’ In its interim decision, the TGA decided the proposed changes would introduce new risks which outweighed the potential benefits. The pill carries side-effects, and these are best discussed and managed by a doctor, the decision said. Dr Bonny Parkinson, a senior research fellow with the Macquarie University Centre for the Health Economy, co-authored a paper examining the cost-benefit analysis of making the pill available over the counter in 2019. The paper found such a move could save $96m a year in healthcare costs and save 22 lives over 35 years through preventionof pregnancy, ovarian cancer and other complications. Costs included those related to general practitioner and specialist consultations, contraceptives and other medicines, pharmacist time, hospitalisations and averse events. But Parkinson says there is a disconnect between TGA legislation, and the medicine scheduling policy framework. The former clearly states that the TGA needs to consider risks and benefits when considering whether to down-schedule a medicine to make it available over the counter. “But then when we go to how that legislation is implemented within the policy framework, looking at requirements for allowing a medicine to be given through a pharmacist as opposed to prescription only, they stop talking about benefits,” she says. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They’re really focused on risks and adverse events. And neither the legislation or the policy framework mention costs, so things like if a patient doesn’t go to a GP, it reduces the pressure on the healthcare system, or if a patient’s not in hospital delivering a baby or having a miscarriage, that also saves money.” Parkinson says the TGA was risk-adverse, and that may be the best approach when it came to the contraceptive pill, which she says “is not a clearcut case”. “There is a higher risk of stroke and thromboembolism, depending on your BMI, whether or not you’re a smoker, your blood pressure, and if you experience migraines,” she said. “And then there are benefits, obviously, of preventing unintended pregnancies, and all the complications associated with pregnancy and the aftermath of pregnancy. And then also the pill is protective against ovarian cancer. “But on the other hand, if you’re using the pill without condoms, you’ve got increased risk of sexually transmitted diseases. It’s not an easy case.” In its submission to the TGA, the Public Health Association of Australia [PHAA] said it was supportive of moves to down-schedule the pill, so long as certain requirements were in place such as further training of pharmacists. The benefits of improved access to the pill outweighed the risks, the PHAA said. National family planning organisation Marie Stopes Australia also made a submission to the inquiry, supporting over-the-counter pill access with safeguards in place like additional pharmacist training, saying the move “would increase sexual and reproductive health access and equity in metropolitan, regional and remote areas of Australia”. Marie Stopes medical director, Dr Philip Goldstone, says the argument women should be required to see a GP for a prescription so they could be screened for other health issues at the time was not a strong argument. “We now have many contraceptions, including hormonal contraception, which are in place for three years such as progesterone implants,” he says. “So we already have women participating in a contraceptive plan that is in place for three years, and we know that those people will still access their GP for their other health needs.” Demand for easier access However, since consultation and calls for submissions to the TGA’s latest review of over the counter contraception began, there have been changes already to the way people access healthcare, largely thanks to the global Covid-19 pandemic. Parkinson says this has significantly reduced access barriers. “Since the pandemic we have Telehealth, and now you can quickly talk to a GP and be prescribed something without physically seeing them,” she says. “However there are other access barriers such as younger girls being concerned their GP might tell their parents. But in the last two years there are online prescription services that allow people to fill in a questionnaire and have a text consult with a doctor who will send a pill prescription to you in the mail. “Is that better or worse than seeing a pharmacist and speaking in the flesh? There is definitely demand out there for easier access. I think the TGA needs to get their head around what risks are of the most concern, and is keeping it prescription only still the best way?” Given rapid changes to the way people access healthcare, is there a risk that submissions to drug rescheduling inquiries are already out of date by the time the TGA makes its final decision? Parkinson says this is a good question, but that whatever the TGA decides, it would unlikely be the end of the debate. “They can always review it again. New Zealand considered the scheduling of the oral contraceptive pill twice in 1990, again in 1994, 1995, 2014, twice in 2015 and again in 2016 before it finally decided on changing access in 2017. “It’s not like there is only one shot at this.”There are a number of television shows which have been heralded as changing the landscape of television, including The Sopranos, The Wire, Breaking Bad, Six Feet Under and Mad Men. These shows were hallmarks of the “peak TV” era. But one series that is always perplexingly absent from any of these lists is Big Love, the underrated HBO series helmed by Mark V Olsen and his husband, Will Scheffer, which focuses on the lives of a closeted polygamist family living in Sandy, Utah in 21st century America, and which turns 15 this year. Of all the taboo topics that pop up in great US television – sex, death, mental health, drugs and murder – religion remains the most contentious. Big Love, which first hit our screens in 2006, deftly takes one of the most controversial aspects of religion – polygamy – and uses it to inspire comedy and despair in equal measure. Big Love centres on the Mormon Henrickson family, including the family patriarch Bill Henrickson (played by the late Bill Paxton) and his three wives: his first wife, Barbara “Barb” Henrickson (an endearing Jeanne Tripplehorn); his second, the selfish Nicolette “Nicki” Grant (a mesmerising Chloë Sevigny), who maintains a belief in “the principle” of polygamy; and Margene “Marge” Heffman (Ginnifer Goodwin), the third and youngest wife who struggles with the responsibilities of motherhood and the tenets of Mormonism. All four actors play their roles superbly, and the complex interplay between the characters provides endless comedic brilliance as the wives deal with jealousies and frustrations. Bill is, for the most part, a sympathetic and admirable character, though his own hypocrisy and outdated philosophy tests our patience: “A man has to know his woman is his,” he says in one episode, while in another he labels the idea of a woman with multiple partners as “wrong”. As Bill’s first wife, the resilient and loving Barb has assumed the role of matriarch, much to the chagrin of the manipulative Nicki, who believes in the principle of polygamy more than Barb does. Then there’s the naive and bubbly Marge, who seems to view polygamy as a kind of sorority. The four function on a rotating schedule in which Bill spends a certain number of nights each month with each wife and, while Mormonism dictates that the wives sublimate their jealousy for the greater good of growing their celestial family, tensions inevitably come to a head over who Bill loves the most, or who, at least, is having the most sex. The show’s mix of familial absurdity and pathos makes it a true gem of US television. It is also the supporting cast who make Big Love such a masterpiece. There is Nicki’s father, Roman Grant (played by the late, great Harry Dean Stanton), who is the self-proclaimed prophet of Juniper Creek, a run-down compound on which polygamist families live under Grant’s control, and which Barb sees as a cesspool. Living on the compound is Bill’s fiery mother, Lois (played brilliantly by Grace Zabriske), who frequently tries to kill her violent, domineering husband, Frank (Bruce Dern), who in turn frequently tries to kill his wife. The series deals mostly with the family’s attempts to keep their polygamist lifestyle secret amid a flurry of anti-fundamentalist discourse. The Mormons in this fascinating slice of Americana view polygamy as an outdated and unsavoury practice that sullies their religion. Throughout the series, Bill struggles to defend his faith and love of his wives while disassociating himself from the sordid abuses committed under polygamy, as more and more underage girls are married off to older men. Bill and his family were not always polygamists. He and Barb were married with three children before she became sick, and her illness led Bill to return to his faith. Nicki was sent by her father to be Barb’s carer, and the three formed an unlikely bond that culminated in plural marriage. While Barb is understandably conflicted, she has chosen to remain with Bill as his first wife, even after he falls for the babysitter (Margene). Their children, meanwhile, must contend with the polygamist lifestyle that includes two additional mothers and supplementary siblings. In particular, Bill and Barb’s daughter Sarah (Amanda Seyfried in her most underrated role) finds herself alone in her rejection of polygamy, and often pines for her old life. Like other “golden age” shows, there is a prevailing focus on familial power struggles and conflicting loyalties, here with a religious dimension. But it is not simply faith that Bill and his wives are struggling to hold on to but the notion of family itself. Bill believes his choices are for the good of his family, though much of the time he remains in the dark about exactly how his choices are affecting his wives and children. Debt, teenage pregnancy, infidelity and incest are among the many secrets kept from him. In an age when dysfunctional families were standard fare on US TV, Big Love takes it up a notch, making even The Sopranos seem conservative. Big Love does not praise polygamy outright, though it certainly does ask us to sympathise with and even admire those who, willingly or not, are involved in alternate lifestyles or religions. It tests the limits of our capacity for understanding, and humanises those we take pleasure in judging. Despite the various scandals, backstabbings and murders that crop up, Big Love maintains an upbeat disposition, with the Beach Boys’ God Only Knows accompanying the opening credits of each episode (for the first three seasons). That the show has been left off the radar of all television retrospectives is nothing short of blasphemous.Critics of Victoria’s proposed new pandemic powers legislation say it is the “most extreme of its kind” and will give the premier and health minister too much control, while the legislation has become the focus of anti-lockdown and anti-vaccination protesters in Melbourne since restrictions eased. The premier, Daniel Andrews, cancelled a press conference in Bendigo this week due to security concerns related to a small group of protesters targeting the Victorian premier over the bill. The legislation passed the legislative assembly last month, and is due to be debated and potentially passed in the legislative council next week. Key upper house MPs such as the Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party’s Andy Meddick have faced abuse and death threats in attempts to persuade them to vote against the bill. So what will the new pandemic legislation actually do? What are the new pandemic laws? When the Covid-19 pandemic hit, the Victorian government declared a state of emergency. The government only has the power to declare a state of emergency for four weeks initially, and it can be renewed for up to between six and nine months. The current state of emergency cannot be renewed beyond 15 December 2021. The government in Victoria has continually renewed the state of emergency, but when the parliament last agreed to extend the state of emergency powers, it requested permanent legislative changes be developed. Last month the Victorian government announced changes to the Public Health and Wellbeing Act to overhaul the powers the government will have during pandemics in the future. Andrews said the new legislation was based on similar legislation in New Zealand, with elements of what is in place in New South Wales and other states. It shifts much of the power over orders from the chief health officer to the premier and health minister. The premier will be responsible for declaring a pandemic, after which the health minister can make pandemic orders, similar to how the public health orders have been made today. The premier and minister will be required to seek and consider the advice of the chief health officer in making the orders, and the advice will be provided to parliament and released publicly. The pandemic declaration must be renewed every three months, but there is no limit on how many times it can be renewed. What are the new powers? While the Victorian government has said the orders will be similar to the public health directions used during the Covid-19 pandemic around quarantining, and restrictions, the order powers are very broad. Under the legislation the minister “may make any order … that the minister believes is reasonably necessary to protect public health”. The powers will also allow the minister to issue pandemic orders to specific classifications of people, such as by where they live, an event they attended, their age, vaccination status, job or living arrangements. Authorised officers, including WorkSafe employees, Victoria police, and health officials will be empowered under these orders to enforce compliance, similar to the powers today. The officers will also be able to issue specific directions to people under the orders. But these directions cannot be in conflict with the overarching pandemic orders. Why does the Victorian government say it needs these powers? The state of emergency powers were being continually renewed, and the parliament requested more specific pandemic legislation. The health minister, Martin Foley, told parliament it was important to go further than just replicating the state of emergency powers in new legislation, and develop fit-for-purpose pandemic legislation built on what had been learned from Covid-19. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Decisions about how to respond to public health risks from pandemic diseases can, as we have seen over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic, have far-reaching consequences,” he said. “Inevitably, Covid-19 will not be the last pandemic faced by Victoria. “The experience of responding to Covid-19, together with insights shared by the Victorian community and its leaders, have clearly demonstrated the need for pandemic management decisions to be transparent and accountable, proactive, protective of human rights, and guided above all else by the imperative of minimising risks to public health and the right to life.” Is there any oversight? Aside from new requirements for the public health advice to be released publicly, there will also be a requirement to publish to the parliament a statement of reasons for why the orders are being brought in. The minister must also publish a statement on how it complies with human rights obligations, including how limitations on human rights are needed under the orders. There will also be an independent pandemic management advisory committee of experts and community representatives. The advice from the committee will be tabled in parliament. A pandemic order can also be disallowed by the Victorian parliament. Orders can be reviewed by the parliament’s scrutiny of acts and regulations committee and if they report back that the orders lack legal authority or are incompatible with human rights, they can recommend they be disallowed. It would require a resolution of both houses of parliament for the disallowance to go into effect, however. What will it mean for fines for breaking the rules? There will be general offences for failing to comply with orders, with fines of up to $21,800 for people and $109,000 for businesses. There will also be an aggravated offence introduced for the most serious and high-risk instances of non-compliance. If a person refuses to comply with an order, and should have known their non-compliance would cause risk to the health of someone else, such as breaching quarantine restrictions, or going to a large gathering when they know they are Covid-positive, they can face fines of up to $91,000, or two years in jail. For businesses, the fine is either $454,000 or up to three times the commercial benefit gained from the non-compliance. Foley said this harsher penalty would not apply to people not wearing masks, or people at protests, or other powers used routinely, and it was only intended to be used rarely for the most egregious breaches. Vulnerable and disadvantaged people will not receive fines under the changes, and there will be a new concessional fines scheme for people experiencing financial hardship. People will be able to apply to the director of Fines Victoria to have their fine reduced. What will happen with quarantining and detention? Authorised officers will be able to detain people under the pandemic orders, such as when they’re arriving from overseas and need to go into quarantine. While there is no set time for how long detention will last, there will be a requirement that it must not be longer than the minister deems reasonably necessary to eliminate or reduce a serious risk to public health. Authorised officers will also have the power to detain someone where they believe it is reasonably necessary to eliminate or reduce risk to public health in places that may not be covered by a pandemic order, but where it is necessary to reduce the spread of a pandemic disease. For example, if there was an order in place for Melbourne but not regional Victoria, and then there were cases emerging in Bendigo. People must be given an explanation for their detention, and told their rights and ability to apply for a review. The changes to quarantine are mainly around how the Victorian government recoups fees from people placed into quarantine. Covid-19 Quarantine Victoria will be able to chase people for the money owed, and impose additional fees for non-payment. What does it mean for privacy? The Victorian government says the new laws “enshrine a person’s right to privacy” by making it an offence to use information obtained for non-public health purposes, but there is an exception to share the information for a “permitted purpose”. The legislation will also remove the ability for law enforcement to access contact tracing information, and QR code check-in information. What are people’s concerns with the legislation? The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, argues the legislation is “the most extreme of its kind” and an “attack on democracy” because it imbues too much power in the premier to make the pandemic declaration. He vowed to dump the legislation if elected at the 2022 state election. The Law Institute of Victoria also raised concerns that the declaration can be in place indefinitely, with wide powers conferred on the premier, health minister and authorised officers. “Many powers appear to be an unnecessary infringement on democratic rights and freedoms, with little oversight offered by a truly independent body,” it said. The institute said there was also no timeframe for the maximum period of detention, or clarity on where people would be detained, and there was no independent external merits review on the detention review process. It said the privacy protections do not go far enough, and the allowance for the sharing of personal information for “permitted purposes” should be reconsidered. The Victorian Bar has said there is “grossly insufficient” parliamentary oversight of the new pandemic order powers granted to the health minister, and a disallowance of an order should not require approval of both houses of parliament. The bar recommended the bill be amended to limit the orders the minister can make to specific actions, like mask mandates or restricting movements, and any catch-all power to make other orders have a time limit unless both houses of parliament approve. The Victorian Bar called for the bill to be delayed until the issues raised had been considered and the bill amended.Indigenous Australians would be most disadvantaged by proposed voter ID laws due to the “social and economic barriers” they face obtaining official documentation, advocates warn. The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services executive officer, Jamie McConnachie, said obtaining accurate birth records was a “logistical and practical nightmare” for her clients due to the legacies of colonisation and the stolen generation, leaving them at risk of disfranchisement. The Coalition’s voter ID bill was introduced in October and could be pushed through federal parliament in the final sitting fortnight of the year in November before the 2022 election. If passed, prospective voters would be asked to produce ID such as photo ID, Medicare or pensioners cards, bank cards, or recent documents from financial institutions, utility companies or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander land councils. A voter unable to produce ID would still be able to vote if their identity could be verified by another voter, or by casting a declaration vote, which requires further details such as date of birth and a signature. The Australian Human Rights Commission has warned this could create a barrier to voting for groups including “Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who often do not possess a birth certificate and face difficulties obtaining subsequent formal identification”. McConnachie said Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander births were “often not registered” with central authorities due to removal policies and, if they were registered, a generic birthday such as 1 January or an approximate year was often used. In remote and regional areas such as pastoral stations, records may have been kept by private landowners but were now be lost, she said. “Getting documents like a birth certificate is a logistical and practical nightmare for my former clients,” she said. “For some of them it was like they never existed – their records were mystifying and discombobulated, they took years to assemble. The process of obtaining a licence may seem like a simple advancement in the life of an individual. “But there are some social and economic barriers that exist for Aboriginal people that have impeded their opportunity to have access to their identity documents.” Aunty Naomi Wilfred, an Alawa native title-holder from Hodgson River about 300km east of Katherine, said Indigenous voters in remote areas already faced difficulties such as poor disability access and waiting “a long time” in temperatures above 40C. “This will make it really hard,” she said of the voter ID proposal. “We don’t understand why the law keeps changing. It’s confusing.” Neralle Arnold, the chief executive of the Alawa Aboriginal Corporation, said “you rarely get anyone who is walking around in community or going into town with all those documents on them”. “They may have their [bank] keycard and drivers licence, but [it’s] very rare you would have your birth certificate or all those other documents,” she said. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “A lot of our mob don’t have passports anyway. I don’t think they would carry that on election day. A lot of people will just turn up, they won’t turn up with identification, they’ll just turn up to vote.” Wilfred and Arnold noted the requirements pose a barrier to people who had lost ID. A declaration vote “would need to be explained, what they’re signing”, Arnold said. The joint committee on human rights has warned the bill may discourage people from voting and “no evidence” has been provided regarding how it could prevent fraud. The Australian Electoral Commission has found instances of voter fraud were “vanishingly small”. Labor and the Greens are opposed to the bill. One Nation supports the voter ID bill and has claimed credit for it, meaning the government is just one vote short of passing it in the Senate. Centre Alliance senator Stirling Griff has said he was “generally supportive” of an ID requirement but his party hadn’t finalised its position. In October, Griff said he “understands the need for ID” but may seek some accommodation for Indigenous Australians and other groups for whom the bill could impose a hurdle to voting.Surging energy costs and export restrictions from usual overseas suppliers are leading to record high fertiliser prices in Australia, with analysts predicting farmers could be forced to ration its use, potentially disrupting global food supply. Modelling from Thomas Elder Markets shows the price of fertiliser in Australia is at a record $1,320 per tonne for purchase, freight and discharge. Agricultural market analyst Andrew Whitelaw says fertiliser prices had been rising since the start of the year but have skyrocketed since August. He said as a result, “we’ll see more rationing, as farmers will use less fertiliser because it’s too expensive” which could disrupt the global food supply chains. “Fertiliser is one of the key components ensuring we’re able to feed the world. “If farmers are using less fertiliser, there’s the potential for lower yields and if there’s lower yields there’s less food to go around.” Organic wheat, for example, yields 30% less on average than the synthetically fertilised equivalent, according to Whitelaw. The prices of the two main sources of energy used to produce fertiliser – natural gas and coal – have “gone through the roof”, according to Whitelaw and that has a corresponding effect on fertiliser price. The high energy prices have hit some of Australia’s biggest international suppliers, who have consequently acted to safeguard supplies for their own domestic markets. Australia has previously imported 60% of both monoammonium and diammonium phosphate fertilisers from China, but it has restricted exports of fertiliser, while Russia has imposed a quota. Whitelaw said Australian farmers are buying fertiliser from Morocco but prices are being driven up by a global shortage and the greater distance incurs higher freight costs. Whitelaw says food prices are all increasing on a global level. “For the average Australian, we’re still going to be able to afford what we want to eat. It’s more a concern if you’re a consumer in Afghanistan, Kenya or Somalia.” Chief economist at the National Farmers Federation, Ash Salardini, says it’s a price concern but “freight supply chains are stretched and Australia is a particularly inefficient port system that adds costs and delay and disruption that the end user has to pay for.” Grain farmer and chair of the NSW Farmers Grains Committee, Justin Everitt, says the cost of fertiliser for the coming season has become “unmanageable.” “You can see there’s a lot of stress. Very rarely do you try to lock in fertiliser supplies this early, before you’ve even harvested the previous crop.” Everitt said farmers are concerned prices will stay prohibitively high, making it difficult for them to remain profitable. He said in addition to the fertiliser price increases, farmers were already feeling the high prices of fuel, on top of the labour shortages. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Chair of Birchip Cropping Group in Victoria, John Ferrier, said both supply and price of fertiliser have been big issues. Ferrier said as soon as prices started to move three months ago, with urea and then phosphorus rising dramatically “we made the business decision at our farm to secure price and have on-farm supply of phosphorus for next year’s crop.” The manager of an agricultural supplies shop in Gilgandra NSW, Patrick Riley said prices are “through the roof” and have left customers “shocked and unsure what they’re going to do”. Industry representatives and politicians have recently held a green fertiliser industry roundtable to discuss the potential for domestic manufacturing of cheaper and greener fertiliser. Fertiliser manufacturer Strike Energy is aiming to use hydrogen to produce a greener fertiliser by developing a plant at Geraldton, in Western Australia’s northern wheatbelt. However, Whitelaw who presented at the roundtable discussion said new green fertiliser plants in South Auastralia and WA were a long way from producing fertiliser: “probably more like five years than the next year.” In terms of short-term solutions, Ferrier said the industry could see a change in crop rotations in favour of crops that produce nitrogen such as pulses, to improve the health of soils. Farmer Dianne Haggerty, who does not use artificial fertiliser, believes the high prices are a “reflection of the true cost of using artificial fertilisers”. That is, their impact on the environment such as nitrogen and phosphorus runoff affecting waterways and oceans, as well as the release of nitrous oxide. Haggerty believes any lower yields resulting from avoiding artificial fertiliser would only be a short-term issue as farmers rebuild their soil capacity. She said the advantages of turning away from artificial fertilisers mean over time “you have a more resilient farming system that isn’t requiring artificial inputs”. She says as artificial fertilisers continue to escalate in price, alternatives will help farmers’ businesses financially and will become even more relevant as carbon accounting emissions exchange start affecting bottom lines. As a pig farmer, Whitelaw said he supported manure usage but in addition to the problem of yield discount, “the reality is that there’s not enough organic fertiliser produced in Australia to meet the demands of the horticulture and cropping industry”. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityA national effort to save the Murray-Darling by returning 2750 gigalitres of water to the system is under way, but climate change could see roughly the same amount evaporate. The extra water is needed to save ecosystems in the southern basin. Top CSIRO scientist Francis Chiew says while it is a better scenario than not delivering the water at all, global heating means it is effectively giving with one hand and taking away with the other. A reduction in flows means “Armageddon” in South Australia, Conservation council of South Australia chief executive Craig Wilkins warns, threatening wildlife and agriculture that depend on the water. Chiew’s projections show increasing temperatures would see a 20% reduction in water flows, while a worst-case scenario would mean a “devastating” 40% reduction. Chiew, a CSIRO research group leader, modelled the impacts of climate change on the Murray-Darling and found there have already been significant reductions. “It’s been hotter … about 1.4C hotter over the last 100 years,” he said. “There’s more evaporation, and crops, the environment and people all use more water. “We have also been seeing significant reductions in the stream flows, particularly in the southern basin.” The Murray-Darling Basin Authority’s Dr Matthew Coleman said average annual inflows had decreased by 51% in the past 20 years, compared to the 100 years before it. “Less water moving through the system means less water for everyone,” he said. Chiew said under climate change the flows would drop further. “The drier systems that we see will happen more frequently and will be more severe,” he said. “For every degree of global warming you get a reduction of stream flow of about 10% in this region.” Global warming of 2C would mean by 2060 there will be a 20% drop. The Paris Agreement set a target of limiting warming to 1.5C, but a United Nations report released on the eve of the Cop26 climate summit shows the world is on track for 2.7C. “There’s a lot of uncertainty. Our worst-case scenario would be up to 40% (reduction in flows) in that region,” Chiew said. “Even at 20%, we’d have to make choices about what we do.” “The plan is supposed to return the equivalent of 2750GL back to the environment … under the 20% scenario that’s probably equivalent to roughly the same number … but if we didn’t (get the 2750GL) it would be even worse.” Wilkins said the impact of reduced flows were seen in the millennium drought. During that drought, which ran from 2001 to 2009, residents and irrigators faced severe restrictions. Aboriginal burial grounds were exposed, acid sulfate soils were exposed in the Lower Lakes, and low water levels caused parts of the riverbank to collapse. SA Water looked at trucking in bottled water, parts of the Coorong became five times saltier than the sea, killing native plants and animals, and the Murray mouth closed, then had to be dredged around the clock to be kept open. The mouth is still being dredged, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. ‘Literally impossible’ Wilkins said the Murray was bordering on “whole system collapse” during the millenium drought, and if it faced those low flows again the “cancer” would spread, with salinity from the blocked Mouth flowing back up the river, threatening the Riverland food bowl, along with fish, turtle and bird species. “If the lakes and the Coorong flip into acidic conditions, it’s Armageddon down there,” he said. “The idea of having Australia’s greatest river with an open mouth becomes a fairytale, it becomes literally impossible.” The desalination plant – built after the drought threatened water supplies – would help provide drinking water, he said, but agriculture and threatened species would be at risk. Coleman said the basin plan itself was a “key climate adaptation tool” that limited the level of water extraction and helped build environmental resilience. “Without water for the environment, the impact of climate change on the health of the basin would be more damaging,” he said, adding that governments, communities and industries were working together to face the climate challenge. The millennium drought triggered the MDB Plan’s development, so the river system could be managed as a whole. Some estimated that 9000 gigalitres would need to be returned to, or kept in the system to keep it healthy. Bickering between the states drove that figure down to 2750 gigalitres. Eventually another 450 gigalitres was added specifically for SA’s environmental needs. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But New South Wales and Victoria are reluctant to promise that 450 gigalitres will ever flow downstream, arguing it will hurt farmers. SA environment minister, David Speirs, said he would continue to pressure the other states to deliver “what’s been agreed, for the good of the river, our environment, and the communities that rely on it”. “The most effective way to restore the health of the Murray-Darling Basin is through the full implementation of the basin plan. We are already seeing significant improvements across the Basin as a result of the water recovered to date, but there is still more work to do,” he said. Federal water minister, Keith Pitt, said progress was being made, and that there were three years left on the plan to reach the water savings targets. “There are challenges but it will come down to the commonwealth and basin states working cooperatively with a focus on what can be achieved rather than what they say they can’t do,” he said.Sixteen people have died while in Australia on the government’s troubled seasonal workers program since the beginning of the pandemic. The figures have come to light as the scheme faces widespread accusations of exploitation and “inhumane conditions”, as well as a potential class action. The spike in fatalities has also raised concerns that the Pacific Islanders coming to Australia under the program are not being given adequate safety training. The 16 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic were in contrast to zero recorded between 2018 and 2019 and three between 2017 and 2018. In total, since 2012 there had been 30 deaths of workers on the two visas, which allow Pacific Islanders to work in regions with labour shortages – often on farms picking fruit and vegetables. The federal government was refusing to provide details on many of the deaths, but it was understood at least seven of the 16 deaths were linked to road accidents. The most recent, which occurred last week, was a suicide. The family of Silas Ufiau – a seasonal worker from Solomon Islands who was killed in a car accident in April – has called for more regulations around the program and better education for those coming to Australia about the culture, working conditions and road rules. Ufiau’s cousin, Redley Raramo, said his death had devastated the family. “It was really sad. To have him gone that way,” Raramo said. He said his cousin had wanted to make enough money in Australia to build a house for his wife and son, now one. “For him, his aim was to go and work for his family. His wife has lost all her dreams … She’s yet to come to terms with the reality of the situation.” Raramo was supportive of the program but said the governments needed to help make sure seasonal workers were prepared for life in Australia, including better road safety lessons. There had been recent accusations of unfair pay, poor working conditions and employers making huge deductions on pay, including some charging $14.80 a week for water. Raramo said there were critics in the Solomons that argued it was modern-day blackbirding, but that it would be better for everyone if they were proven wrong. “That is why I am putting across these recommendations, to see that it is a win-win situation at the end of the day.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment, which runs the biggest seasonal worker visa, said there had been 25 deaths since the program started in 2012. “None of the deaths have been determined to be a direct result of a workplace accident. “The department does not release information related to individual worker welfare, including individual causes of death. However, the major causes included vehicle accidents and pre-existing health conditions.” Shane Roulstone from the Australian Workers Union said to stop the death rate from climbing even more there needed to be widespread driving training and rules to force employers to address driver fatigue. “Some employers have good intentions and good driver education programs, but they’re not the majority,” he said. Most workers were transported to farms in buses driven by a seasonal worker, who then did a 12-hour shift in the field before getting back behind the wheel to drive everyone home, he said. Workers were charged around $40-$80 a week for their transport costs, but the driver had this fee waived. He said the department of skills and employment currently offered to pay for a week-long training course but some employers were reluctant to put workers through it. “It takes them out of the production line for the best part of the week,” Roulstone said. “I’ve said to the department, you should subsidise the wages as part of the skills training, so they go and get to do a proper driving course.” Dr Rochelle Bailey from the Australian National University had interviewed 500 workers over the course of the pandemic. She said there were lots of reasons for the spike in deaths, not just road accidents. “We had an increase in the number of workers, we’re going to have an increase in the number of incidents,” she said. Many of the workers currently in Australia had been stuck here for the course of the pandemic and were mentally and physically exhausted, Bailey said. There were serious barriers to workers seeking medical help. “Especially with a lot of the workers moving around and going to different farms, they’re not confident in talking to their employer they don’t know,” she said. “Covid has exacerbated a lot of mental and physical health issues.” She said there had been an increase in accidents at work because of worker tiredness, and many employers were “concerned”. “They would like to get them home, so they can have a break and see their families,” Bailey said. The Sydney lawyer Stewart Levitt was building a class action against the government over the program. Workers were meant to receive $900 a week for their work, but Levitt said this was rare and some were left with only $300 a week after their employers made excessive deductions. This could include $200 a week to share a shipping container or room with six other people, he said. “They’re paying through the nose to live with six people in one bedroom, with an outdoor toilet,” Levitt said. “We have payslips where people are being charged $14.80 for water.” He said workers were subjected to “substandard and inhumane conditions” but many were too scared to come forward. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgSpectral, shapeshifting predators stalk Rachel, the glass artist at the centre of Australian writer Inga Simpson’s fourth novel. Set in the aftermath of bushfires and pandemic, The Last Woman in the World layers precise nature writing with a conspiratorial tone for our times, turning in a gripping apocalyptic thriller that infects the sublime features of the landscape with primal fear. Rachel’s past traumas have prompted her to isolate herself in her artist’s bush studio, and she reluctantly answers the door to a woman, Hannah, holding her ill baby son, Isaiah, who claims they are the last humans left alive. A confluence of fear presses down on Rachel, as indeed it has been pressing down on us all in a world assaulted by global heating, bushfires, pandemic and enforced isolation, while politicians prevaricate on demonstrating leadership. Rachel is immediately suspicious of this mother and child, “its face an ugly red”, and its biblical name meaning saviour: “The religious right had a lot to answer for, derailing the country, dragging it backwards.” The trio soon race through the Monaro high plains of New South Wales and into the cloistered bunkers of Parliament House and Department of Defence in Canberra. Seeking help for Isaiah, they witness the quick and shocking deaths of strangers along the way, whose faces crumple and collapse, gothic images of human destruction dredged from dreams, like the subjects of Bosch or Bacon or Goya paintings. Is this another virus at work? If it is, there are no symptoms. Rachel also learns that while she has been a hermit making art in the forest that anti-government protesters armed with weapons have held a community under siege for months, now joined by refugees, prison escapees and the homeless; a movement lacking political cohesion and with much mental illness in its ranks, the corollary of our algorithmic age that manipulates outliers through social media. Simpson herself lives on the NSW south coast in a house made of ironbark and stone, built by her father in an area decimated by the 2019-20 bushfires, and while finishing the first draft of The Last Woman in the World had to flee twice, as fires engulfed settlements around her. Her writing conveys a keen eye for the bushland as well as a visceral wariness of disparate fires joining forces, of “smoke that obscured the sun for months, even in the cities” and, most ominously, “fires were the future”. The Last Woman in the World is elevated from mere page-turner to art via ambiguity: Rachel feels pursued by malevolent forces known collectively as they or them. These bad-faith actors trying to grab Rachel might be human survivors motivated by conspiracy, or they might be human-like ghosts that can fly and move through walls, or perhaps they are the detritus of Rachel’s mind troubled by personal trauma and global catastrophe. Or all of the above. While the outside world forever threatens fresh man-made disasters and viral variants, Rachel’s fear of becoming “we” again, triggering her dependency on others, is very relatable, as we all must adjust to the new normality of bumping up against one another again, albeit with masks and some social distancing, together facing fear of the unknown and unforeseen. Simpson’s slow drip-feed of the traumas that ail Rachel – parental deaths as a child, assault committed upon her as an adult – works slightly against this relatability, taking a little too long to reveal. Meanwhile the suggestion a vaccine based on a synthetic form of a hormone involved in human bonding through childbirth and breast-feeding – oxytocin – could be the panacea for the mystery illness is a bit heavy in its messaging. More interesting here are the meditations on the importance of others in these times, the collective rather than the perpendicular pronoun of the atomised “I”: recovering her senses, Rachel remembers the team effort of learning her craft in classes: “The heat, not just fire and molten glass, but of bodies, companionship.” Simpson makes clear the important role of art in making us see the world anew: documenting, reflecting and asking questions. If she is a real artist, Rachel cannot afford to look away, just as none of us can afford to allow the future to be taken out of our hands. The Last Woman in the World by Inga Simpson ($32.99) is out through Hachette“Like Bridget Jones directed by John Cassavetes” was how one Guardian review described the first mumblecore film. The film, Funny Ha Ha, was US director Andrew Bujalski’s debut: a shoestring budget affair following a cast of twentysomethings suspended in postgraduate ennui – not so much coming of age as fumbling their way towards adulthood via awkward encounters and half-baked conversations. Premiering in 2002 at a small festival in Alabama, critical acclaim quietly snowballed. It wasn’t long before a nebulous scene of interconnected directors had sprung up in the film’s wake – American indie pioneers including the Duplass brothers, Joe Swanberg and the late Lynn Shelton, who made their name off films which eschewed any definable narrative in favour of plotlines as meandering as their millennial characters. Its heyday in the US may be long gone, diffusing into the early 2010s with increasingly mainstream offshoots – including, notably, the TV series Girls. But a recent contingent of Australian directors are offering something of a mumblecore revival, with films such as Hot Mess, Pretty Good Friends, and Chocolate Oyster leaning into the particularly local inclinations of the genre – if it is one at all. James Vaughan’s first feature Friends and Strangers, which is streaming digitally at this year’s Sydney film festival, might be one of them – though he’s not fully sold on the label. “‘Mumblecore’ is something that I’ve intuitively disliked,” he says over Zoom. “I guess it just depends on how we’re defining it.” This contest over mumblecore’s parameters has plagued the genre since its inception, when it was first coined after the fast and loose quality of its dialogue, so naturalistic it was often unintelligible. “It doesn’t mean anything to me,” Bujalski himself said in 2013. Still, “there is definitely crossover between my film and mumblecore”, Vaughan concedes. “Mumblecore is coming from a generation of people that have grown up with the internet, and this idea of social difficulty in real-life [settings] is just a fact of life.” Friends and Strangers’ protagonist, Ray, embodies this difficulty. He wanders through Sydney like a modern-day slacker, listlessly drifting through a series of unfortunate events: a failed sexual encounter, a broken down car, and a neurotically wealthy photography client in the eastern suburbs. The film itself also conforms to what most proponents of mumblecore will agree are its integral traits: made on the smell of an oily rag (and, in this case, entirely self-funded), often with a cast of friends and collaborators, with dialogue that captures the clumsy idiosyncrasies of real conversation. And, importantly, it privileges disaffected characters over action: particularly, characters who are stuck in what Monash University’s head of film and screen studies, Claire Perkins, calls a “protracted adolescence”. “[Characters] in that post-college era … messing around, not really knowing what they’re doing, not being able to get their lives together.” Mumblecore takes inspiration from predecessors such as French New Wave, she says – a genre that also formed a bedrock for Friends and Strangers. But as much as the Europeans have laid claim to this style of wistful, drifting insouciance, might we also find something distinctly Australian about mumblecore too? “In terms of the action of mumblecore, it’s very every day, mundane – I think that’s quite Australian,” Perkins says. “Some of the most famous, iconic Australian films over time have really celebrated that ordinariness in a particular way.” Like which films? “Muriel’s Wedding!” she instantly responds, alongside other classics which turn mundanity into both comedic and emotional goldmines: The Castle, Kath &amp; Kim, Love Serenade. For Steve Jaggi, whose film Chocolate Oyster premiered at Sydney film festival in 2018, Australian mumblecore is about reclaiming a period of life – your 20s – which has traditionally been misrepresented on Australian screens. Born in Canada, Jaggi observed a disjunct when he first moved to Sydney. “What it meant to be Australian was so disconnected from Australian television and films,” he says. “What I really noticed when I moved here … is that amongst all the people I met, there was a complete disdain for Australian content.” Chocolate Oyster, then, was an attempt at closing the divide. Jaggi wanted viewers to see themselves in his film’s characters – a disparate group of friends, mostly unlucky in love, going through the motions and chores of life with almost entirely improvised dialogue. “I think what mumblecore does incredibly well is reflect a time and place,” he says. “Maybe that’s why it’s mushrooming here. More and more film-makers are saying, ‘Well, hold on. I’m not being represented.’ “The stories are inherently quite small, and in those stories you can explore very specific pieces of society.” Vaughan agrees: the scale of Friends and Strangers, in all its low-stakes intimacy, allows for a narrative that speaks to a particularly Australian shade of alienation. “Looking at Australia, we’re a society that is quite dissatisfied with where the country has been going, what the future of the country is going to be.” The film captures a generation who are “anxious and depressed and unhappy about their own situation, politically and socially”. “It’s a national malaise.” Friends and Strangers is screening digitally at 2021 Sydney film festival 2021 from 12 November, and is available now on Mubi in the UKFrederik Willem – FW – de Klerk, who has died aged 85, was the last president of South Africa under apartheid. He was often compared with Mikhail Gorbachev, the last leader of the Soviet Union, for his work in consigning a bankrupt and reviled regime to oblivion. When De Klerk succeeded PW Botha in 1989, he oversaw an event no less unexpected than the collapse of Soviet communism was when Gorbachev came to power in 1985. His stunning act of realpolitik in announcing sweeping political reform, including the release of his eventual successor, Nelson Mandela, was the grand gesture that saved his country, and in 1993 they shared the Nobel peace prize. The following year Mandela became the country’s first democratically elected leader. Fears of uncontrollable bloodshed and civil war had proved unfounded as De Klerk led a skilful, strategic withdrawal by the white, Afrikaans-speaking inventors of apartheid, the National party, in power since 1948. Very few observers of De Klerk’s presidential term expected to see the end of apartheid in their lifetimes. Almost nobody, not even his NP colleagues, appreciated that there was more to this machine politician than affability and adroitness in debate. Anglophones as well as Afrikaners wanted him to preserve white supremacy, while the black African majority wanted, but could hardly have expected, him to run up a white flag. South Africa got a radical pragmatist with a talent for negotiation who set about the tortuous preparation for an orderly transfer of power. Foreigners made the same mistake about De Klerk as they had about his two predecessors, Botha and John Vorster: because he, too, spoke English like a steamroller he could only be dimwitted. But it was simply not his mother tongue. Born in Johannesburg, FW was the son of Hendrina (nee Coetzer) and Jan (Johannes) de Klerk, a teacher. His father was also Transvaal general secretary of the NP and a member of the province’s parliament and cabinet, until appointed to the senate, the upper house of the old white central parliament in Cape Town, as national minister of labour and public works. The young De Klerk was thus steeped in Afrikaner politics from childhood. Already an NP activist, he left Monument high school in Krugersdorp to study law at Potchefstroom University, graduating in 1958. He became a qualified attorney in private practice at Vereeniging, Transvaal (now Gauteng), in 1961, and a decade later was chosen at short notice as parliamentary candidate for Vereeniging, and elected in November 1972. After hard work on committees he became the NP information officer for Transvaal, the constitutionally federal party’s dominant province. When in 1978 Botha succeeded Vorster he promoted De Klerk to the cabinet, where he held six posts in succession over 11 years. But his key appointment was not in Botha’s gift: he was elected Transvaal leader of the NP in 1982. Botha was an anomaly, having risen to supreme office via the Cape provincial leadership largely because Vorster, disgraced over the “Muldergate” secret slush-fund scandal, had been a Transvaaler. This promotion made the less than colourful De Klerk the heir apparent to Botha as the next “chief leader” of the NP and state president, into which office the premiership was absorbed under Botha’s constitutional changes, which came into effect in 1984. Meanwhile Botha was ineptly seeking to break out of South Africa’s increasing isolation. But when US banks, prompted by superbly organised African-American lobbying, halted investment in South Africa and started a stampede, apartheid’s number was up. While Margaret Thatcher railed against sanctions as “immoral” and Ronald Reagan’s US administration secretly backed South Africa’s disastrous intervention in the Angolan civil war, sanctions finally worked. The currency shrivelled, the economy reeled and internal unrest mounted, provoking a prolonged and bloody state of emergency throughout the late 1980s. The bellicose Botha was not the man to achieve a fair settlement with the turbulent black majority. The best he could manage in his constitutional changes of 1984 was to give “coloured” (mixed-race) and ethnic-Indian minorities separate chambers in parliament, while the black majority were left to exercise their “rights” through tribal homelands that occupied just 13% of South Africa’s worst land, and in which millions of them did not even live. De Klerk assisted in this last realignment of partitions until apartheid was fatally holed by an economic iceberg. The crash came in 1989. A fissure had opened in the NP, with the diehards defecting to the Conservative party, founded in 1982. Botha resigned as NP leader in January 1989 after a stroke. De Klerk was elected leader in his place, but Botha clung to the presidency – only to resign in a huff that August when De Klerk dared to go to Zambia for talks with President Kenneth Kaunda without his permission. De Klerk was appointed head of state and government in September by an electoral college formed from the three racial chambers of parliament. He began to unravel apartheid by organising the repeal of one racist law after another, reining in the rampant security apparatus built up by Vorster and Botha and finally, in February 1990, releasing Nelson Mandela. The magic of his name had survived 26 years in jail and even the Botha regime had been driven into secret, though abortive, contacts with him. De Klerk realised that no settlement could be achieved unless he was freed, and years of fraught negotiation between the NP and the African National Congress ensued, leading to the first election by universal franchise in 1994. Mandela was duly sworn in as the country’s first black president, while De Klerk became vice-president in the transitional government. He would have been well advised to bow out gracefully at once, with the Nobel peace prize shared with his successor, when the worldwide esteem he had earned by his statesmanship was at its height. But, booed by leftwingers at the Oslo prize ceremony and blasted by white rightwingers at home, De Klerk soldiered on from 1994 to 1996 as Mandela’s increasingly embittered deputy. The two men exchanged insults in public, belying the handshakes and fine words at the handover. De Klerk resigned as NP leader and left politics in 1997 to write his memoirs. He had already withdrawn the NP from the government of national unity in 1996, sidelining it after 48 years in power. The rump was reconstituted as the New NP, and De Klerk left it in 2004 when it merged with the ANC. As the remarkable work of Archbishop Desmond Tutu’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission continued meanwhile, the horrific measures taken by successive NP leaders to preserve white domination were exposed – clearly enough to lead to the inescapable conclusion that De Klerk, as a cabinet minister, must have been aware of them, even though Botha made the big decisions. De Klerk’s memoirs, The Last Trek: A New Beginning (1999) were a classic politician’s apologia, rejecting blame for the actions of the security forces, which he had been obliged to appease even as he negotiated power away. By then he had instituted the De Klerk Foundation, to “work for peace in multicommunity societies”. In 1969 he married Marike Willemse, and they had three children, Susan, Jan and Willem. After their divorce in 1998, De Klerk married Elita Georgiades. Marike was killed during a robbery in 2001; Willem died in 2020. De Klerk is survived by Elita, Susan and Jan. Coupling the names of De Klerk and Mandela, as the Nobel committee did, may seem like placing a garden gnome alongside a Michelangelo statue. Yet the peaceful triumph of the latter would not have been possible without the pragmatic statesmanship of the former, however grudging. White diehards condemned De Klerk as a Judas. The analogy is totally false. De Klerk may have been driven by historic necessity, but unlike his predecessors he recognised it, and displayed moral courage in acting on it, saving untold South African lives in the process. • Frederik Willem de Klerk, politician, born 18 March 1936; died 11 November 2021 • Dan van der Vat died in 2019Norwich City are moving closer to naming Daniel Farke’s replacement after holding talks with Frank Lampard about becoming their manager. Lampard is a leading contender to fill the vacancy and was interviewed on Thursday. The 42-year-old has been out of work since being fired by Chelsea last January and is interested in the position, although Norwich are yet to make a decision on whether to appoint him. Norwich, bottom of the Premier League after 11 games, could still speak to other candidates. Dean Smith, sacked by Aston Villa on Sunday, has been linked. It remains to be seen whether Smith would prefer to take a break. Whoever takes over at Norwich will be tasked with saving the team from relegation. Norwich, who sacked Farke after their victory over Brentford last Saturday, have struggled since promotion from the Championship. Lampard has no experience of overseeing a relegation battle but he is keen to return to management. The former England midfielder started his coaching career at Derby in 2018 and almost took the club into the Premier League before joining Chelsea in 2019. Chelsea were under a transfer embargo but Lampard did well in his first season at his former club. He promoted academy players, qualified for the Champions League after finishing fourth and reached the FA Cup final, losing to Arsenal. However, Lampard struggled to convince after Chelsea spent heavily in the summer of 2020 and he was replaced by Thomas Tuchel, who led the team to Champions League glory. Lampard has been waiting for another opportunity and was overlooked by Crystal Palace last summer. He could try to take his former assistant Joe Edwards from Chelsea to his next job.Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz has pushed ahead with a plan to phase out a state of national emergency by the end of the month, despite the country recording the highest coronavirus case numbers since the start of the pandemic. “The virus is still here and threatening the health of our citizens,” Scholz said in a parliamentary debate on Thursday, as he called on MPs to support a catalogue of new measures to curb the spread of Covid that would replace the state of emergency. “Therefore it is very, very important that we take all measures to ensure we can protect their health.” The Social Democrat, whose SPD party is in the process of forging a governing coalition with the German Greens and the liberal Free Democratic party, specifically mentioned bringing back free rapid tests for the entire population, compulsory testing for care workers and more financial support for vaccination centres administering booster jabs, on top of keeping in place mandatory mask-wearing rules. Scholz said he welcomed some German federal states following Austria’s lead by introducing so-called “2G” requirements, meaning that only those who have been vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid can visit bars, clubs or restaurants, but shied away from endorsing a nationwide application of such a rule. Germany has reported record daily rates of new infections on a seven-day average since the start of the week, with the country’s disease control agency on Friday announcing 50,196 further cases. In terms of deaths, the country’s fourth wave still remains below previous peaks in April 2020, January 2021 and April 2021. The Robert Koch Institute on Thursday reported 235 new deaths, up from 165 at the same point a week ago. “Even though the situation is different because so many are vaccinated, it is not good,” Scholz said on Thursday. “In particular because not enough citizens have taken the vaccine so far.” Germany has the third-lowest vaccination rate in western Europe, with 66% of the country’s population fully vaccinated, ahead of other German-speaking states Austria and Switzerland. German states with the largest rates of unvaccinated people, in the east and south, are also reporting the highest rates of infection. Saxony, where only 57.2% of the population are fully vaccinated, is the country’s hotspot, with 522 infections per 100,000 people over the last seven days. The outgoing and incoming governments have nonetheless agreed that 25 November should mark the end of the so-called “epidemic situation of national relevance”, which created a legal framework for the government to agree on nationwide pandemic restrictions with the heads of Germany’s 16 federal states, effectively circumventing parliament. In the future, pandemic restrictions should again be debated and decided in the Bundestag, the incoming government argues. “This blanket set of measures, with lockdowns for the entire republic and de-facto occupational bans … we no longer consider proportionate,” said Dirk Wiese, deputy of the SPD’s parliamentary group. The conservative bloc of the outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, has criticised the end of epidemic emergency rules, as it adjusts to its role on the opposition benches. Alexander Dobrindt of the Bavarian Christian Social Union said the likely new government’s first decision risked creating a “corona chaos in Germany”. He said: “To put a political end to the epidemic situation without naming sufficient alternatives while hospital occupancy rates are rising is a sign of aimlessness.” Only the far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) is calling for the complete scrapping of all pandemic restrictions, pointing to the UK’s “freedom day” as an example for Germany to follow. The proposed law will be voted on on 18 December.Turkey’s currency is slumping to record lows against the US dollar, deepening the poverty felt by households across the country and eroding popular support for Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government. The lira fell 1% to a new low of 9.97 against the greenback on Thursday because of higher-than-expected US inflation data, settling at around 9.93 when US markets opened. The currency has lost a staggering 25% of its value so far this year after a series of deep interest rate cuts by Turkey’s central bank, despite three years of double-digit inflation. Turkey’s insistence on slashing the benchmark interest rate, even as other central banks around the world use higher borrowing costs to try and put a brake on inflation, reflects Erdoğan’s belief that high interest rates, which he has termed “the mother and father of all evil”, fuel higher inflation. Contrary to the view of mainstream economists, since the lira began to nosedive in 2018 the president has placed an emphasis on keeping Turkey’s economy growing with the help of cheaper borrowing costs. In a sign of his now near-total control of the country’s institutions, three central bank governors have been sacked over disagreements about interest rate hikes in the last two years. While the economy had a record 21.7% year-on-year growth in the second quarter of 2021, middle- and low-income households – including much of the Turkish leader’s political base – are feeling the pinch. Unemployment remains above 10%, rising to 22% for young people. Inflation hit 19.9% in October, sending the cost of food, energy and housing skyrocketing. According to official data, the pandemic helped double the number of families living in poverty in 2019-20 to 6.63 million households. A report released this week by the pro-Kurdish opposition Peoples’ Democratic party (HDP) found that 76 people have killed themselves this year because of financial pressures. After it came to power in 2002, Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) raised living standards with a development boom, particularly in the construction and tourism industries, largely fuelled by foreign credit. But the lira has lost more than half its value since 2018, wiping out savings and bankrupting businesses, and once-loyal voters are deserting the party in droves. Opinion polls consistently show support for the ruling party has dropped to about 30%, which is 10% less than the 2018 general election. The government is reportedly preparing to raise the minimum wage and subsidise energy costs, but as Turkey’s elite profit from lower borrowing costs, widening financial inequality looks set to threaten the coalition’s chances in elections scheduled for 2023. Sinem Adar, an associate at the Centre for Applied Turkey Studies in Berlin, said: “Why do Erdoğan and the AKP willingly increase social and political costs by recklessly intervening into the central bank? One of the important factors seems to me the pressure from actors particularly in the construction sector with close ties to the AKP, that is, the so-called ‘low interest rate lobby’ that has emerged as a consequence of the party’s construction-fuelled growth model. “As the manoeuvring space of the president and his party narrows, the pressure [to bow] also gets more intense.”The chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, Lord Evans, has urged the goverment to “rapidly” implement plans that would stop MPs working as political consultants and limit the amount of time they can spend on second jobs. He said it could act quickly because a well-considered plan is already “on the table”, having been set out in a report from his committee three years ago. (See 11.07am.) A hospital trust has admitted that Boris Johnson did briefly ignore its rules on mask wearing during a visit on Monday. (See 5pm.) Rishi Sunak has said the government “must do better” in upholding standards in public life, as Conservative MPs continue to be mired in sleaze allegations. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has accused three opposition MPs of disrespecting the armed forces by getting drunk on a trip to visit soldiers in Gibraltar. The EU’s Brexit commissioner will tell David Frost that negotiations over Northern Ireland are doomed to fail unless he drops an “unattainable” demand over the role of the European court of justice. Practicalities, not principles, are holding back the payment of a £400m British debt to Iran, seen as a precondition of the release of British-Iranian dual nationals held in Tehran, the former foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt has said. Britain’s recovery from its third Covid-19 lockdown slowed sharply over the summer as the economy’s growth was hit by rising infection rates, the pingdemic and global supply shortages. Hospital managers have admitted that Boris Johnson did briefly ignore a request to wear a face mask when he visited Hexham general hospital on Monday. In response to members of the public who asked about the incident, officials at Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust issued a statement conceding that at one point Johnson had to be reminded to put on a mask. They said: In response to your communication about the coverage you have seen of the prime minister pictured without wearing a face mask at Hexham general hospital, the trust would like to assure you that infection prevention and control has always been and continues to be of utmost priority in all of our hospitals and in all other Trust sites. Our mask-wearing rules are very clear, and it is important to note that everyone that was part of the official visit to Hexham general hospital on Monday 8 November were formally advised and reminded of these rules on the day. Information was included in the written programme. These rules include information about mask-wearing and other infection prevention and control measures, such as hand-washing, tucking away loose clothing [ties], and having rolled-up sleeves. After the prime minister left a welcome meeting, he walked along a mezzanine corridor, for a very short period of time, without a mask. This brief moment was captured on camera. As soon as this was identified he was given a mask and he put it on. The prime minister did wear a mask for the majority of the visit. He didn’t have a mask on when he did his media interviews, but this was with agreement with everyone else in the room, who did wear a mask. We ask that everyone visiting our hospital sites continue to follow our infection control and prevention rules. We hope this helps to clarify the situation and we apologise for any upset this has caused. On Monday, when pictures of Johnson in the hospital not wearing a mask first appeared, the trust put out a tweet defending the PM, saying he had been wearing a mask in every clinical area he visited. Richard Ratcliffe, whose British-Iranian wife, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, has been detained in Iran since 2016, said that he found a meeting with a minister about her case “depressing” and that it left him “a little bit more deflated today than I was this time yesterday”. Ratcliffe, who has been campaigning outside the Foreign Office on hunger strike for 19 days, was invited to see James Cleverly, a Foreign Office minister, for an update on talks between the UK government and the Iranian deputy foreign minister, Ali Bagheri Kani, who is visiting London. After his meeting Ratcliffe described it as: If I’m honest, quite a depressing meeting. In terms of what we got told, well, not much. Ratcliffe said that Cleverly told him he had raised his wife’s case with his Iranian counterpart, but Ratcliffe said Cleverly could not say when things might move forward. Ratcliffe said: I said to him [Cleverly] at the end: ‘I come away with no hope. I felt that in your strategy it’s all carrots to Iran. There’s no stick’. I can’t see what’s stopping them from continuing to play games with Nazanin. I think by being here, Nazanin is probably safe for a few weeks. But what’s to stop them threatening to put her in prison again? Ratcliffe believes his wife, who was originally jailed for five years on what are widely seen as bogus spying charges, is being held as a hostage by the Iranians because they want to use her case to pressurise the UK government into repaying a decades-old £400m debt. Ratcliffe said that he asked Cleverly about this issue, but that Cleverly “clammed up”. Zaghari-Ratcliffe is currently on parole and staying at her parents’ home in Tehran, but she fears being returned to jail at any moment. Ratcliffe said that he would continue his hunger strike at least for this evening, but that at some point soon he would end it. “I made a promise to Nazanin, I made a promise to my family, mum in particular, and to the family doctors, that I won’t take it too far,” he said. This, from my colleague Patrick Wintour, explains the background to the £400m debt whose non-payment is preventing Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s release. Sir John Major, the former prime minister, has issued a statement paying tribute to FW de Klerk, the former president of South Africa, who has died. Major’s premiership overlapped with De Klerk’s presidency. Major said: FW de Klerk was a man who realised that apartheid was morally and politically wrong, and acted to bring it to an end. He freed political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, ended racial segregation and faced down hostility in his own party. He worked with Mr Mandela to fully dismantle apartheid and return South Africa to democracy and the community of nations. He deserves to be remembered as a brave politician who helped change the future of his country for the better. According to the Sun’s Jack Elsom, government whips are furious with Sir Geoffrey Cox for claiming yesterday that the chief whip, Mark Spencer, approved his decision to vote by proxy from the Caribbean. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, told Sky News that concern about a “sense of corruption” at Westminster is genuine. Speaking from Cop26, she said the recent stories about Tory sleaze had been a distraction from the work being done at the climate crisis conference. But she said the controversy could lead to these problems being addressed. She said: It has also shone a light, and perhaps this is a good thing, on some of the other issues that need to be resolved around politics, and Westminster politics in particular. There is a real concern - I certainly don’t use this word lightly - [about] a sense of corruption at the heart of the Westminster system, and that has to be rooted out. A pharmaceutical firm has asked for an apology and has not ruled out future legal action after the health secretary told MPs its coronavirus vaccine would not get approval for use in the UK, PA Media reports. PA says: Valneva, a French company which has a production facility in Livingston in Scotland, had its previous order of around 100m doses torn up by the UK government, with Sajid Javid saying the product would not get the go-ahead from the regulator. But the company, visited by Boris Johnson in January, has since been cleared to supply tens of millions of doses across Europe. David Lawrence, Valneva chief financial officer, told BBC Radio Scotland Javid’s comments in September had caused reputational damage, had financial implications for the company, and “put a question mark next to our vaccine”. Lawrence said Mr Javid was “very clearly wrong” to state the vaccine would not secure approval from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). He added: “We would love to hear an apology from him. The damage he did to our company and our commercial discussions was quite significant and we’re still awaiting an apology for those remarks.” Javid originally told MPs the company “would not get approval” by the regulator, but later amended Hansard, the official parliamentary record, to state the vaccine “has not yet gained” clearance. Lawrence said Valneva was still deciding whether or not to sue the government over Javid’s comments. Asked for its response to Lawrence’s comments, and whether an apology would be forthcoming, the Department of Health and Social Care said: “Clinical trials for the Valneva candidate vaccine have not yet been completed. As such, our independent medicines regulator - the MHRA - has not approved the Valneva candidate vaccine for use in the UK.” The EU’s Brexit commissioner will tell David Frost that negotiations over Northern Ireland are doomed to fail unless he drops an “unattainable” demand over the role of the European court of justice, my colleague Daniel Boffey reports. Ministers arrived at No 10 for cabinet at around lunchtime. They were meant to be having an awayday at Chequers, but the venue got switched to Downing Street for diary reasons. However we were told that the event was going to go ahead as planned, with the discussion lasting longer than usual. According to a report in the Times (paywall) at the weekend, several ministers were told to prepare five-minute presentations explaining how their departments were contributing to the levelling up agenda. They were also told to bring A3 maps showing their plans, and it looks as if the work and pensions secretary was one of them. According to the Times report, the main presentation will come from Michael Gove, the new levelling up secretary, and Andy Haldane, the former Bank of England chief economist now working for the government as a levelling up adviser. The discussion will cover the contents of the much-awaited levelling up white paper due to be published before Christmas. Dominic Cummings, Boris Johnson’s former chief adviser, is not impressed by the drunk opposition MPs story. (See 10.06am.) In a single tweet he manages to deride both lobby journalists and the Johnson government (now he’s left it) - two of his pet hates. It was Johnson himself who first publicised the term “dead cat” for a media distraction ploy, in an article citing (but not by name) the Australian election strategist, Lynton Crosby. In an article in 2013 Johnson wrote: Let us suppose you are losing an argument. The facts are overwhelmingly against you, and the more people focus on the reality the worse it is for you and your case. Your best bet in these circumstances is to perform a manoeuvre that a great campaigner describes as “throwing a dead cat on the table, mate”. That is because there is one thing that is absolutely certain about throwing a dead cat on the dining room table – and I don’t mean that people will be outraged, alarmed, disgusted. That is true, but irrelevant. The key point, says my Australian friend, is that everyone will shout: “Jeez, mate, there’s a dead cat on the table!”; in other words they will be talking about the dead cat, the thing you want them to talk about, and they will not be talking about the issue that has been causing you so much grief. But today’s story doesn’t count as a dead cat because it is just not good enough to overshadow sleaze. It’s more of a dead mouse, if that. Labour has called on Boris Johnson to reach a deal with the EU over the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol and end the “poison of division” it says the government has provoked. The shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, said the the Conservative party had been “reckless” in its approach to Northern Ireland where a fragile peace has held for more than 20 years. In a speech to the George J Mitchell Institute for Peace in Belfast, she urged the prime minister not to provoke “further poisonous instability” in the weeks ahead over the Northern Ireland protocol. Her comments come as Lord Frost yesterday lifted the immediate threat of triggering article 16, the mechanism to allow one side suspend parts of the protocol as a last resort to safeguard communities from societal or economic damage. Speaking the House of Lords yesterday, Frost said indicated talks would continue for a “short number of weeks” but maintained that the conditions had been set for article 16. Haigh said: The Conservative’s reckless custody of the Good Friday agreement has sown division and undermined stability. This is not a partisan point, nor one that gives me any satisfaction. Peace in Northern Ireland is too precious to be a plaything of partisan politics. The Labour party recognises and pays tribute to the work done by John Major,who helped lay the ground for the Good Friday agreement. But we cannot ignore the damage that has been done. Yesterday, at his press conference at Cop26, Boris Johnson said declared that “the UK is not remotely a corrupt country”. It was a surprising thing for him to say because the journalist asking him the question had not suggested to him that Britain is a corrupt country, and so it sounded like a hurt response from a PM needled by opposition claims in recent days that he has been enabling corruption and worried about how he is seen internationally. Today that has triggered a rebuke from an anti-corruption adviser to the Nigerian government. In an interview with Finance Uncovered, an investigative journalism website, Prof Sadiq Isah Radda, executive secretary to the presidential advisory committee against corruption in Nigeria, said that the UK was a “tangential enabler” for corruption and that London was “the most notorious safe haven for looted funds in the world today”. He explained: There are no thieves without receivers. Without safe havens for looted funds, Nigeria and Africa will not be this corrupt. Johnson’s comment was a response to claims that some British MPs have been acting corruptly. Radda was focusing on a different, but not wholly unrelated, issue, and in his interview he was particularly critical of the UK government’s failure to implement a long-promised proposal to require public registration of the beneficial ownership of offshore companies and trusts. This would expose the real identity of people using offshore structures to conceal their wealth. Radda challenged Johnson to deliver this law. On corruption Johnson “can do better by matching words with concrete actions”, Radda said. Radda explained: UK law allows the global elite to loot their countries and rush to London. No wonder London swims in other people’s blood and sweat ... As a country and as a people, corruption has done monumental damage to us and we have to bring a stop to it. Safe havens, such as London, as well as their governments, have to support and help Nigeria. The muted response by British politicians suggests complicity. The practice under UK law where anyone buying a house or apartment can hide their identity from public records that are submitted to the Land Registry if they purchase the property through a company registered in an offshore secrecy haven is very disappointing, disturbing and contradictory. According to the BBC, Labour activists in Coventry are trying to organise trigger ballots that could lead to two of the city’s MP, Taiwo Owatemi and Zarah Sultana, facing reselection battles. It says some activists are unhappy about the way Owatemi and Sultana were chosen before the 2019 general election, because local councillors were excluded from the shortlists. A successful trigger ballot leads to an MP having to face a full reselection battle, with other candidates standing, although a rule change passed at the Labour conference has made it significantly harder than it was for a reselection contest to be triggered. Andrea Leadsom, the Conservative former leader of the Commons who tabled the amendment backed by the government last week shelving the proposal to suspend Owen Paterson from the Commons for 30 days, has written to colleagues apologising for what happened, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. As Aubrey revealed in a very good backgrounder last week, although the amendment was tabled by Leadsom, in effect it was a government amendment cobbled together at the behest of Paterson’s allies, who believed he had been the victim of an injustice (a view shared by few people who have actually read in full the report criticising him). Leadsom was asked to put her name to it because she is seen as less polarising than the key Paterson supporters, and her work as Commons leader setting up a new system for dealing with complaints of bullying and sexual harassment by MPs was widely admired. The more Tories who do apologise for what happened last week, the more awkward it gets for Boris Johnson, who is refusing to say sorry himself. Boris Johnson is planning to travel to Paris tomorrow for a meeting with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, according to the Telegraph’s Joe Barnes. Boris Johnson has welcomed the joint plan from the US and China to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. The UK’s most prominent standards watchdog has urged the government to act rapidly to address concerns about MPs’ second jobs. In an interview with the Today programme, Lord Evans, the former MI5 boss who now chairs the Committee on Standards in Public Life, said that there was no need for a lengthy review of what needed to be done because proposals were already “on the table”. He told the programme: I’ve been slightly slightly frustrated over the last few days at people calling for a review of MPs’ second jobs, and this and that. Our committee ... has made recommendations on a number of these areas, including only last week. Those are on the table. They offer a way forward now, which means that we can be confident that our standards bodies are independent, that our public life is being defended, and we don’t need to set up a royal commission or a public inquiry. Evans accepted that the Commons standards committee (a different body) will also be publishing recommendations soon. But after that report was out, it should be possible to “take action on these things rapidly”, he said. At the moment, as there is such an upwelling of public concern on standards issues, there is an opportunity to look at what is already on the table, what has already been researched, what we’ve consulted widely on. Asked what should be done about the rules around second jobs for MPs, Evans said that his committee did a lot of polling before it published a report on this topic in 2018 and he said the views of the public were “quite sophisticated”. He went on: They recognised that there were certain jobs that it was right and appropriate that MPs should be able to hold, in addition to their main responsibilities. But we recommended that MP should not accept any paid work to provide services such as parliamentary strategists or advisers or consultants, because that was in tension with their main job. And we said that the critical thing was that nothing that an MP does should get in the way of their ability to work in support of their constituents. So the amount of work that they do, the sort of work, needs to be judged against that. If somebody is spending a huge amount of their time on a second job, then they can’t be made maintaining the support for their constituents. The 2018 report recommended a ban on MPs working as political consultants. This would have prevented the Owen Paterson scandal, because if this rule had been in place, Paterson would not have been able to take up the two consultancy posts that got him into trouble in the first place. Paterson was found to have broken the current rules, not because he had those jobs, but because he used them for paid advocacy, which is already banned. But the 2018 report also said the rules should be changed so that any outside work undertaken by MPs should be “within reasonable limits and should not prevent them from fully carrying out their range of duties”. Given what has emerged about the scale of Sir Geoffrey Cox’s legal work, this rule would almost certainly force him to cut back. According to the Daily Mail, in some years Cox has devoted almost 30 hours a week to his legal work. (Cox said yesterday that he regularly works 70 hours per week, and that casework for his constituents is always given primary importance.) The Committee on Standards in Public Life does not investigate specific cases of wrongdoing. But it was set up to monitor standards across all areas of public life, and to make recommendations for improvements. The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a new record high, PA Media reports. In his interview with Times Radio Paul Scully, the business minister, also suggested that Labour’s attacks on the Conservatives over second jobs could turn out to be counter-productive. He said: What I’m saying is that it tends to erode trust in politicians in general, ultimately. So what seems like a short term political attack line, if you like, from other parties, tends to just erode the trust in politicians in general. But Scully did accept that wrongdoing needed to be tackled, and he accepted that the government’s decision last week to whip its MPs to vote for the motion sparing Owen Paterson from a Commons suspension was “regrettable”. With the sleaze allegations of the last week largely focused on the Tories, CCHQ must have been anxious to have something to throw at the opposition, and that perhaps explains a bizarre story in some of the papers today claiming that two SNP MPs and one Labour MP got drunk on a flight to Gibraltar on a visit organised by the armed forces parliamentary scheme. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, is reportedly planning to complain to the SNP and Labour leaders about the conduct of their MPs. Paul Scully, the business minister, was on interview duty for No 10 this morning, and in an interview with Times Radio he was happy to comment on the story. Asked if he agreed the story was “not a good look”, he agred. He went on: We’ve got to show responsibility. We are leaders. We - all 650 MPs - are leaders in their own right. And to be held to a high standard and clearly, you know, with the armed forces over there, we’ve got to show ... our respect to our armed forces as well. Some of the reports have not named some or all of the MPs, in what may be a sign that in-house lawyers fear some of the allegations would not stand up in court. But the two SNP MPs named by the Daily Telegraph have used Twitter to deny the story. These are from David Linden. And these are from Drew Hendry. Good morning. The Tory sleaze news horror show shows no signs of abating, and there are two aspects to it that must be causing alarm in No 10. First, this isn’t just an obsession for papers on the left; papers on the right, that normally support the Conservatives, have embraced it with gusto. And, second, once a narrative like this gains traction (“Tory MPs are on the take”, to put it bluntly), then it becomes open season for the media, with all sorts of stories that in the past might have been ignored suddenly getting scrutiny because they now qualify as newsworthy. This story has reached that point. Today’s papers are still full of revelations about Sir Geoffrey Cox. The Guardian focuses on the £6m he has earned from his legal work, the Daily Mail has done a similar calculation, while the Daily Mirror has a go at him for claiming for accommodation in London while at the same time renting out a flat he owns in the capital. But it is not just Cox who is in the news. Other Conservatives facing uncomfortable questions about second jobs include Julian Smith, the former Northern Ireland secretary (in the Guardian), Mark Pawsey (in City AM), Philip Dunne, a former defence minister (in the Times), and Alun Cairns, the former Welsh secretary (in the Times). It is not anything like as dire as the 2009 MPs’ expenses scandal, but there are some parallels. This morning we have had a potentially significant intervention from Rishi Sunak, the chancellor. In interviews primarily about the growth figures (mildly disappointing), he said the government needs “to do better” on standards than it did last week. He told Sky News: On the broader point and just reflecting over recent events, I think for us as a government, it’s fair to say that we need to do better than we did last week and we know that. In one respect this is not surprising. Ministers have admitted that it was a mistake to get MPs to vote for the motion shelving the Owen Paterson report, and so of course the government has to do better. But, because they are coming from a cabinet minster who (at least until now) has not been implicated in controversy about sleaze or second jobs, and one seen as the favourite to be next PM, Sunak’s words also sound like an implied rebuke to Boris Johnson. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: NHS England publishes its latest waiting time figures. Morning: Boris Johnson chairs what is set to be a lengthy meeting of cabinet. Originally they were planning a cabinet awayday at Chequers. The venue has been switched to Downing Street, but the agenda will be the same, focusing on levelling up, ahead of the publication of the levelling up white paper later this year. There will also be a political cabinet. 12pm: John Swinney, the deputy first minister, takes first minister’s questions in the Scottish parliament. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.com“Britain is not remotely a corrupt country,” declared the prime minister in Glasgow this week. So what did he mean by remotely? He had just been accused of selling peerages to party donors. In 2006, Boris Johnson called such abuses of the House of Lords a “putrefaction … a quintessentially British crime”. Back then it was Tony Blair he was attacking. We know Johnson’s ethics vary depending on the situation – but the hypocrisy of this is still blatant. Members of the House of Lords must have yawned at headlines that donors who gave £3m to the Conservative party had been offered peerages. What was new? They were all aware that Britain has long been the only democracy in the world where membership of the national parliament is up for sale. This has been the case since David Lloyd George’s day, and is so despite the Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act of 1925 having outlawed it. Party leaders simply break the law. Yet no member of the political establishment will admit to this, because cases erupt under every regime. Michael Foot as Labour leader in 1980 privately confessed that when he nominated his first Labour peer, his chief whip, Michael Cocks, was aghast: “But none of them has any money.” At least 25 of Blair’s 292 peers were party donors. In 2006, Blair was the first prime minister to be interviewed by the police under the 1925 act, but the Crown Prosecution Service later admitted there was insufficient evidence for a prosecution. The same omertà this week forced a hapless Tory minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, to defend Johnson by implying that it was mere coincidence that so many “great philanthropists” to whom he had given peerages happened to be Tory donors. This was like Moscow calling it coincidental that so many foes of Vladimir Putin happened to come down with food poisoning. In 2015, an Oxford University survey found that between 2005 and 2014, under Blair, Gordon Brown and David Cameron, 303 peers had been created, boosting Lords membership close to an obscene 800. This made it the biggest assembly in the world outside Beijing. The report recorded that in that time 92 of these peers had given £338m to the three main political parties, almost all from just 27 millionaires. The Lords is not just an upmarket Thames-side retirement club but the principle sump from which British party politics is lubricated. It is perhaps significant that not one of the last five prime ministers has deigned to go near the place. Britain is a parliamentary rather than a presidential democracy, with the Commons acting as the absolute sovereign. The Lords, a relic of ancient hereditary rule, is mere icing on parliament’s cake. It contains some of the wisest and most experienced voices in the land, whose contribution to public debate is invaluable, and serves as a partial check on the Commons. Yet those voices must do so in a chamber inflated by patronage and corruption, where 92 individuals are still present by virtue of birth. No one involved has any interest in reform, not party treasurers eager for cash, nor MPs dreaming of retirement. nor, it seems, even reputable peers embarrassed by the company they must keep. Johnson may be right that Britain is not “corrupt” in comparison with some states. But as Transparency International puts it, corruption is “the abuse of public power for private gain”. The British state is corrupt in, among other things, planning decisions, ministerial access, defence contracts and the regulation of international money. The corridors of Westminster are awash in lobbyists with free passes. Why else would firms pay MPs and peers thousands of pounds as “consultants”, if not in the expectation of government favour? We still await accountability on billions of public money squandered on non-competitive Covid contracts, including to “friends” of peers and MPs. Ostensibly, this looks like the most monumental case of corruption in British history. The case for Lords reform is beyond argument. The chief obstacle is the absence of a mechanism for change. In the 1960s, a great age of reform, royal commissions served as non-partisan forums in which to negotiate proposals. Governments came to dislike such commissions as somehow infringing upon their sovereignty. In the 2010s Cameron and Nick Clegg came near to a coalition compromise on a new second chamber but funked it at the last minute. There have been copious reports on Lords reform over past decades. Increasingly, opinion has moved away from electing peers, which would leave control of membership to the party machines. Election is the privilege of the Commons. Some have suggested a chamber whose members are drawn from the nations and regions of an emergent federal Britain, and from occupations and interests that have been chosen because they will be likely to contribute to public debate. Its powers would be limited, but not nonexistent. Such a chamber cannot be hard to envisage. In fact, there seems no better moment for it: refurbishment is about to move the Lords into a temporary home, hopefully outside London. The price of its return to Westminster should be reform. As for the rich who merely want the title of lord, why not sell it openly? As the newspaper baron Lord Northcliffe said when offered a peerage: “When I want one, I will buy it like an honest man.” Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistBest known in the UK for her scene-stealing turn in BBC sitcom Shrill, Patti Harrison is prominent among a generation of female American comics – Catherine Cohen and imminent UK debutante Megan Stalter included – who are whip-smart, soaked in irony and fluent in the language of self-projection in the age of social media. Her affinity with those terrific acts is clear from the outset in her own UK debut, which sold out in a heartbeat. On comes Harrison, or the constructed version thereof: self-delighted, in no hurry to deliver jokes, secure in the assumption that we’re fascinated with everything she has to say. She introduces herself by PowerPoint. She’s American, so we’re invited to pledge allegiance to the US flag (or is it?). She cares about friendship for which she has created an increasingly wacky acrostic. So far, so faux-anodyne – but Harrison’s nephew has sabotaged the presentation, scrawling “I miss Uncle Patrick” across the slides and inserting photos of Harrison pre-transition. That’s all part of the fun, though, for our affectless host – and for us, charmed by this off-beam incursion of Harrison’s trans identity into a show that otherwise barely mentions it. The show pivots to musical comedy, and Harrison performs a series of improbable, so-bad-they’re-good parodies of Dua Lipa, Charlie XCX and Kate Bush. It takes her a while to get there: the show’s links are meandering. There are also joke-free monologues about Harrison being out of practice at standup, and about the weight of expectation on trans artists – which would be fine, but the heavily ironic atmosphere she established earlier makes it impossible to take anything she says at face value. I ended up believing the bit about standup rustiness – because this is a good 75 minutes with a great hour struggling to get out. But its highlights are very bright. The send-up of millennial entitlement is done with a lovely light touch. Her Stevie Nicks song, meanwhile, about leaving a baby on a beach, and a Joanna Newsom number about an improbable love affair (featuring the bodily fluids of a certain political strategist) – both performed at full tilt with striking vocal verisimilitude – are unforgettably ridiculous. At Soho theatre, London, until 13 November.Azeem Rafiq has described himself as “incredibly hurt” after Joe Root said he has not been witness to any instances of racism during his 14 years at Yorkshire. On Thursday England’s Test captain broke his silence on the continuing scandal hours before Mark Arthur confirmed his resignation as chief executive. Issuing a statement from his team’s pre-Ashes quarantine camp in Queensland, Root described racism as “intolerable” and called for change in the sport. However, in a follow-up press conference – one in which questions on specific allegations were barred – Root was asked three times whether he could remember any of the abuse that Rafiq has alleged was widespread during his two spells in the Yorkshire dressing room between 2008 and 2018. “Not that I can recall, no I can’t,” he replied. Root did add that “it is clear things happened” which need eradicating and he has pledged to help Lord Patel, the new Yorkshire chair, who has hailed Rafiq as a whistleblower and is now tackling the gravest crisis in the club’s 158-year history. But Rafiq is understood to still feel badly let down by Root failing to acknowledge he was witness to any wrongdoing personally and, an hour after his former teammate had spoken, tweeted: “Disappointed is not even the feeling. Incredibly Hurt. But uncomfortable truths are hard to accept it seems.” This was followed by news that Arthur, the Yorkshire chief executive, has become the latest person to leave Headingley in the wake of the scandal. Patel said the departure was “an important moment for the club” and added that new leadership “will be vital in driving the change we urgently need”. Arthur, who was at the helm when Rafiq’s original allegations of racism were not properly escalated when he left the club in 2018, thanked supporters and listed the six-year south Asian engagement programme and the redevelopment of the Bradford Park Avenue ground as being among the highlights of his eight-year spell in charge. The day was dominated by Root and Rafiq, however, two players who rose through the academy ranks together and made first-class debuts in 2009 before their careers went in different directions. They were also close friends with Gary Ballance, the former England batsman who last week admitted using racist language towards Rafiq in the past as part of what he described as their “two-way” friendly verbals. As a centrally contracted England player, Root’s time at Headingley has been limited since his debut in 2012. The 30-year-old has also driven the Test team’s public messaging on anti-discrimination and earned praise in 2019 after challenging an alleged homophobic slur by West Indies’ Shannon Gabiel on the field of play. Rafiq has previously described Root as an “outstanding guy” in interviews – similar praise has gone to Jason Gillespie, Yorkshire head coach from 2012 to 2016 – but has been left flummoxed by his old teammate replying “no” when asked whether he recognised the dressing room environment that has been portrayed of late. As such, Root now risks being publicly challenged on this point by Rafiq when the former off-spinner speaks under parliamentary privilege at what is expected to be an explosive session of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee on Tuesday. Asked if the events of the past 18 months have made him question his future at Yorkshire, Root replied: “If you’re not at the club, how can you make any change? How can you help move things forward? As I said, I look forward to speaking to Lord Patel at some point in the future about how I can help move things forward.” On the subject of whether players found to have used racist language should be banished from the sport, Root replied: “I do think people deserve a second chance. And if they are willing to accept that they’ve made a mistake and they want to make change and want to move forward then I think that’s really important as well.” In his earlier statement, Root said: “These events have fractured our game and torn lives apart. We must now recover and come back together as fans, players, media and those who work within cricket. We have an opportunity to make the sport I love better for everyone. “I want to see change and actions that will see YCCC rise from this with a culture that harnesses a diverse environment with trust across all communities that support cricket in the county. We need to educate, unify and reset.” Much of the fallout is a direct result of Yorkshire’s handling of the crisis, first by failing to escalate Rafiq’s allegations when he raised them, in-house, in 2018 and then the 12-month investigation that Patel described as “flawed” upon announcing that the club had settled the employment tribunal case with their former off-spinner. Indeed Rafiq himself tweeted on Thursday that he tried hard to prevent the current “car crash” at Yorkshire, something that has already led to Andrew Gale being suspended as head coach pending an investigation into an antisemitic tweet posted 11 years ago and Martyn Moxon, the director of cricket, being signed off with stress. Rafiq insists this is the result of the club being unwilling to listen to him and clearly there are those at Headingley who still vehemently reject his allegations. This was outlined in a letter from 14 staff members to the club’s board in October that spoke of a “one-man mission to bring down the club”. Sent three weeks after Yorkshire published a summary of the report into Rafiq’s allegations – one that concluded he was the victim of racial harassment – the signatories accused the club of failing to offer a strong rebuttal of his claims. The letter, first reported by the Daily Telegraph, said: “Staff who knew Azeem well felt that an initial apology to him and an acceptance that he was a victim was not the correct approach and misrepresented entirely what kind of individual he was whilst at the club. “There are endless episodes of Azeem’s behaviour, well-known to the club, which reflect on him as a person well before he decided to accuse the club, staff and players of any wrongdoing. We find it difficult to comprehend how this part of Azeem’s character has not been released or at least used by the club in its defence.” Responding to publication of this letter, Patel said: “It is troubling for many reasons, and further evidence of the wider issues the club has faced.” The Yorkshire board’s previous response to this – and the crisis as a whole – will need to be explained by Roger Hutton when he speaks to the select committee next week, with the former chair having bemoaned “a culture that refuses to accept change or challenge” upon resigning from his position last Friday. Tom Harrison, the ECB chief executive, will appear before the select committee too.Scientists have identified what appears to be a small chunk of the moon that is tracking the Earth’s orbit around the Sun. The asteroid, named Kamo`oalewa, was discovered in 2016 but until now relatively little has been known about it. New observations suggest it could be a fragment from the moon that was thrown into space by an ancient lunar collision. Kamo`oalewa is one of Earth’s quasi-satellites, a category of asteroid that orbits the Sun, but remains relatively close to the planet – in this case about 9m miles away. Despite being close in astronomical terms, the asteroid is about the size of a ferris wheel and about 4m times fainter than the faintest star that can be seen with the naked eye. Consequently, the Earth’s most powerful telescopes are needed to make observations. Using the Large Binocular Telescope on Mount Graham in southern Arizona, astronomers found the spectrum of reflected light from Kamo`oalewa closely matched lunar rocks from Nasa’s Apollo missions, suggesting it originated from the moon. They had initially compared the light with that reflected off other near-Earth asteroids, but drawn a blank. “I looked through every near-Earth asteroid spectrum we had access to, and nothing matched,” said Ben Sharkey, a PhD student at the University of Arizona and the paper’s lead author. After missing the chance to observe Kamo`oalewa in April 2020 owing to a shutdown of the telescope during the coronavirus pandemic, the team found the final piece of the puzzle in 2021. “This spring, we got much needed follow-up observations and went, ‘Wow it is real,’” Sharkey said. “It’s easier to explain with the moon than other ideas.” The observations also showed Kamo`oalewa is in an unusual orbit, one that would be unlikely for objects that had drifted towards Earth from the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. The team are unsure how the piece of moon came to be adrift in space, in part, because there are no other known asteroids with lunar origins. However, they narrowed down the timeframe for the violent event to have occurred between 100,000 and 500 years ago. Prof Stephen Lowry, an astronomer at the University of Kent, said: “While not 100% conclusive, the team has made a strong case that Kamo`oalewa may indeed be a collisional fragment from such a violent event [as a lunar collision].” The findings are published in the journal Communications Earth and Environment. • This article was amended on 12 November 2021. The journal is not called Nature Communications Earth and Environment, as stated in an earlier version, it is called Communications Earth and Environment, which is part of the Nature publishing portfolio.Students taking A-levels and GCSEs in England will be asked to sit repeated mock exams, after the exam regulator Ofqual told schools to test pupils throughout the year in case national exams are cancelled for the third time. The regulator published its long-delayed contingency plan, detailing how teachers in England are to award grades by assessment in the event of Covid disruption making it impossible for formal exams to be held, as was the case in 2020-21 and 2019-20. But the new plan B, endorsed by the Department for Education, was criticised by teaching unions and school leaders for being released so far past the start of the school year, and for creating a heavier workload for teachers and students having to prepare for assessments as well as final exams. The contingency plan includes advice for schools to collect evidence in order to assess grades, with Ofqual advising that a “sensible approach” would be for schools to set formal exams once a term, starting before the Christmas holidays this year, and followed by others in spring and in the first half of the summer term. Ofqual also advised that students should be assessed under formal exam-like conditions wherever possible, without knowing the questions in advance or having access to notes or textbooks. But the regulator also warned against “over-assessment”, saying that the “total assessment time should not normally exceed the total time students would spend taking exams for the relevant qualification, plus any time spent on non-exam assessment”. Julie McCulloch, director of policy at the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “These plans involve students having to sit a series of mock exams, which may or may not count towards their final grades, as well as then probably having to take formal exams next summer. This is far from ideal and places them under a great deal of pressure. “But not having a contingency plan would risk a repeat of the chaos of the past two years, and therefore, on balance, this seems like the right course of action and the confirmed set of measures appear to be sensible enough.” Both McCulloch and Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, were highly critical of the delay in finalising and publishing the contingency plan. “The lack of urgency is shameful and an affront to parents, pupils and their teachers – all of whom needed to know, much earlier than today, how they would be assessed if the exam system fell over, as it did last year and the year before,” Bousted said. In 2020, the government refused to create a contingency plan, leading to immediate confusion when A-level, GCSE and other national exams were then cancelled in January this year.A former Royal Ballet choreographer killed himself after feeling “humiliation” over allegations of sexual misconduct against him, an inquest heard. Liam Scarlett, 35, who was employed by the Royal Opera House as a dancer from 2005, then as artist in residence from 2012, was accused in 2019. He was suspended on full pay in September 2019 while the allegations were investigated. Leah Hurst, the head of legal and business affairs for the Royal Opera House, told an inquest in Ipswich, Suffolk, that there were a “variety” of claims. “Broadly they included inappropriate physical contact in rehearsals and other settings, sexual behaviour out of the workplace that was felt to be inappropriate, improperly made casting decisions,” she said. She said there were “sufficient grounds to proceed to a disciplinary process” and Scarlett was informed of this in January 2020. She said press reports at the time incorrectly said the allegations involved children. She said that after the reporting, further allegations were received via a whistleblowing hotline. She said that before the disciplinary process, Scarlett approached the Royal Opera House through his lawyers and said he wanted to leave. “We negotiated terms of departure with his solicitors and he left on 23 March 2020,” Hurst said. She said that Scarlett was offered support, adding: “We had not only to think of our duty of care towards Liam but also those individuals who came forward.” Scarlett’s parents, Deborah and Laurence Scarlett, went to his flat in Bramford, near Ipswich, on 12 April this year, after each receiving text messages from him, and called emergency services after finding him there. He had left notes to family members. He suffered a cardiac arrest and died at Ipswich hospital four days later of a brain injury. Recording that Scarlett died by suicide, Suffolk’s area coroner, Jacqueline Devonish, said: “It’s clear from his own words that there were feelings of humiliation around all of what happened in regards to those allegations.” She said the “main contributing factors to his decision” were the “serious nature of the allegations made by individuals at the Royal Opera House” and “press reports making public those allegations”. Devonish said Scarlett “clearly knew” that his production of Frankenstein had been called off by the Royal Danish Ballet, ahead of its announcement on 16 April, and that this may also have been a factor. His mother said she spoke to her son about the allegations after they appeared in the press. She said: “He told me they weren’t true and he couldn’t understand why people would make allegations against him. “We feel Liam would not have taken his life if his name hadn’t been dragged through the press with inaccurate allegations.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Alexander Lukashenko has threatened to cut deliveries of gas to Europe via a major pipeline as the Belarusian leader promised to retaliate against any new EU sanctions imposed in response to the crisis at the Poland-Belarus border. Backed by the Kremlin, Lukashenko has struck a defiant note after inciting a migrant crisis at the border, where thousands of people, mainly from Middle Eastern countries, are camped out as temperatures plunge below freezing. Meanwhile thousands marched through the streets of Warsaw to mark Poland’s Independence Day, including far-right groups calling for the government to prevent migrants from entering the country illegally. The city government had banned the march but those orders were overturned by the national government, which is dominated by the conservative Law and Justice party. Polish authorities have taken a hardline stance on the crisis, instituting a state of emergency in the border region that allows police to ignore asylum requests and summarily expel migrants. It also prevents NGOs and journalists from entering the border zone. As punishment for Belarus’ actions, the EU is expected to sanction up to 30 Belarusian individuals and entities, possibly including the national air carrier Belavia. Belarus’s neighbours have said they may be forced to shut their borders. “We heat Europe, and they are still threatening us that they’ll shut the borders,” said Lukashenko in an emergency meeting with his top ministers on Thursday. “And what if we cut off [the transit of] natural gas to them? So I would recommend that the leadership of Poland, Lithuanian and other brainless people to think before they speak.” The threat to cut off deliveries along the Yamal-Europe pipeline from Russia is an attempt to pile additional pressure on Europe, where gas prices spiked last month due to an international energy crisis. Yet it appears unlikely that EU members will back down from a new round of sanctions against Lukashenko, who has already been targeted for a brutal crackdown on his country’s opposition and the grounding of a Ryanair flight in May. Belarusian opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya said Lukashenko would not follow through on the threat. “It would be more harmful for him, for Belarus, than for the European Union and I can suppose it’s bluffing,” Tikhanovskaya told AFP, urging European countries to hold firm and not communicate directly with the “illegitimate” leader. EU members say that Lukashenko has enabled thousands of people to travel through Minsk and to the EU borders as revenge for the sanctions against him. Belavia, the Belarusian state airline, has strongly denied it is involved in any trafficking of vulnerable people to the border with the EU. Videos posted to social media indicate that the flow of migrants through Minsk has not slowed and that hundreds more people may be arriving at the border every day. Poland reported that there had been 468 illegal attempts to cross the border on Wednesday and that people had attempted to cut through razor-wire or use logs to batter down border fencing in some places. Other countries bordering Belarus have warned that the border crisis could lead to a new military conflict. In a joint statement on Thursday, the defence ministers of Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia called the situation “the most complex security crisis for our region, Nato and the European Union in many years”. Belarus’ use of migrants could lead to “provocations and serious incidents that could also spill over into military domain,” the statement said. In a show of support for Lukashenko, Moscow has dispatched nuclear-capable bombers for the past two days to patrol the skies over western Belarus. The Russian defence ministry has called the patrols, which included imitation bombing runs by a pair of Tupolev Tu-160 heavy strategic bombers on Thursday, a training exercise of the countries’ joint air defence systems. “Let them squeak and shout,” Lukashenko told his top officials in bellicose remarks. “Yes, these are bombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons. But we have no other option. We have to see what they are doing beyond the borders.” Lukashenko also claimed that there had been attempts to smuggle weapons from east Ukraine to those on the border in an attempt to “provoke our border guards into a conflict with theirs”. He did not provide any evidence for the claim, which he said he had discussed with Vladimir Putin. Ukraine’s interior ministry on Thursday announced that it was planning to deploy an additional 8,500 troops and police officers, as well as 15 helicopters, to prevent attempts by people to cross the border. Although not part of the EU, the country has said it is also concerned at being drawn into the crisis. European officials said that they expected the crisis to worsen. The German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, said that the picture from the border camps between Belarus and Poland were “terrible”. “Lukashenko is responsible for this suffering. He abuses people to put the EU under pressure.”Fears of overwhelmed morgues, record Covid cases, anti-lockdown protests – the headlines this week in New Zealand might evoke deja-vu for anyone who lived through the pandemic in Europe, Asia or America. New Zealand has recently generated a series of news stories that could have been a year-old dispatch from the opposite side of the globe. National radio announced that hospitals had been buying portable refrigerators to prepare for the possibility of growing Covid deaths. In the capital, Wellington, a crowd of thousands of “pro-freedom” anti-vaccination protesters gathered in front of parliament – one of the first organised, medium-scale expressions of dissatisfaction from a country that had held on to extraordinarily high levels of social support for its Covid response. Over the weekend, the country cracked 200 new daily Covid infections for the first time in the pandemic. New Zealand is preparing to face for the first time what the US, UK, Europe and much of Asia saw almost a year ago. For a government that has so far protected its population from the worst of Covid, the new era presents new challenges – including pockets of complacency or denial. On Wednesday, the Covid response minister Chris Hipkins warned that the virus would soon spread across the country. “I think that there are pockets of people who have formed the view that Covid is not going to affect them, and they are wrong,” he said. The ministry of health put full vaccination rates of the eligible population at 80% on Thursday, with 90% having received a first dose. But that protection is not evenly spread across ethnicities, regions or age groups. Modellers have warned that even with high vaccination rates, New Zealand faces the prospect of potentially thousands of hospitalisations and rising death tolls. “That does just reiterate the urgency for people around the rest of the country,” Hipkins said on Wednesday. “Get vaccinated – because Covid is coming.” For epidemiologists and the population more widely, the change brings grief and anxiety, especially for undervaccinated Māori and Pacific populations – but also optimism that New Zealand’s long period of zero Covid could have equipped it to emerge from the pandemic with minimal losses. Siouxisie Wiles, a microbiologist, said New Zealand’s response had huge benefits: most importantly, buying time for vaccination, stronger public health responses, and better antivirals. But the long period of protection also seemed to have fostered a certain level of complacency, which the government was racing to undo. “We’ve benefited from our response massively but it also was partly what put us in this position – that complacency can stop people from getting [vaccinated], and not prioritising the right communities for vaccination,” she said. “I feel like we’re in this really difficult phase now … There’s going to be two trajectories, the trajectory of the outbreak in the vaccinated and the trajectory of outbreak in the unvaccinated. And the question becomes, is the trajectory of the outbreak in the unvaccinated enough to overwhelm our hospitals? Michael Baker, an epidemiologist and public health professor, said: “We’re having to adjust psychologically … to having the virus in our midst. People know it’s going to come but it’s hard to visualise what it will be like.” While New Zealanders are familiar with endemic Covid in the abstract, having watched it rip through countries overseas, Baker said it would be a different challenge getting used to having Covid-19 circulate at home. Most of the world has spent the past year being pummelled by Covid – and has had time to begin forming scar tissue, the friction of demands like masks, distancing, testing regimes and uncertainty creating their own callouses and hardening over time into a new “normal”. In New Zealand, though, each loss is still an acute one. Ben Thomas, a political analyst and former National party government staffer, said the new era would also present political challenges. New Zealand’s continued success through 18 months of pandemic would make its recent fall all the harder to take. “New Zealanders really internalised the idea that beating Covid was a part of the New Zealand national identity. That somehow punching above our weight on the world stage also included being uniquely resistant to a virus infecting the world.” Recent polling showing a substantial drop in support for the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, “is just readjusting to reality”. It’s not yet clear how much backlash that re-adjustment will provoke. The week’s anti-vaccine and anti-lockdown protests were at times vitriolic and ugly, with threats made against journalists and one police officer allegedly bitten by a demonstrator. However, the bulk of protestors couldn’t entirely escape New Zealanders’ deep-held abhorrence of making a fuss: at one point the crowd knocked down a fence outside parliament, only carefully put it back up again. “It’s all relative,” Baker said. “For us, a very frightening pandemic wave may get up to killing 10 or 15 people a day across New Zealand … that would be quite a shock. But that is a fraction of what – on a population basis – was experienced in most overseas countries. “It’s really important to maintain a sense of perspective with this. We don’t want to catastrophise it, but we don’t want to trivialise it either. So it’s getting that balance right.” He said that even as New Zealand passes through the worst months of its pandemic, it shouldn’t lose sight of the gains won along the way. While its zero Covid elimination strategy is over, the policy was still the best decision New Zealand could have made. “Governments in the Asia-Pacific region by acting very proactively saved hundreds of thousands of lives – if you take China into account, probably millions of lives. So yes, we are having a bumpy period as we adjust to be exposed to this virus. But [our response so far] has been worth it.” • This article was amended on 16 November 2021 to clarify that the vaccination rates are of the eligible population, not the whole population.Global cities are acting now to fight the climate crisis, while many governments are delaying, the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, has told the Cop26 summit. Cities are growing fast and cause an estimated 75% of carbon emissions, making urban action critical to halting global heating. Khan is chair of the C40 group of 97 major cities, representing more than 700 million people and a quarter of the global economy. Cop26 focused on cities on Thursday and Khan told the UN secretary-general António Guterres and other delegates that C40 had mobilised an international alliance of investors to deliver $1bn (£750m) for zero-emission buses in Latin America. “In cities, we are the doers, in contrast to national governments who are the delayers, kicking the can down the road to 2040 or 2050,” he said. “National governments can talk a good game, but then refuse to put in place the plans, action or funding we desperately need. Unfortunately, we have seen more examples of this at Cop26. “More than two-thirds of C40 cities are already taking action exceeding the Paris Agreement targets. There’s only one country that is making similar progress – the Gambia. But by working with cities, we can still make sure that the 1.5C target stays alive.” The $1bn electric bus initiative aims to drive down the cost of buses through bulk purchasing. Khan, who became C40 chair last week, said at least two-thirds of the C40 budget would be spent in the global south: “We as the global north have the broadest shoulders, we’ve got to carry the greatest burden.” Analysis indicates that public transport use needs to double in cities worldwide to keep to the 1.5C warming limit. London has 500 zero-emission buses, the most in western Europe, but Khan said all 9,000 buses will be zero-emissions by 2034. That could be brought forward to 2030 with government investment, he said: “It also creates jobs around the country, from Ballymena to Falkirk to Scarborough to Guildford.” The UK government announced £27.5m of funding to support cities across Africa, Asia and Latin America to take climate action. By 2050, 1.6 billion people living in cities will be regularly exposed to extremely high temperatures and more than 800 million city dwellers across the world will be exposed to flooding, the UK government said. Greg Hands, energy and climate change minister, said: “By 2050 urban areas will be home to two-thirds of the world population, with the speed and scale of urbanisation set to lock in high-carbon infrastructure and inequality if we do not act now.”India, Pakistan, England, West Indies, South Africa, West Indies... Those are the winners of the men’s T20 World Cup to date. We’ll have a new champion on Sunday, either Australia or New Zealand. Thanks for your company and emails throughout an immense game of cricket - congratulations to Australia, commiserations to Pakistan. Goodnight! And here’s Aaron Finch “It was a great game of cricket. The way Matty Wade and Marcus Stoinis held their nerve was unbelievable. I thought we were pretty sloppy in the field today – we dropped a couple of difficult chances – but we played some really good cricket towards the end. “Teams batting second have been so successful in this tournament. It’s really strange because there’s no dew but the lights take effect and speed up the wicket a little bit. The slower balls don’t grip as well. It was a nice toss to win. I was actually hoping I’d lose the toss and bat first, because I thought it would be nice to put a total on the board in a semi-final! But it’s great to chase it down, it was brilliant at the end.” The thoughts of a disconsolate Babar Azam “We were satisfied with how many runs we got, but at the back end of their innings they were too good. The margins are fine and the dropped catch affected the game. But overall I’m happy with how we played in the tournament. It’s very exciting for the future.” That runchase was so similar to New Zealand’s yesterday. The result was identical, a victory by five wickets with six balls to spare. Pakistan have their what-ifs, just like England. Had Hassan Ali caught Matthew Wade in the penultimate over, Australia would have needed 20 from nine balls with only four wickets remaining. Instead it was 18 from nine, and Wade got them in three balls. While we try to make sense of all that, here’s the latest in the Yorkshire scandal The player of the match is Matthew Wade “I was glad to get those two ramp shots out of the middle. They went pace-on a bit more than I expected, that’s why I premeditated the ramps. Marcus was really confident we’d get home - I was a bit unsure because the rate was getting up a little bit, but he reassured me that he’d take it deep and hopefully I could chip in at the end there. “It hasn’t really sunk in yet. When I sit down tonight it’ll probably sink in. I’m just happy I could contribute - I was out of the team for a while and then I got back in, so I’m just happy I could repay the faith a bit.” By any standards, that was a spectacular game of T20 cricket Stoinis, whose Zen-like innings shouldn’t be forgotten, finished with 40 not out from 31 balls. But Matthew Wade - belittled so often in this format, in every format - grabbed the bulk of the glory with an extraordinary 41 not out from 17 balls. It means that, for all the formidable brilliance of England and especially Pakistan in the group stages, it will be Australia v New Zealand in the final. 19 overs: Australia 177-5 (Stoinis 40, Wade 41) The last ball was another outrageous ramp stroke, taken on the full and pinged over the keeper’s head for six. Shaheen Afridi’s first over was one for the ages, but so, alas, was his last: it went for 22 runs and will go down in Australian cricket folklore just like Saeed Anwar’s over to Michael Hussey in the 2010 semi-final. Matthew Wade complete an epic victory with three successive sixes! 18.5 overs: Australia 171-5 (need 6 from 7 balls) He’s done it again! Wade smacks Afridi high over square leg for another six! This is an homage to Mike Hussey in 2010 - he has made 35 not out from only 16 balls. 18.4 overs: Australia 165-5 (need 12 from 8 balls) Wade jumps across his stumps to ramp Afridi for six! That’s an outrageous shot, which takes Australia to the cusp of the World Cup final! 18.3 overs: Australia 159-5 (need 18 from 9 balls) Wade is dropped by Hassan Ali! It was a tricky running chance at deep midwicket, but at this level you’d expect it to be taken seven times out of 10. To compound Pakistan’s misery, Wade comes back for a second. 18.2 overs: Australia 156-5 (need 20 from 10 balls) A leg-side wide! He went for the yorker but overreached and speared it past leg stump. STOINIS IS NOT OUT! 18.2 overs: Australia 156-5 (need 21 from 10 balls) Yep, it pitched outside leg. Just a leg bye to Australia. PAKISTAN REVIEW FOR LBW AGAINST STOINIS! They have two left so it’s a tactical review - I’m pretty sure they know it pitched outside leg. Stoinis ran through for a leg bye. 18.1 overs: Australia 155-5 (need 22 from 11 balls) A dot ball! Stoinis bottom-edges a pull this far short of Rizwan, who immediately singles that it didn’t carry. As if you couldn’t love Rizwan any more. The penultimate over will be bowled by Shaheen Afridi. 18th over: Australia 155-5 (need 22 from 12 balls; Stoinis 40, Wade 21) Hasan Ali’s last ball is worked behind square for four by Wade, another terrific shot. Pakistan urgently need a wicket. 17.3 overs: Australia 149-5 (need 28 from 15 balls) Hassan Ali starts his final over. Stoinis can only take a single off the first ball, with Hassan Ali deliberately/accidentally getting in his way. Wade whips two off the second - and then clubs a slower ball into the crowd! With 15 balls remaining, Australia are favourites. 17th over: Australia 140-5 (target 177; Stoinis 38, Wade 8) Stoinis blasts Rauf’s penultimate over for 13, including a sweet pulled six over midwicket and a vicious hit down the ground for four. Sheesh, this is exquisitely tense. Australia are slight favourites, I think. I think Hasan Ali was sick at the end of that over. He still has one over left, at least in theory, and he’s staying on the field. 16th over: Australia 127-5 (target 177; Stoinis 25, Wade 8) Hassan Ali’s third over goes for 12 - but it could have been a lot worse for Pakistan. He started with a slower ball that Stoinis picked and clouted for four, and followed that with a no-ball. After that he was able to pull the over back with a mixture of yorkers and slower balls. Australia need 50 from 24 balls. They need a Neesham, they’re holding out for a Neesham till the end of the night. 15th over: Australia 115-5 (target 177; Stoinis 15, Wade 6) Pakistan miss a third run-out chance. This time it was the new bowler Shaheen Afridi in his follow through, with Stoinis well short of the stumps at the non-striker’s end. Stoinis has another escape when a leading edge loops tantalisingly past Hafeez at backward point. Six runs from the over, another very good one for Pakistan. Australia have scored 26 runs from five overs since the drinks break; they need 62 off the final five overs to win. 14th over: Australia 109-5 (target 177; Stoinis 11, Wade 5) Pakistan miss another run-out chance! Wade, sent back by Stoinis, was well short and had given up when Shadab’s throw missed the stumps. Haris Rauf is back on, I should have said that earlier, and finds the edge of the new batter Matthew Wade. It drops short of Rizwan, who does well to save the boundary. Wade gets off the mark next ball, clubbing Rauf down the ground for a one-bounce four, and then mistimes a pull that drops short of long-on. All told that’s a fine over from Rauf, with only six from it. 13th over: Australia 103-5 (target 177; Stoinis 11, Wade 0) Just in case anyone needed reminding that Australia are still in this. Stoinis lifts Shadab over wide mid-on for six. As for Maxwell’s dismissal, Haris Rauf’s catch looks better with every replay. He almost ran past the ball, then slipped slightly, but was still able to change direction and take the catch. Shadab finishes a gamechanging spell with figures of 4-0-26-4. Australia need 74 from 42 balls. Shadab takes his fourth wicket! Maxwell heaved a reverse sweep towards deep point, where Haris Rauf swooped to his right to take a beautiful two-handed catch. Aggressive wristspin in the middle overs has always been one of Pakistan’s trump cards in white-ball cricket, but rarely has it been as effective as this. Shadab has taken a wicket in every over! 12th over: Australia 95-4 (target 177; Maxwell 7, Stoinis 3) With Warner gone and two right-handers at the crease, it’s safe for Imad Wasim to come back into the attack. He starts with three dot balls to Stoinis, who forces the fourth for a single. A gloved reverse sweep brings Maxwell two more, but overall that’s a great over for Pakistan. Australia need 82 from 48 balls. “I think,” says Simon McMahon, “that Warner was given out for his moustache.” 11th over: Australia 92-4 (target 177; Maxwell 5, Stoinis 2) Just three singles and the wicket from Shadab, who has great figures of 3-0-18-3. I’m still trying to make sense of that Warner wicket. There was a noise but all the evidence suggests he didn’t nick it. Maybe it was a rogue aglet. The plot thickens - there was nothing on UltraEdge for Warner’s dismissal, and it looks like there is daylight between bat and ball. Warner didn’t review it, didn’t even discuss a review, and Pakistan were also certain he edged it. That is so strange. Pivotal moment my foot: Warner has gone next ball! He flashed outside off stump at Shadab and got a thin edge that was gleefully taken by Rizwan. That’s Shadab’s third wicket and a huge one for Pakistan, because Warner was playing magnificently. 10th over: Australia 89-3 (target 177; Warner 49, Maxwell 4) Hassan Ali returns to the attack. Warner helps his first ball over short fine leg for four, another marvellous stroke, and then survives a big run-out chance. Maxwell called him through for a crazy single on the off side, and Warner was barely in the frame when Fakhar Zaman’s throw missed the stumps. With the form Warner’s in, that feels like a pivotal moment. 9th over: Australia 80-3 (target 177; Warner 43, Maxwell 1) Glenn Maxwell is the new batter. This is the game, right here. Australia need 97 from 66 balls. Another slog-sweep off Shadab, another top-edge, another wicket. Smith swished his bat in disgust as soon as he made contact, a couple of seconds before Fakhar Zaman calmly took the catch at deep midwicket. Australia are three down - but crucially they still have Warner, who is in glorious touch and drove Shadab for a straight six earlier in the over. 8th over: Australia 70-2 (target 177; Warner 34, Smith 5) The offspinner Mohammad Hafeez comes into the attack, and starts his spell with a hideous delivery. It slips out of his hands, bounces twice and is butchered over midwicket for six by Warner. It’s also a no-ball, because it bounced twice, and Warner gets two more off the free hit. A wide and a handful of singles complete an excellent over for Australia - 13 from it. Allan Border will have loved that six by Warner. He did the same to Phil Simmons (I think) in a Test match. 7th over: Australia 57-2 (target 177; Warner 24, Smith 4) Steve Smith is the new batter. He almost becomes the old one when he edges his second ball from Shadab, but it flashes past the keeper Rizwan and goes for four runs. Mitch Marsh has a poor record against legspin - and it has taken Shadab Khan just two balls to dismiss him! Marsh top-edged a slog-sweep towards deep square leg, where Asif Ali held his nerve to take a very awkward catch with both hands. Marsh goes for a useful 28 from 22 balls. 6th over: Australia 52-1 (target 177; Warner 23, Marsh 28) Hassan Ali comes on for the last over of the Powerplay. The second ball is a filthy half-tracker which Marsh swivel-pulls for four. After a torrid start to the innings, he has sped to 28 from 20 balls. And it’s been a really good Powerplay for Australia, who are ahead both on the comparison and win predictor. They need 125 from 84 balls. 5th over: Australia 44-1 (target 177; Warner 21, Marsh 22) Haris Rauf replaces Shaheen Afridi. His first ball is pulled flat and hard for six by Marsh, a cracking stroke, and the next flies off the edge for four. The mood of the match has changed dramatically in the last 10 minutes, and the Pakistan captain Babar Azam looks rattled. Four singles make it 14 from the over and 30 from the last 11 deliveries. So much for a cautious Powerplay. 4th over: Australia 30-1 (target 177; Warner 19, Marsh 10) Warner has a great record against Imad Wasim, and it just got a bit better. He spanks Imad for 14 in three balls - a mighty slog-sweep for six, a light-footed thump through the covers and a muscular scoop/pull to fine leg. That’s a very good for Australia, 20 from it. We’ve just seen a replay of Finch’s LBW, and it wasn’t as plumb as I thought. It was still out, but it was umpire’s call on impact with the stumps. 3rd over: Australia 13-1 (target 177; Warner 4, Marsh 8) Warner crunches Afridi for a single. It’s a no-ball, which means a free hit for Marsh. Or, rather, a free miss: he can’t lay bat on a lovely slower bouncer. Marsh gets hold of the next ball, however, driving handsomely through extra cover for four. That’s a great shot. An inside-edge flies just past leg stump, with Haris Rauf doing well to save the boundary, and then Marsh takes a risky single on the off side. Another pulsating over ends with a sizzling yorker that Warner digs out. This is terrific stuff. 2nd over: Australia 6-1 (target 177; Warner 3, Marsh 3) And now for something completely different. The slow left-armer Imad Wasim starts around the wicket to Warner, who works a single. That’s the first of five runs from the over, three singles and a two. I wonder if, with the dew and the threat of Afridi in mind, Australia might be relatively cautious in the Powerplay. 1st over: Australia 1-1 (Warner 1, Marsh 0) The next ball is a huge inswinger that beats Marsh on the inside. An awesome over from Afridi, one for the books, ends with Australia happy to be only one wicket down. I don’t believe it! The impact was umpire’s call, and Marsh survives. I think that’s a poor decision from Chris Gaffaney, in truth, but on we go. It was a blistering inswinging yorker from Afridi which hit Marsh on the boot. Pakistan couldn’t believe it was given not out, and in the chaos Marsh was almost run out as well. It looked plumb LBW. PAKISTAN REVIEW FOR LBW AGAINST MARSH! I think this is another golden duck! Shaheen Afridi is a superstar! He has pinned Aaron Finch LBW for a golden duck with a classic inswinger. It was as plumb as plumb will ever be, and Finch walked straight off the field without even considering a review. As in the 2019 World Cup, he has gone first ball. “I don’t back Australia’s chances of chasing 177 tonight, although I am hoping,” says Laura Daw. “What’s their largest total of the world cup?” I think it’s 161/2 against West Indies, though they had 22 balls to spare. What do you reckon, then? I’d make Pakistan slight favourites, even with the dew, but it’s so hard to call. Time for a very quick coffee run before the chase begins. Here’s a freshly baked piece for you to read during the break. 20th over: Pakistan 176-4 (Zaman 55, Hafeez 1) Fakhar Zaman finishes the innings in style! He smokes Starc for two humongous sixes to bring up a savage 31-ball fifty, and then mows the last delivery of the innings for a single. That takes Fakhar to 55 not out from 32 balls, including 38 off the last 15. The last four overs went for 54. Malik misses, Starc hits. Four balls remaining. 19th over: Pakistan 161-3 (Zaman 41, Malik 1) Fakhar Zaman is dropped at long off by Smith! It should have been two wickets in two balls for Cummins. The batters crossed, which meant Zaman was on strike when Shoaib Malik walked to the crease. He blasted another slower ball (I think) towards long off, where Smith dropped a relatively straightforward low chance. No matter - Cummins’s last over is quite brilliant, with only two runs and a leg-bye from it. And even the leg-bye came when he pinned Zaman in the grille with a bouncer. Cummins finishes with figures of 4-0-30-1. “Regarding your comment on Darren Stevens (16th over) I feel you’ve done your esteemed colleague Jonathan Lew a disservice by not linking his wonderful article on the subject,” says Matthew Dunnill. “Do our man Joe Meade a favour and pop this link up – just so he knows what’s on offer!” ‘What’s on offer’ - you make Darren Stevens sound like a kooky backstreet deli. Asif Ali goes for a golden duck. He cuffed a slower ball from Cummins straight to long on, where Smith took an easy catch. As golden ducks go, that was pretty noble - no messing, just straight into six-hitting mode. 18th over: Pakistan 158-2 (Zaman 40, Ali 0) Asif Ali is the new batter. Before he can take strike, Zaman blasts Starc for a monstrous straight six. After a slow start, he is hitting the ball savagely. An attempted yorker from Starc is smeared whence it came for four, with the umpire Chris Gaffaney hitting the deck in self-preservation. Starc, suddenly rattled, bowls a leg-side wide, and Zaman digs out a yorker for two off the final ball. For the most part, that was a textbook death over from Starc, and it cost 15. Brilliant from Mitchell Starc. He beat Rizwan first up with a wide yorker from round the wicket, and stuck with the same line next ball. Rizwan, desperate to force the issue, clunked a big shot straight to mid-off. He walks off feeling his cheek, where he struck by Starc earlier in the innings. It was a lovely innings, rich in flair and fun: 67 from 52 balls with three fours and four sixes. 17th over: Pakistan 143-1 (Rizwan 67, Zaman 26) Josh Hazlewood’s final over has disappeared for 21! Fakhar Zaman got things started by muscling a full ball over long off, a shot of mildly frightening power. Hazlewood then bowled a high full toss that Rizwan pulled through midwicket for four. That meant another free hit - and this time Rizwan pinged it over wide mid-on for a huge six! “Afternoon Rob,” says Guy Hornsby. “This isn’t mere tiresome England fan gammonism, but I really do hope Pakistan can do this. With the Black Caps already in the final, surely – unless you’re from India or Aus, maybe – NZ v Pakistan is a final we can all get behind. The Mavericks v The Good Guys. I just have a horrible feeling that a combination of a late flush of form and, well, being Australia may tip things with batting second. I’ll be a bit aghast, especially as Australia’s selection seems so 2000s with most of the Test team in there, but what the hell do I know?” I guess it helps when the Test team includes Warner, Starc, Hazlewood and Cummins. 16th over: Pakistan 122-1 (Rizwan 56, Zaman 17) Zampa comes on to finish his spell. Pakistan have really struggled to get him away, with Rizwan’s slog-sweep the only boundary, and there are only five singles in his final over. He finished with excellent and thoroughly deserved figures of 4-0-22-1. “As a fresh-faced cricket fan I have decided to support Pakistan internationally,” writes Joe Meade. “However I can’t decide which domestic county team to support. Who do you recommend? I live in Hertfordshire so I could stay local. At least the tickets would be cheap.” Right now the most exciting team in county cricket is probably Darren Stevens. 15th over: Pakistan 117-1 (Rizwan 54, Zaman 14) A filthy delivery from Cummins, a high full toss, is steered for four by Fakhar. It’s a no-ball, too, which means a free hit. Cummins bowls a slower bouncer that Fakhar can only heave for a single, the start of a decent comeback from Cummins - the last five balls of the over went for a respectable five runs. Rizwan has 54 from 45 balls, Fakhar 14 from 12. 14th over: Pakistan 106-1 (Rizwan 50, Zaman 8) Fakhar gets his first boundary, mowing Hazlewood through midwicket. Rizwan sees that shot and raises it by launching a slower ball into the crowd at square leg. Pick that out! A single off the last ball takes Rizwan to a sparkling fifty from 41 balls. His record as an opener in IT20s is absurd - he averages 82, with Jos Buttler’s 57 the next best (min: 10 innings). “Good to see a wicket, it becomes more exciting, but how do you know Warner growled?” says John Starbuck. “They can’t have microphones on all the players and he’s some way away from the wicket mics, so we deduce you’ve been adding literary flourish.” I don’t know how I know, but trust me, he growled. He was almost growling in celebration before the ball reached him, like Justin Langer at the Gabba in the 2006-07 Ashes. 13th over: Pakistan 92-1 (Rizwan 42, Zaman 3) Rizwan already has some swelling below the right eye. He doesn’t look in any pain, though, and is laughing with Aaron Finch as he puts his helmet back on. Starc bowls the last two balls of a very good over, just three from it. The new batter Fakhar Zaman, who has had a poor tournament, is struggling a bit: he has 3 from 6 balls, Rizwan 42 from 38. 12.4 overs: Pakistan 91-1 (Rizwan 41, Zaman 3) Mitchell Starc, who has still three overs left, returns to the attack. A short ball beats Rizwan’s attempted hook and thumps into the grille, so there’s a break in play while he is treated by the physio. He looks okay. “I’m an Englishman and Yorkshireman, recently moved to Auckland, NZ,” says Aaron. “I stayed up last night to watch the match and pretty gutted about the result, but NZ probably deserved it! Having watched pretty much every match while in quarantine in NZ, Pakistan have been my favourites for the team of the tournament and the eventual winners. I’m a little bit concerned they won’t have that opportunity because of the toss, but hopeful their quality will win out. They’re an exceptional side.” 12th over: Pakistan 89-1 (Rizwan 40, Zaman 2) A Pakistan batter finally gets hold of Zampa, with Rizwan blasting a slog-sweep into the crowd for six. That was some shot, the product of extraordinary handspeed. The next ball, a wider, flighted legbreak, beats both Rizwan and Wade on its way for four byes. The usual ones and twos make it 14 from the over. “This start from Pakistan has me very nervous as an Australian supporter,” says Laura Daw. “I’m nearly regretting my decision to stay up to midnight to watch this.” Watching sport in the small hours - vital, can’t-miss sport, not just any old rubbish - is one of life’s underappreciated pleasures. 11th over: Pakistan 75-1 (Rizwan 31, Zaman 1) Rizwan is beaten, trying to dab Maxwell to third man, and then Fakhar Zaman survives an appeal for a catch down the leg side. Only five runs from the over, which is fine for Australia. Maxwell (3-0-20-0) and Marsh (1-0-11-0) have done their job with the ball. 10th over: Pakistan 71-1 (Rizwan 28) That was the last ball of a terrific over from Zampa, who has stunning figures of 2-0-7-1. Adam Zampa is rewarded for some brilliant bowling! Pakistan couldn’t get him away for anything other than singles and their frustration was increasingly clear. Babar resorted to a slightly desperate slog sweep that was taken by Warner at long-on. Warner growled with delight, knowing Babar is the biggest wicket of all. He played really nicely to make 39 from 34 balls, but in the end Zampa was too good. 9th over: Pakistan 68-0 (Rizwan 27, Babar 38) Another bowling change - Zampa off, Maxwell on. Aaron Finch is understandably keen to get Maxwell and Marsh in and out of the attack as soon as possible. Maxwell goes round the wicket for his second over and is milked for six singles; Australia will take that all day/night long. 8th over: Pakistan 62-0 (Rizwan 24, Babar 35) Mitch Marsh’s first over goes for 10. His second ball is a fraction short - if that - and Babar plays a delightful, almost tender pull stroke through midwicket for four. The timing and placement of that shot were as near perfect as dammit. The calmness of his innings must be doing wonders for the Pakistan dressing-room. “1.30am here in Aus and I can’t shake this feeling,” says Lee Henderson, whose specialist subject clearly isn’t REO Speedwagon. “I’d like Pakistan to win and then I’d like NZ to beat them and take the prize. It’s positively unAustralian I know but there it is. I hope this doesn’t continue or I’ll be singing with the Barmies in a month’s time.” 7th over: Pakistan 51-0 (Rizwan 23, Babar 26) With the Powerplay complete, the legspinner Adam Zampa comes into the attack. He is played respectfully by the Pakistan openers, with just four low-risk singles from the over. The third of those singles brought up another fifty partnership between Babar and Rizwan. When they get to fifty, they usually go big. 6th over: Pakistan 47-0 (Rizwan 21, Babar 24) Babar makes room to drive Cummins for three off the back foot, another high-class stroke, and then Rizwan pings a low full toss off the pads for four. The sprawling Maxwell did brilliantly to stop the ball, only for it to hit him on the chest and dribble onto the rope. Rizwan is dropped again off the last ball of the Powerplay! He whipped Cummins down to fine leg, where Zampa couldn’t hold on to a very tricky chance diving forward. But he did save three runs. “I have just got into cricket this last year,” says Joe Meade. “Pakistan haven’t lost since I bought my hat. Coincidence? Seems unlikely.” You’re not familiar with how the Pakistan cricket team works, are you? 5th over: Pakistan 38-0 (Rizwan 15, Babar 21) Hazlewood changes ends to bowl his second over. Rizwan finally nails one, dismissing Hazlewood’s first delivery over backward square leg for a flat six. Beautiful shot. He tries again later in the over but is beaten by a slower ball. Then Babar, who has suddenly started to look a bit skittish himself, edges on the bounce to the man at short third. 4th over: Pakistan 29-0 (Rizwan 7, Babar 20) Rizwan is all over the show. He’s so excitable that he’s struggling to mistime the ball, never mind time it, and he keeps setting off for absurd singles before being sent back by Babar. Thing is, Rizwan doesn’t need to force it because Babar is taking good care of the scoreboard. He rolls the wrists to flick the new bowler Cummins round the corner for another boundary, his fourth in as many overs. He has 20 from 15 balls, Rizwan 7 from 9. “I suspect perfect league tables are pretty common in the group stages of Rugby Union World Cups,” says Gareth Owen, “because of the scarcity of upsets and the way the seedings feed into group structures. See Pool A in 2019 and Pools A, C and D in 2015. The other thing to note is that if the number of wins goes 5-4-3-2-1-0, for example, then it’s mathematically impossible for any team to have beaten a team above them in the table. The proof, as it used to say in my undergraduate algebra textbooks, is left as an exercise for the reader.” That is an exceedingly good point. 3rd over: Pakistan 21-0 (Rizwan 5, Babar 15) Aaron Finch brings Glenn Maxwell into the attack, a deviation from the usual Starc-Hazlewood-Cummins method. And his third ball amost brings a wicket when Rizwan is dropped by Warner! Rizwan, still on 0, charged down the track and launched the ball into orbit. Warner hurtled back towards long-off and dived forward, but all he could do was punch the ball for four. It was a seriously tough chance, even for someone like Maxwell. If Rizwan has made a horrible start to his innings, then Babar is batting like a dream. He turns a reasonable over into a good one for Pakistan by dumping Maxwell’s last delivery over backward square leg for four. 2nd over: Pakistan 11-0 (Rizwan 0, Babar 10) Here comes Josh Hazlewood, who has a very good record against Babar Azam - and a strike rate of 12 in this tournament. His second ball is a generous outswinger that Babar drives through the covers for four, a quite gorgoues stroke. Babar is now the leading runscorer in this tournament, having moved back ahead of Jos Buttler. While Babar has started serenely, Rizwan looks nervous and fidgety. He’s desperate to get off the mark, but he can’t do so in that over. The boundary aside, that was good from Hazlewood. 1st over: Pakistan 6-0 (Rizwan 0, Babar 5) Starc’s first ball, wide of off stump, tempts Rizwan into a lusty smear that he inside-edges for a single. In fact it’s been given as a bye, though I thought he edged it. Babar plays a couple of lovely strokes without piercing the infield and then flicks a loose delivery to fine leg for four. Starc won’t be unhappy with that over, especially as there was some inswing to the right-handers. Rizwan is beaten on the inside by the final delivery. “Hello from Pakistan,” writes Shoaib. “It seems to me like Pakistan have a mountain to climb from here on having lost the toss. As you mentioned already, 10 out of 11 games in Dubai have been won by teams batting second. That means even a total of 170 by Pakistan might not be enough. And Australia won’t allow more than that! Nevertheless, onwards and upwards.” Mitchell Starc is going to bowl the first over. Babar Azam and Mohammad Rizwan are statistically the best opening partnership in IT20 history (min: 10 innings), so this Powerplay is even more important than usual. “The points table in the second group stage seems like a rare ‘perfect’ league result,” writes Smylers. “The teams respectively won five, four, three, two, one and zero matches, each one having beaten all the teams below it and lost to those above — an unambiguous ranking of the teams (and obviously no need to bother with net run rate). How often does a league table end up so perfectly ordered, in any sport? You ask me to research that now? (It’s a great spot though, and I’m imagine it’s exceedingly rare. “As an Indian, completely gutted to see my team on a flight back to India,” writes Venu Vedam. “But I would like Pakistan to win this comprehensively. Babar and Shaheen Afridi will take them to the finishing line I hope. Go Pakistan, Go – bring the cup to the subcontinent!” That’s an admirable sentiment, doubtless shared by all Indians. The players line up for the national anthems. There’s a really good crowd at the Dubai International Stadium, the majority Pakistan fans. A quick pre-match plug If you like cricket, and you like the past, you’ll probably like this podcast. It’s hosted beautifully by OBO legend/fictitious character Gary Naylor; it also has some terrific guests and me. The first email of the semi-final! “Good evening,” says Akbar Jamil. It surely is: I cannot wait for this game. Both teams are unchanged. Next! Pakistan Babar Azam (c), Mohammad Rizwan (wk), Fakhar Zaman, Mohammad Hafeez, Shoaib Malik, Asif Ali, Imad Wasim, Shadab Khan, Hasan Ali, Haris Rauf, Shaheen Shah Afridi. Australia Finch (c), Warner, Marsh, Smith, Maxwell, Stoinis, Wade (wk), Cummins, Starc, Hazlewood, Zampa. “It’s a nice-looking wicket, don’t feel it’ll change much,” says Aaron Finch, somehow resisting the urge to shout “YOU BEAUTY!” That is a great toss to win. Pre-match reading It’s Pakistan v Australia, dear reader, but not as we know it. The roles of the two teams have been reversed at this World Cup. Pakistan are a formidable winning machine, who have lived up to their pre-tournament form and hype. Australia - who lost five T20 series in a row before this competition - are the intriguing outsiders. They started slowly, took one spectacular beating but then got their act together to reach the final four. That’s usually how Pakistan do things. All of their major tournaments wins (1992, 2009, 2017) have come after shambolic starts, so it’s almost unnerving to see them play with such serene control. In reports of their matches, the word ‘mercurial’ has been conspicuous by its absence. They have still all the hallmarks of a great Pakistan side. Babar Azam and Mohammad Rizwan are the best opening pair around; Babar is a future all-time great and Rizwan might be the world’s most joyous cricketer. Their bowling attack has a level of variety (LF, RF, LBG, RFM, OB and occasionally WTF) that should be illegal. And while their Nos 4-6 have a combined age of 110, they can all still belt the ball 100 metres. Shoaib Malik has an average of 99 and a strike-rate of 187 in this competition. Asif Ali doesn’t have an average, as he hasn’t been dismissed, but he does have a strike rate of 248. (Malik and Rizwan missed training yesterday with mild flu symptoms, but they tested negative for Covid, and Pakistan expect them to play today.) So far, so ominous for Australia, but they should be at peace with their form after a clear improvement over the past fortnight. David Warner looks as good as new, with the bat and in the field, Adam Zampa has quietly been one of the bowlers of the tournament and Aaron Finch one of the best captains. He and the rest of the team have probably enjoyed a rare chance to go under the radar. Australia, who have won all four knockout games against Pakistan at ICC tournaments, might be inspired by two precedents in particular. The semi-final in 2010, when Mike Hussey redefined what was possible in a T20 runchase, and most of all the 50-over final in 1999. Then, as now, Pakistan started the formidably and Australia struggled through to the final stages. Eventually they met in the final, which Australia won with 29.5 overs to spare. The toss was crucial that day. Pakistan won it, but Wasim Akram made the wrong decision in batting first on a sweaty pitch and they were rolled for 132. It’s likely be even more important today. Ten of the 11 games in Dubai have been won by the team batting second. I’m a bit surprised, in these wordplayful times, that some wag hasn’t christened it Dewbai. The odds are pretty close: Pakistan 4/5, Australia 1/1. But whoever wins the toss will instantly become strongish favourites to face New Zealand in the final on Sunday. Play starts at 6pm local time, midnight AEST, 2pm GMT.A match blessed with so much drama it kept coming even after the final runs had been hit and the players had left the field, illuminated with several outstanding individual performances and a couple of unexpected plot twists, ended with Matthew Wade powering Australia to victory over Pakistan and a place in the T20 World Cup final against New Zealand on Sunday. In the moments after their unexpected pursuit of the title had been terminally derailed, Pakistan announced that before passing a fitness test on the morning of the game their opener Mohammad Rizwan had spent two nights in hospital, some of it apparently in intensive care, with a chest infection, a development they had kept secret to protect team morale. Having declared himself fully recovered Rizwan proceeded to hit a 52-ball 67, remarkably assured in the circumstances, in which the only pain was that he inflicted on the Australians. But Australia always thought a target of 177 was achievable on a good wicket and, having started their tournament by steering them to victory over South Africa, Marcus Stoinis and Wade came together to guide them the final. “To be able to bat with Marcus has been awesome,” Wade said. “I played a lot of cricket with him at Victoria, I’ve seen him grow into the cricketer he is today, and I know if I can just hang with him for a few overs he’s going to find a boundary. “Trying to keep calm is probably the biggest thing in the back end and I get to look down the other end and see his big rig looking to hit it out of the park.” On this occasion it was Wade who did the more explosive hitting, with 41 off 17 balls including three successive sixes off Shaheen Shah Afridi to end the match. And so, 24 hours after England, the team that dominated Group One of the Super 12s, were knocked out of the competition, the side that dominated Group Two followed them. After an often underwhelming group stage and two high-quality, compelling semi-finals, it seems the tournament has saved its best until last, even if the best teams did not last. Australia’s run chase got off to a terrible start, with Shaheen bowling a magnificent opening over of high-speed extreme late in-swing, and Aaron Finch absolutely blameless as he fell to his first ball of the night. But after scoring 13 runs off the first three overs of the power play Australia hit 39 off the second three as David Warner, in particular, accelerated. The 35-year-old was at his pugnacious, brutal best before his innings ended in bizarre style immediately after the drinks break. Shadab Khan ripped one past the bat, bowler and wicketkeeper instantly set off in celebration, the umpire raised his finger and the batter trudged angrily from the field. Perhaps conscious that New Zealand’s Devon Conway had broken his hand by angrily punching his bat after getting out in the first semi-final he restricted himself to a shake of the head, but he must have been tempted to kick something when he found out there had been no contact between bat and ball, and with reviews in hand had in effect given himself out. “I think there was a noise, maybe his bat handle clicked,” Wade said. “He didn’t think he hit it but I think Glenn [Maxwell] heard the noise, so he thought he might have hit it. It’s really tough in those situations – how many times do you see a batter think they haven’t hit it and they have? You need a bit of reassurance from the other end, I suppose.” After Warner’s dismissal and cameos from Steve Smith and Glenn Maxwell, Stoinis and Wade united to steer Australia to victory. It might have been different had Hasan Ali, off the third ball of the 19th over, not misjudged the flight of the ball and dropped Wade at deep midwicket. Had he held on Australia would have needed 20 off 10, far from impossible but certainly a challenge. As it was they ran two, Wade hit the next three for six and that was that. Once they have recovered from their disappointment, Pakistan will find plenty of positives both in this performance and across the tournament. Babar Azam and Rizwan sit first and second on the list of top scorers, the latter overcoming a nervy start to hit 67 off 52 and become the first player in the history of the format to make 1,000 international runs in a calendar year. Fakhar Zaman was outstanding in hitting 55 off 32, while with the ball Shaheen cemented his reputation as the game’s most exciting young seamer and the 23-year-old Shadab Khan was outstanding, and took a wicket in each of his four overs (if you count Warner’s). They came into the competition as rank outsiders but, with another T20 World Cup just 11 months away, are unlikely to be underestimated again.Boris Johnson’s government has been accused by MPs of prioritising trade agreements over national security in its handling of surveillance abuses on British soil by governments using spyware made by the Israeli company NSO Group. A letter to the British prime minister signed by 10 MPs and peers has called on the government to end its cybersecurity programmes with countries that are known to have used NSO spyware to target dissidents, journalists and lawyers, among others, and to impose sanctions on NSO, “if they are at all serious about our national security”. NSO is regulated by the Israeli defence ministry and sells its powerful Pegasus spyware to governments around the world. While the spyware is meant to be used by the governments to track criminals and terrorists, experts have documented dozens of cases in which NSO clients have abused the surveillance tool to use it against their own perceived enemies. The letter was sent to Johnson as news broke in Israel that Isaac Benbenisti, who was serving as chief executive officer-designate of the company, had resigned, citing a decision by the Biden administration last week to place NSO on a US blacklist. Benbenisti, an NSO co-president, was named in the top role on 31 October but had yet to start. NSO declined to comment on the resignation. Since 2019 researchers have documented a string of cases in which governments used NSO spyware to hack the phones of individuals in the UK. Targets whose phones were confirmed to have been hacked include Princess Haya bint al-Hussein, ex-wife of Dubai’s ruler, Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum; five of Haya’s lawyers, including Fiona Shackleton; the late Emirati activist Alaa Al-Siddiq; Bahraini activists living as refugees in the UK; and the Saudi satirist Ghanem Almasarir, a frequent critic of Saudi’s royal family. Governments who use the spyware against UK-based targets are believed to include the UAE and Bahrain. It has been reported that NSO no longer allows clients to target UK-based phone numbers. “The UK government’s credibility has been shot to pieces by its handling of the NSO surveillance scandal – a credibility already damaged by their cybersecurity programmes with Gulf states implicated in human rights abuses,” said the Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran. “Prioritising free trade deals with countries like Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE must not mean handing them a blank cheque to commit abuses on UK soil with impunity.” The Pegasus project, an investigation into NSO by a consortium of journalists led by the French non-profit Forbidden Stories, and which included the Guardian, found dozens of British mobile phone numbers on a leaked list of potential surveillance targets of NSO clients. They included Roula Khalaf, the editor of the Financial Times, and Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, the director of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy. It is not known whether Khalaf or Alwadaei’s phones were successfully hacked by governments using Pegasus, though forensic analysis of dozens of phones on the leaked list were later found to have been infected by the spyware or contained traces of it following analysis by Amnesty International’s security lab. NSO has denied that the leaked list represents individuals who were targeted by its clients and has said it investigates credible allegations of abuse. Alwadaei said that as someone whose mobile appeared on the Pegasus project list, it was difficult to describe the “pain of knowing that NSO’s malicious spyware may have put my family, loved ones and those who trusted me to defend their human rights at risk”. He was equally shocked that the UK had not sought to censure those governments who have been accused of perpetrating the abuse and contrasted British policy with that of the Biden administration. “The US has taken action and blacklisted this dangerous organisation; Boris Johnson should follow their example by sanctioning NSO and halting exports of surveillance equipment to abusive Gulf states,” he said. Andy Slaughter, the Labour MP for Hammersmith, said: “The use of NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware by Gulf regimes against UK residents and nationals, including members of the House of Lords and refugees living under British protection, poses a threat to our national security and reveals the contempt with which our so-called allies in the Gulf view our laws. As well as immediately sanctioning NSO Group, the government must investigate the harms caused by these hacking operations and ensure consequences, starting with a fundamental reassessment of their relationship with Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE.” In their letter, the MPs said the cyber-attacks represented “egregious breaches of domestic and international human rights law”, which prohibit “arbitrary or unlawful interference” with an individual’s correspondence. “We are concerned that your government has failed to publicly condemn the actions of either NSO Group or the Saudi, Emirati, or Bahraini governments or take substantive action to protect UK nationals and residents, including those living under British protection as refugees, from cyber-attacks,” the letter stated. It also called for the suspension of all UK spyware licences and cybersecurity contracts with Gulf nations implicated in cyber-attacks in the UK, namely the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain, pending an independent investigation. Signatories include Brendan O’Hara, Paula Barker, Lloyd Russell-Moyle, Richard Burgon, Martyn Day, Paul Scriven, Natalie Bennett and Jenny Jones.It was founded shortly after Victoria ascended the throne, and over the intervening 178 years a few changes have naturally been made. What was once the Liverpool Independent Legal Victoria Burial Society later became Liverpool Victoria, and now calls itself, rather tersely, LV=. Where agents used to go door to door collecting pennies to cover funeral costs, today the brand is slapped on everything from pensions to pet insurance. The HQ has shifted from Liverpool to Bournemouth. But one big and rare thing remains in place: LV is still owned by its customers, all 1.2 million of them. That makes it one of Britain’s last great mutuals. For now. If all goes according to its board’s plans, the company will soon be sold to the giant American private equity firm Bain Capital. Members have until early next month to vote on the takeover, but the website presents it as a done deal. Directors claim the buyout offers “an excellent financial outcome for members”; most are promised £100 for surrendering their ownership of a major insurer – a paltry sum compared to the £6,000 members received when Scottish Widows was bought by Lloyds TSB more than 20 years ago. Directors also say the deal will give “unrivalled support for the LV brand”, although they have been tight-lipped about the 11 rival bids received, including from fellow mutual Royal London. Well-paid executives and their lavishly remunerated advisers have cooked up a boardroom deal that is bad for the rank and file who are now expected to rubber-stamp it. The lack of communication with policyholders and members is so bad that the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has publicly chided LV. Directors have shown a striking combination of high-handedness and cack-handedness. The chair is most famous for his role as managing director of the Post Office while it was prosecuting blameless branch operators for its own IT shambles. The chief executive in charge of tossing away LV’s history has only been with the company since last January – less time than many customers. And the would-be buyer has given no firm commitments about jobs or investment. Private equity groups have a long track record of minimal corporate stewardship and maximal extraction. No wonder Labour and other opposition parties are up in arms. A hue and cry at Westminster, allied with a rebellious membership, may just break up this particular boardroom party. But it is no way to run a takeover regime. Over the past few months, big names have been swallowed up by private equity, including the supermarket chain Morrisons, the outsourcing firm G4S and the retirement-home provider McCarthy &amp; Stone. In the first six months of this year alone, private equity paid £34bn for UK plc: a substantial reconfiguration of corporate Britain, which largely happened out of the glare of the press and parliament. As the FCA notes, it has no legal right to consider the corporate form of potential buyers, whether they are private equity barons or social enterprises. It is high time MPs rectified that. For too long, the political class has turned a blind eye to who owns our newspapers, banks and water companies – and to what end. But ownership matters. Just ask the 12 firms queueing up to buy LV.Lewis Hamilton has said that he must take victory at this weekend’s Brazilian Grand Prix if he is to stay in touch with Max Verstappen in the Formula One world championship race. However, the Mercedes driver noted that the task would be exceptionally difficult, as he expects Verstappen’s Red Bull to once more be on top at Interlagos. The world champion trails Verstappen by 19 points with 107 still available from the final four races. Verstappen was the dominant winner at the last two rounds, the US and Mexican GPs, and Hamilton admitted he could not afford to cede any more points. “Every race is a must-win race,” he said. “It’s been a must-win race since forever, particularly since we came back form the break but we have not really been able to do so. “The task is as steep as it can be. Their pace was phenomenal in the last race. They have a strong car, they have the strongest car you can tell. Last time here they were incredibly strong, so we anticipate they will be hard to beat this weekend.” Verstappen, who won the last time the race was held here in 2019, insisted he was taking nothing for granted having seen a 32-point lead disappear earlier in the season. “In four races a lot of things can happen,” he said. “Things can change very quickly. I had a bigger lead in the championship and that disappeared in two races. We have to try and win the race. My approach every single weekend is the same.” Hamilton also reiterated his belief that Mercedes were still suffering from rule changes made before this season. Aerodynamic adjustments designed to slow the cars mandated changes to the rear floor and affected downforce. The cars with a low-rake design (the angle from rear to front), such as Mercedes, lost most performance while the high-rake Red Bull was affected less. Hamilton has previously suggested it was an attempt to peg Mercedes back and did so again in Brazil. “This year we have had our wings clipped, it has definitely been harder from an operational standpoint to maximise the car,” he said. “It’s a harder car to optimise, some weekends it works some weekends it doesn’t.” F1 is holding its third and final trial of the sprint race format this weekend, with qualifying on Friday and the sprint to decide the grid for the GP on Saturday. The teams face a hectic preparation beforehand, with bad weather causing delays for two planes carrying their freight – including engines and tools – some of which did not arrive until Thursday. It is understood to have affected about half the teams, with their crews now likely to work through the night to prepare their cars.Boris Johnson headed back to the Cop26 conference this week, doubtless hoping that his trip might divert attention from the sleaze allegations washing around his party and government at Westminster. If so, he hoped in vain. Instead, with the world’s press watching, the prime minister could not escape making a statement about the domestic crisis. In words that may eventually be replayed as often as Richard Nixon’s denial that he was a crook or Tony Blair’s claim to be pretty straight, Mr Johnson said: “I genuinely believe that the UK is not remotely a corrupt country.” You do not have to define corruption by the most extreme standards to recognise that this is both a thoughtless exaggeration and wholly inadequate. Britain stands in a “could do better” place, ranked 11th cleanest out of 180 in Transparency International’s global corruption ratings. Yet as an anti-corruption adviser to the government of Nigeria (ranked 149th) pointed out on Thursday, the UK is also a “tangential enabler” and London “the most notorious safe haven for looted funds in the world today”. British politicians and public officials may not get into office by making and taking massive bribes. They may not spend their careers salting away millions in Swiss bank accounts. But these are not the only ways of defining corruption. Polling shows that the public understands this better than the prime minister does. The enduring problem, as Machiavelli and others argued long ago, is that corruption is a permanent and organic threat to public life. It takes several forms, large and small, which all require constant attention, in various ways, to prevent them from becoming systemic and inextricable. It is entirely typical of Mr Johnson that his remarks in Glasgow wholly ignored these real dangers and offered no criticism of, or apology for, any of the current cases that have caused such alarm. The contrast with Thursday’s interview on Radio 4’s Today programme with Lord Evans, chairman of the committee on standards in public life, could not have been starker. Where Mr Johnson blustered about Britain not being remotely a corrupt country, Lord Evans forensically explained some of the practical controls that need strengthening if Britain is not to slip further into forms of political corruption that are anything but remote. In 2018, for example, Lord Evans’s committee produced a report to tighten control of MPs’ second jobs, about which new allegations now arise almost daily, yet the report remains unimplemented. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, admitted on Thursday that the government must “do better” on standards. Mr Johnson, by contrast, shows no sign of either caring or wishing to act. Next week, the government will overturn the decisions for which its MPs voted in the so-called Leadsom amendment a week ago. But the real priority is now stronger measures to control outside interests. These include limits on second jobs and more financial transparency. The agenda extends wider too, to abuses such as the award of peerages, including to Tory party treasurers. Writing in Lord Evans’s latest report, Sir John Major, who established the committee in 1994, also calls for tighter controls on party funding, anathema to Mr Johnson. It is only a generation ago that Sir John intervened to set a 21st-century moral and regulatory compass for Britain’s security services, which had previously been a law unto themselves. Ironically, given that Lord Evans was the director general of MI5 for six years, the boot is now entirely on the other foot. Today we see an upright former security chief attempting to set the compass for modern politics instead, and to instruct a prime minister who frequently appears to operate in a moral vacuum about what is required to turn blustering words into a much-needed and properly enforced reality.Sharply mixed reactions have greeted the award by a federal judge of a $626m settlement for residents affected by the lead water crisis that engulfed the city of Flint, Michigan, more than six years ago. While some residents and officials welcomed the payout resulting from lawsuits filed over the crisis, which was particularly damaging to many of the city’s children, others were dismayed at an outcome they saw as wholly inadequate. “It’s a Band-Aid on a bullet wound once again for our city that is still coping with the residual effects of the water crisis,” LuLu Brezzell told local news website MLive. The Flint resident is the mother of Amariyanna “Mari” Copeny, the youth activist also known as Little Miss Flint. On Tuesday, district judge Judith Levy announced the settlement deal, calling it a “remarkable achievement” that “sets forth a comprehensive compensation program and timeline that is consistent for every qualifying participant”. However, some Flint residents who came out against the settlement before its approval are bitterly disappointed about the small amount of money many community members will receive and the lack of legal accountability for those behind the crisis. In 2014, state officials switched the source of Flint’s water supply from Lake Huron to a local, polluted river as a money-saving exercise. City and state officials repeatedly declared the water was safe even as the switch immediately triggered widespread complaints of illness and prompted protests. The Flint river flows through the city but had not been used for public consumption since the early 1960s because of industrial pollution. Flint, 70 miles north-west of Detroit, was best known before the lead contamination scandal as one of the regional manufacturing bases of General Motors. After the water supply switch, many residents and those who worked in Flint reported that the water coming out of their taps was yellowy, cloudy and odorous. People reported suddenly breaking out in rashes or losing their hair. Critics condemned a “manmade disaster” and called the water “toxic soup”. The authorities refused to switch back to the safer lake supply until October 2015, shortly after new tests revealed alarming levels of lead in the blood of the city’s youngest children who are particularly vulnerable to damage to their early mental development from such poisoning. More than half of Flint’s 81,000 residents have signed up for a share of the newly announced settlement. A proposal was also forwarded for $200m out of the settlement’s $626m to go to attorneys involved in the case, but Levy did not rule on that motion on Wednesday. Former Flint mayor Karen Weaver called the settlement a “a slap in the face” to many residents still suffering from the water crisis. “This was not justice for the people of the city of Flint,” Weaver told ABC 12, a local news affiliate. “The amount in this settlement does not reflect the value of the lives that have been lost and the lives that have been damaged.” Claire McClinton, an activist and Flint resident, was also opposed to the settlement, saying that residents were “lowballed”. “The pain and suffering – the physical, emotional and financial suffering – this settlement just does not meet the mark. Period”, McClinton said to MLive. There had been earlier expectations that a class action lawsuit could result in a settlement of at least $1bn. Residents were also unhappy at the payout structure. The money will be distributed based on a formula that gives more to younger claimants and to those who can prove greater injury. Flint city councilman Eric Mays said the payment parameters, including a $1,000 settlement cap for adults, would limit the compensation amount for many eligible recipients and said the average person who had signed up “don’t know what to expect”. Back in July, resident Daniel Fletcher said citizens were being “legally robbed” and added: “This will go down in history as one of the greatest steals from innocent, helpless people by the very lawyers who came here to help us.” Amid such anger, other residents viewed the settlement as a minimal first step and possibly a precedent for the future. “While it is not enough to change everyone’s life … at least it will be something in our hands saying that it is not OK to poison people,” said Melissa Mays, a resident and activists who plans to use the settlement money to pay for tutors and medical bills for her three children. “We stopped people from getting away with it. It sends a message to other governments that are trying to cut corners … You might as well put public health first and treat people properly from the get-go,” she added.One senior paramedic working part-time in England explains what it is like working a 12-hour shift in an ambulance. “Things were OK up until about three months ago. I don’t know what exactly happened, but suddenly waiting times in getting patients admitted to hospital exploded. I think one reason was that social distancing guidelines were introduced in [our local] hospital, so the capacity of patients that could be in A&amp;E at any given time was dramatically reduced. And there is much less care happening in the community now, so there are often no beds. “I work 12-hour shifts. On my last shift, I only saw two patients because of waiting times. Normally, I see six or seven. “Recently I dealt with one palliative care patient who was septic. Normally, we’d go straight to the resuscitation department but we had to wait for an hour and a half in the ambulance outside the hospital. An end-of-life patient like this should not be lying on our trolley for so long. “In another case there was a trauma patient who had to wait for many hours with severe injuries. “We had a callout for a cardiac arrest, and the closest paramedic was 25 minutes away – a manager in their car, not even an ambulance. Twenty-five minutes is not quick enough to save somebody – we are normally aiming for eight minutes. “And then there was a paediatric cardiac arrest, and the fire brigade responded and was there for 20 minutes before we got to them. That’s just unacceptable. “I have been a paramedic for more than 14 years, and I have never known morale to be so low. Many paramedics who were full-time are now going part-time and are putting in applications for flexible working, as they can’t cope otherwise. Shifts are getting longer and longer as we can’t abandon patients who haven’t been admitted, so we work 14 hours most days, not 12. This has a massive effect on the mental health of our workforce. “It’s also difficult to keep patients happy for so many hours. People don’t get into the ambulance service to sit in the back of ambulances; they want to be out in the community and help people. It’s currently no longer the job they signed up for. “I absolutely do believe people are already dying because of ambulance delays. If we don’t get to someone elderly after a fall for instance for many hours, they may be dying from the consequences of this fall. Falls are very low on the list in terms of priority, so people may be left lying on the floor for many, many hours. “Strokes are also one of the big worries. Normally, we’d probably be able to get them in for treatment within an hour and a half. The rule is that a stroke patient needs to be seen within four hours from the onset of symptoms, or they’ve missed the treatment window. This is happening right now. It’s awful.” The paramedic asked to remain anonymousRichard Ratcliffe, who is on the 19th day of a hunger strike outside the Foreign Office, has said he felt deflated and stuck after a meeting with the Middle East minister, James Cleverly, to discuss the possible return of his wife to the UK. The husband of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British-Iranian dual national who has been in prison in Tehran since 2016, said: “If I’m honest, it felt like, you know, perfectly nice, sincere, caring, everyone in the room was caring. But you know we’re still stuck in the same status quo. We’re still stuck in the same problems that led us to end up on hunger strike.” He said he was nearing the end of his hunger strike “as a strategy”. He is urging the Foreign Office to pay a £400m British debt to Iran, which dates back to the 1970s and is a seen a precondition for the release of his wife and other detainees. Ratcliffe’s meeting followed talks between UK government officials and Iran’s deputy foreign minister, Ali Bagheri Kani, as part of preparations for the resumption of talks in Vienna at the end of this month on the terms for the US return to the nuclear deal that Donald Trump abandoned in 2018. The talks have been deferred since June after the Iranian presidential elections. Ratcliffe said Cleverly wanted to emphasise that the meeting with the Iranian delegation had been “cordial”. He added: “He’d raised Nazanin’s case, the case of the others [detained in Iran]. He said that was a good step. Couldn’t give a timeline on when things were going to move forwards.” He added: “I think things either move forwards or they move backwards. I don’t feel they moved forwards today. It may be that there are parts of the conversation I am not privy to and there are parts the minister shares down the line.” Of his hunger strike, he said: “I think there’s a basic medical limit on how long you do a hunger strike for. I made a promise to Nazanin, I made a promise to my family, Mum in particular, and to the family doctors, that I won’t take it too far. But yeah, I don’t think we walk away head held high feeling like it’s all been sorted.” In a statement, the Foreign Office said Bagheri Kani “was pressed on the need for Iran to urgently release all British nationals unfairly detained in Iran, including Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Anoosheh Ashoori and Morad Tahbaz”. It added that Cleverly met Ratcliffe again on Thursday “to reaffirm our commitment to reuniting his wife with her family in the UK”. Earlier the former foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt said that practicalities, not principles, were holding back the payment of the £400m British debt to Iran.. He said the payment would not be the equivalent of a ransom payment but the settlement of an outstanding debt. “We are a country that pays its debts,” he said, adding that the money could be paid through a humanitarian channel to avoid any sanctions. He also said he could not foresee any US objections. Hunt said the principle of the payment was now resolved inside the government, claiming this had not been the case at the time he was foreign secretary in November 2018 and went to Tehran to try to secure Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s release. He said it was possible the payment of the debt was “practically challenging”. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “There are practical issues with sanctions, but those are things that you can sometimes get around, if you, for example, gave £400m worth of medicines or something like that. “There are also political considerations, you know, the reactions of people like the United States, but given that President Obama did pay America’s debts to Iran in exactly the same situation, I think it’s unlikely that we would have the same objections from President Biden than we might have had from President Trump.” On the debt, Ratcliffe said: “Our case is associated with the wider manoeuvrings. We are a bargaining chip about the debt, but it is part of a much wider piece about Iran ending sanctions and everyone trying to get the Iran nuclear deal revived. That has got many more moving parts and so is more complicated.”It’s a perfect 180-degree strategic U-turn. As recently as April, Robert MacLeod, the chief executive of the FTSE 100 firm Johnson Matthey, whipped up the excitement about the group’s work on battery materials for electric vehicles – a very net zero venture and one intended to replace the looming decline in the company’s core business of catalytic converters for combustion engines. A new production plant would be built in Finland, in addition to the one under construction in Poland, and long-term deals to secure supplies of raw materials – nickel, cobalt and lithium hydroxide – had been signed. Johnson Matthey, declared MacLeod, had passed “important milestones on our journey towards developing a sustainable battery materials ecosystem”. The news also sounded excellent for the UK. Johnson Matthey is a low-profile member of the Footsie but was being talked about as a national champion in this new specialised field – not batteries themselves but key chemistry and raw materials within. The factories would be overseas, but 400 highly skilled research development jobs were concentrated in Oxfordshire and County Durham. There would be spillover battery benefits for the country. And now? The adventure is being abandoned. In a complete reversal of his April enthusiasm, MacLeod says the numbers don’t add up. “We have concluded that we will not achieve the returns to justify further investment,” he admitted, blaming increased competition and commoditisation. Come on, though, the idea that the competitive risks have become apparent only in recent months doesn’t stand up. More than a few City analysts have been making the same point for ages about the size advantages of Chinese, Korean and Japanese players. In Europe, Umicore, a Belgian rival, was deemed faster off the grid. It’s impossible to know how the debate ran within the boardroom but one suspects a bad case for hoping for the best on the grounds that so much capital had already been committed. Bad call: analysts predict a hefty write-down on the unit’s £340m net asset value even if a buyer, or buyers, can be found. MacLeod has decided it’s a good moment for him to retire (shareholders, looking at a share price down 19% on the day, would probably agree) but the real question is where Johnson Matthey goes next. This is a fine UK company with 200 years of history as a science-based enterprise that ought, in theory, to be well placed to capitalise on energy transition. Instead, the big battery bet has flopped and hydrogen cells and chemical decarbonisation, two other ventures billed as future technologies to replace earnings from catalytic converters, are at earlier stages of development. The danger is that a private equity predator, or similar, decides the company is worth more dead than alive and takes a pop. It is too easy to imagine a depressing alternative strategy: milk the cashflows from catalytic converters, which City analysts say might still amount to £4bn over the next decade, and sell the rest of the business. A new chief executive, Liam Condon, is on the way from German chemicals group Bayer but won’t arrive until next March. One assumes a strategic review will happen at that point but, in the meantime, Johnson Matthey’s board needs to get a grip. When you abandon your big project six months after giving it maximum hype, you look confused and vulnerable. ING braces for ‘non-gigantic’ Brexit impact “Nothing says that we’re in the run-up to Christmas more than Brexit negotiations,” says ING’s economics team, only half-joking. The European Union is preparing possible retaliatory options, including suspension of the trade deal, should the UK make unilateral changes to the Northern Ireland protocol. So, yes, it’s a moment for City thinkers to dust off their “no-deal” Brexit analyses and examine which parts may yet apply. ING’s answer, perhaps surprisingly, is fewer than you might assume. The UK’s departure from the single market and customs union at the end of 2020 was the “major sea change in trade terms” and many of the costs of Brexit have already accrued in terms of form-filling and custom processes. The additional economic hit “may not be gigantic”. It’s a theory and will be tested only if the trade and cooperation agreement ends. But note that the analysts, looking primarily at the impact on sterling, are taking a big-picture perspective. As they concede there would be “a sharp blow to a few key sectors” where serious tariffs could hit. Well, quite. Financial markets may be relaxed about the current political rhetoric; that won’t be true in UK car and agriculture industries.Mice with spinal cord injuries that left their hind legs completely paralysed learned to walk again after a single injection of synthetic nanofibres that scientists say could revolutionise treatments for the condition. The therapy is based on designer molecules that mimic the natural environment of the spinal cord and send signals to trigger cells to repair and regenerate. The team behind the work hope to begin patient trials within two years. Prof Samuel Stupp, of Northwestern University in Chicago, who led the study, believes the work could pave the way for the first effective treatment for spinal cord injuries. “I’m extremely excited and confident that this will help patients,” he said “We are going straight to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to start the process of getting this new therapy approved for use in human patients, who currently have very few treatment options.” There are an estimated 50,000 people in the UK living with a spinal cord injury and each year approximately 2,500 people are newly injured. There are currently no effective treatments to repair spinal cord damage. The therapy used a new class of smart materials to mimic the body’s extracellular matrix, the non-cellular component of all tissues that was once viewed as little more than an inert scaffold. However, there is growing evidence that the matrix plays a complex role in the body’s repair process through biochemical and biomechanical cues – and this is what Stupp and colleagues were aiming to replicate. To do this they used a new class of materials called supramolecular polymers, made up of weakly bonded structural units that wiggle around and vibrate, allowing them to find and communicate with cellular receptors that are also constantly moving. These polymers can be dissolved in water and administered as a liquid injection, but on contact with living tissue instantly turn into a gel that remains in place at the site of injury. “Cells immediately move into the spaces filled by water and get tangled in the nanofibers,” said Stupp. “Over the course of about two to three weeks these fibres are signalling the cells for repair.” The latest paper, published in Science, described how mice with spinal injuries given a single injection of the synthetic matrix regained the ability to walk within three to four weeks of treatment. The study also found that the treatment caused severed extensions of neurons, known as axons, to regrow; a reduction in scar tissue, which can become a physical barrier to repair; the formation of new blood vessels and better survival of motor neurons. After the treatment has performed its repair function, it is biodegraded into nutrients for cells within 12 weeks and then disappears from the body altogether. The advance comes after a number of high-profile studies into spinal cord injury in the past decade that are yet to translate into approved treatments for patients, including a study suggesting that electrical implants could help regeneration and another suggesting that injections of stem cells could be a promising treatment. Stupp expressed confidence that his team’s approach will, this time, deliver. “It does not involve the use of cells, it doesn’t involve the use of electricity and invasive devices or genes that can be dangerous,” he said. “Why this could be different from previous ideas is the therapy is very translatable. It’s a relatively simple molecule. That’s why we are so excited.” The team plans to apply to the FDA next year for permission to conduct a human trial and hope that they could begin such a trial within two years.Seeing Grayson Perry sitting astride his motorbike (Grayson Perry on art, cats – and the meaning of life, 9 November), I was immediately reminded of the Triumph Pink Witch bicycle of my youth as it also was pink and turquoise. How I longed for one! I was lucky enough to be given a new bicycle for my 11th birthday. There was not a lot of money around, and I was thrilled to have it, but I always coveted the Pink Witch! Jill Hughes Cranbrook, Kent • Re George Monbiot’s article (Make extreme wealth extinct: it’s the only way to avoid climate breakdown, 10 November), can Davos 2022 now be cancelled or, at least, made virtual? Karen Shaw Crowborough, East Sussex • Whether or not Rev Trevor Smith is indeed “missing something” by querying whether “gender” should replace “sex”, I am unqualified to say (Letters, 9 November). But surely he of all people must have come across the observation by Rev Sydney Smith that there are three sexes: men, women and clergymen? Father Alec Mitchell Holyhead, Anglesey • Reading Linda Gresham’s letter on thoughtfully stockpiling them from M&amp;S last year (8 November), I smiled too while checking my one- and two-year-old homemade Christmas puddings. I try to keep ahead, where possible. Pat Notley Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk • Bad news for Linda Gresham: if M&amp;S has indeed already run out of 12-month-matured Christmas puddings, there will be none for her to buy, reduced, in January! Liz Kilpatrick Dumfries • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There is something a little different about the Wallabies squad who have bowled into London for this week. It’s not the names on the team sheet. The spine of the team – James Slipper, Michael Hooper, Nic White, James O’Connor, Kurtley Beale – is all familiar, and even the only uncapped player in the squad, Ollie Hoskins, who has won an emergency call-up to the bench, has spent the last five years playing for London Irish. No, it’s the way they’re talking about the game. Dave Rennie’s side don’t bristle the way Michael Cheika’s used to. There’s no needle. Maybe they’re saving it for Saturday. Rennie isn’t too bothered about the “200 years” of rivalry between the two countries. The Wallabies are coming off the back of three Tests against France, three against the All Blacks, two against South Africa, as well as one-off matches against Japan and Scotland. He doesn’t see this as being a bigger Test than most of those. “Some of the guys who have been in the mix for a long time have talked about it, but we’re not getting caught up in history,” he said. “It’s a great opportunity for us, we’re going to play a really, really strong England side at Twickenham and we’re going to throw everything at them.” If they’re quiet, it may be because they have plenty to worry about already. They were already missing a handful of key players and, after their defeat against Scotland, they’ve lost a handful more, including both their tighthead props, Allan Alaalatoa and Taniela Tupou, who are both recovering from head injuries. It was already shaping to be a long afternoon for the Australian pack, given England have six forwards on the bench, and now they’ve had to move Slipper across from his usual position at loosehead, and bring Hoskins, who has only been with the squad for two days, straight in on the bench. “We’re not looking for excuses,” Rennie said, “we’re a couple down, but we’ve got a good squad on the park and those guys are going to have to do the job.” Slipper started his career as a tighthead, and has done the job for the Brumbies this year too, but he hasn’t started a Test there since 2012. “He’s taken on the challenge,” said Rennie, “he’s the best equipped for it, he’s such a good player, he’ll give us plenty around the park and in the scrum”. As for Hoskins, the Wallabies’ scrum coach Petrus du Plessis knew him from his time working at London Irish. “Real credit to Ollie,” Rennie says, “he’s very diligent, got his head around our structures very quickly.” They’ve also lost Jordan Petaia, which is why Beale is back starting at full-back for the first time since they lost to England 40-16 in the World Cup quarter-finals in 2019. That was the last, and worst, in a run of seven consecutive losses to England that stretches right back to the group stages of the 2015 tournament. Understandably enough, Rennie wasn’t too keen to dwell on that, either. “It’s hard to reflect on the past, I didn’t watch the Australian team in great detail in those days.” It’s no surprise he said, playing underdog again. “It’s a massive game in this country, huge playing numbers, huge financial resources, and a club system where you’ve got a hell of a lot of players. So they should be a power in world rugby.” As for this England team, he wasn’t too bothered by Eddie Jones’ surprise decision to put Manu Tuilagi on the wing: “You can almost ignore the numbers on their backs, because they’ll mix things up, I’m sure Manu will end up defending in midfield. I certainly don’t think it weakens them, they’ve found a way to get all their best players on the park.” Australia don’t have that luxury.Much has been made of the resemblance between wartime Britain and the current pandemic. Having experienced both, I find the contrast in social reactions to the two situations very striking and puzzling. During the war, nobody denied its existence, nor disputed whether it represented an existential threat; no one refused to enter air raid shelters, nor declined to don a government supplied gas mask. We trusted every restriction, including severe rationing, as having been imposed for our ultimate benefit. What has happened to cause so many to refuse life-saving procedures and flout sensible precautions during this current emergency when the threat has been, and continues to be, equally obvious? Bob Caldwell Badby, Northamptonshire • Running with Mark Walford’s theme (Letters, 9 November), it is striking how frequently people who are unhappy with the state of the nation say something to the effect of “our parents fought so we [their offspring] could be free and we should honour their sacrifice”. Yet we collectively do not seem prepared to follow that lead and make sacrifices for our offspring so that they can lead lives free from the worst consequences of global heating – which would be a way to honour that earlier sacrifice. Instead, we had the benefit of the actions of our forebears and disregard the impacts of our own acts on our descendants. I wonder for how much longer we shall be able to look them in the eye. Dave Hunter Bristol • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Polly Toynbee (Tory sleaze proves that British politics needs cleaning up. Labour must do it, 9 November) calls for a written constitution as part of an anti-corruption charter. Even a superficial examination of US politics shows that this is not a panacea: it seems that politicians will game any system if vast financial rewards are in question. The problem in both countries is that rightwing political parties, which exist basically to preserve existing privileges (and expand them), are unscrupulous in their methods in proportion to the size of those rewards, which in turn depends on the levels of inequality that exist in their societies. The real solution for UK politics is to return to the relative equality of the postwar years, and the only way to achieve this is by a revolution in the way we tax income and – especially – wealth. Jeremy Cushing Exeter • Polly Toynbee’s notion of a charter-based constitutional alliance may be more of a runner than the much-touted progressive alliance. The latter is a term so vague and slippery that it cuts little ice in serious political arguments. However, obeying the law is a relatively straightforward concept, even when people in high office show contempt for the rules. Apart from the Boris Johnson faction that captured the parliamentary Conservative party, most elected politicians, from parish councillors upwards, understand what a constitution is supposed to do. During Monday’s Commons debate, Chris Bryant made the interesting point that universal suffrage was established less than a century ago. The extension of the franchise to that point was achieved through very specific demands, often expressed through charters. Geoff Reid Bradford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A salary of £82,000 a year, roughly three times the national average, plus generous expenses, should be more than enough to attract decent people into a career in politics (MPs could be barred from consultancy roles in sleaze clampdown, 7 November). If it isn’t, the people being deterred probably are best doing other things. There is no need to “tighten restrictions” on MPs’ second jobs when the obvious solution is to ban them altogether. Furthermore, if an MP finds sufficient time to do additional work, even if it is only a few hours a week, he or she is clearly not devoting enough time to constituency work. The argument that a second job provides MPs with greater awareness of “real life” outside Westminster can be countered by making it compulsory for MPs to spend two weeks of their very long summer break shadowing someone in their constituency doing full-time work for less than average pay. Alternatively, the minimum age of MPs could become 30, almost fully guaranteeing that some experience of work is gained, prior to entering parliament. Whether “socially useless” work in the City counts as such could be left for the electorate to decide. Bernie Evans Liverpool • Your report on the MPs who are consultants or advisers outside their parliamentary work (30 MPs who could be affected by proposed consultancy ban, 7 November) reveals some MPs who are paid more than double their MP’s salary by outside interests. If these amounts surprise people on the average UK salary, then they must feel obscene to people on universal credit. A small number of MPs are obliged to maintain their professional status by continuing to practise, but this doesn’t apply to Chris Grayling being paid £100,000 by Hutchison Ports as a “strategic adviser”. So here’s an idea that the “levelling-up” secretary may like to address: why not apply a universal credit-type rule on MPs’ additional income, so that for every pound received above their salary, their salary is reduced by that same amount? Nick Broadhead Liverpool • One reason cited for MPs having a second job is that such work keeps them in touch with life outside parliament. This may be a good thing, but the kind of work that appears on the list of their outside activities is generally associated with political influence. Perhaps those drafting new rules should permit additional jobs, as long as they are in occupations experiencing shortages of labour – driving HGVs, jobs in care homes, seasonal work in the fields, or housekeeping jobs in the hotel sector. Les Bright Exeter • I see that the trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, thinks that MPs having second jobs brings a “richness” to the Commons (Report, 8 November). Well, I agree, and see no harm in MPs making ends meet by taking on other work, so long as it does not interfere with their duties as political representatives. What about a few hours a week shelf-stacking, or pizza-delivering at times when the House is not sitting? Or perhaps covering shifts in a care home – maybe in their constituencies? I’m sure they’d find the odd low-paid worker who could advise on fitting it all in with other responsibilities. Susan Lakeman Canterbury • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.What is the Yamal-Europe gas pipeline? The pipeline is owned by Russia’s state gas company Gazprom and measures more than 2,600 miles. It brings Russian gas from the giant gas fields of the Yamal peninsula and western Siberia to Poland and Germany via Belarus. The pipeline does not directly lead to other European countries – but it helps to feed Germany’s huge gas storage facilities, which are used by energy companies and traders across the continent. Why is this pipeline important? Russia remains Europe’s biggest supplier of gas and about one-fifth of these supplies travelled through Belarus last year, mainly through the Yamal pipeline, making it an important conduit for European gas imports and for Russia’s gas revenues. The threat by the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, to cut deliveries of gas to Europe via the pipeline in retaliation against any new EU sanctions would be a major concern for European energy companies on top of the looming winter gas crisis. What would happen if Belarus cut off gas supplies? Gas market prices across Europe are already at near-record highs owing to a global surge in demand for fossil fuels after the Covid-19 economic slowdown last year. So any disruption to supplies could force market prices even higher, raising concerns for household energy bills and fresh fears that factories would need to shut down to avoid financially crippling gas prices. How has Russia reacted? Russia is no stranger to using gas supplies as a political weapon or disputes over pipeline routes. In 2009, Russia cut off supplies to Ukraine after the collapse of supply contract negotiations, and Ukraine retaliated by withholding Russian gas destined for other European countries. But on the Belarus threat the Kremlin has remained silent. Although a disruption to its exports to Europe would be far from ideal, Russia’s biggest customer is Asia, where demand for gas is high. A pipeline crisis would also help its lobbying of the EU to approve its controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline project running directly to Germany, which circumvents transit countries.