Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Darktrace, the cybersecurity specialist, is not a company that lives in the shadows. Its logo has a prominent place on the rear wings of McLaren F1 racing cars, thanks to a sponsorship deal that will not be cheap. And, since it entered the FTSE 100 index last month, its shares have been notable for regularly being among the top 10 daily risers or fallers. Indeed, volatility has been the pattern since its IPO in May, at 250p. The shares had quadrupled by September, briefly giving it a £7bn valuation, but have almost halved since then. Last week’s closing price of 528p still looks pretty if you got on board at the stock market debut, but those who took the plunge before the shares turned south may feel less enamoured. Darktrace’s first annual meeting as a public company, on Wednesday, will inevitably provoke another round of debate about the value. It’s a classic technology conundrum: the Cambridge-based business, led by chief executive Poppy Gustafsson, may be losing money today, but how do you value rapid sales growth and the possibility of huge growth? Darktrace’s core products are “network detection and response” tools. They work by using artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms to learn and absorb an organisation’s regular “digital fingerprint” and then spot abnormalities that could indicate a cyber-attack. If an attack is under way, the technology neutralises threats, and prevents or minimises damage. The incentive for organisations to buy such products is obvious. As well as dodging data theft and criminal extortion demands, firms also want to ensure that daily operations can continue. The vast majority of Darktrace’s 6,000 customers are in the private sector. That tally of clients hints at the company’s potential. In theory, given the predicted growth in the cybersecurity market, customers could eventually be counted in the tens of thousands. As it is, Darktrace has been improving its revenues at a clip of almost 50% a year for the past four years. Analysts expect revenues of about $400m this financial year. So why the share price wobble? Probably for three reasons. First, analysts at Peel Hunt punctured the bullish consensus in October with a “sell” note, arguing that there was “a disconnect between the valuation and the ultimate revenue opportunity”. The share price at that point was 950p, so Peel Hunt’s call reinforced its argument that Darktrace’s sales and marketing operation was more impressive than its technology. Is spending 10% of sales on research and development – when rivals are allocating 20% – storing up trouble? Darktrace’s view is that its AI-based tools are simply efficient at learning and that there shouldn’t be any disgrace in being good at marketing. The debate will run. Second, the thrill of the IPO period is over. Six-month lock-up periods for Darktrace’s private equity backers expired at the start of this month. In practice, selling has been modest, but the possibility of disposals can infect the market’s mood. Then there’s the Mike Lynch factor. He is the former Autonomy chief executive whose $11bn sale of the company to Hewlett-Packard in 2011 led to the UK’s biggest-ever civil fraud case (judgment is still awaited). Lynch, who is fighting extradition to the US, owns 16% of Darktrace with his wife Angela Bacares, having been a founding shareholder. He does not have a day-to-day role – he sits only on the company’s science and technology committee – but the relationship will continue to draw attention as long as it survives. Gustafsson will, one suspects, avoid all mention of Lynch, the share price, or Peel Hunt’s note at Wednesday’s meeting. But any update on revenue growth will be devoured in the City. Not only does Darktrace carry many of the hopes of the UK tech sector, it is also a high-profile member of the “Covid cohort” of London IPOs. And, if you splash a few million on F1 advertising before you’re even profitable, expect scrutiny.Three people are being treated in hospital in Rotterdam after they were seriously injured when Dutch police fired shots during a violent protest against Covid-19 measures. Authorities are investigating the shootings, including looking at the question of if the injured people were hit with police bullets. Crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests on Friday evening. The UK government said a further 150 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Saturday, bringing the UK total to 143,866. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 168,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. In Brazil, the country’s health ministry said 70% of the eligible population have been fully vaccinated and 90% have received a first dose. The ministry launched a campaign to reach 21 million Brazilians who have not returned for a second jab, Reuters reports. The rolling 14-day average of Covid-related deaths has fallen to 228 a day, the lowest since 26 April 2020. That compares with a toll of almost 3,000 deaths a day in Brazil at the peak of the pandemic last April. America’s Covid-19 infections are climbing again, and could soon hit a weekly average of 100,000 cases a day as daily case reports increase more than 20% across the upper midwest. The UK cannot afford to be complacent and must be prepared to introduce tougher measures to control the spread of Covid this winter if necessary, a government adviser and leading epidemiologist warned. With Austria planning to introduce mandatory vaccinations from February as well as a new lockdown starting on Monday, and German ministers having declared a national emergency, Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, was asked whether the UK could be forced to take similar action in the coming weeks or months. He said the UK was “on a knife edge” and that much depended on the booster jab campaign and the speed of uptake. Story here. Surging coronavirus infections across Europe show the “critical” need for people in the UK get vaccinated, a government scientific adviser has said. Prof John Edmunds, a member of Sage, said soaring cases on the continent underlined “how quickly things can go wrong”, and pointed out that there were still “many millions” across the UK who were still not fully vaccinated while some had not had any Covid shots at all. Several thousand demonstrators have already gathered in central Vienna to protest against the new tough pandemic measures in Austria, with up to 15,000 people expected to demonstrate in the capital on Saturday. The country faces its fourth general lockdown from Monday, which will also be in place for those who have been vaccinated, and is set to become the first European country to mandate Covid vaccination. The nationwide lockdown will last for a maximum of 20 days, the government has said, and will be followed by a lockdown for unvaccinated people. Thousands of people in Australia marched in “freedom” rallies in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, with the largest crowds in the Victorian capital as protests against the state government’s pandemic legislation ramped up again. Story here. World No 1 Novak Djokovic and all other tennis players will have to be vaccinated against Covid to compete in the Australia Open next January, the tournament’s chief, Craig Tiley, said on Saturday. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, quickly made it clear that no exemptions would be sought for unvaccinated players. Story here. Hong Kong approved lowering the age limit for the Covid vaccine from China’s Sinovac Biotech to three years old, down from 18, as it pursues a broader campaign to incentivise its 7.5 million residents to get vaccinated. Story here. Mexico’s health ministry reported 3,306 new cases of coronavirus infections and 227 additional deaths on Saturday. It brings the total number of confirmed cases to 3,862,137 and the death toll from the pandemic to 292,372, Reuters reports. In Brazil, the country’s health ministry said 70% of the eligible population have been fully vaccinated and 90% have received a first dose. On Saturday, the ministry launched a campaign to reach 21 million Brazilians who have not returned for a second jab, Reuters reports. The rolling 14-day average of Covid-related deaths has fallen to 228 a day, the lowest since 26 April 2020. That compares with a toll of almost 3,000 deaths a day in Brazil at the peak of the pandemic in April of this year. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil’s second-largest city, which was severely hit by the epidemic, did not have a single new case of a person in hospital with Covid-19 at municipal hospitals on Saturday, the city’s health authority said. It added that 76.5% of the eligible population has been fully vaccinated. Three people are now being treated in hospital in Rotterdam after they were seriously injured when Dutch police fired shots during a violent protest against Covid-19 measures, authorities said. Police had initially said two people had been wounded, Reuters reports. Authorities are investigating the shootings, including looking at the question of if the injured people were hit with police bullets, police added. Crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water cannons. Brazil had 8,833 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours and 217 deaths, the country’s health ministry said on Saturday. The South American country has now registered 22,012,150 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 612,587, according to ministry data, Reuters reports. Two people were being treated in hospital in Rotterdam after they were seriously injured when Dutch police fired shots during a violent protest against Covid-19 measures, authorities said. Rotterdam police said on Twitter on Saturday that 51 people had been arrested, half of whom were under 18, Reuters reports. “Two rioters where wounded when they were hit by bullets, they remain in hospital,” police added. Protesters had gathered to voice opposition to government plans to restrict access to indoor venues to people who have a “corona pass”, showing they have been vaccinated or have already recovered from an infection. Organisers of a planned protest on Saturday in Amsterdam against the coronavirus measures said they had cancelled the event after Friday’s violence. But several thousand protesters showed up for a march around the city’s central Dam square. The march remained peaceful, monitored by a heavy police presence. America’s Covid-19 infections are climbing again, and could soon hit a weekly average of 100,000 cases a day as daily case reports increase more than 20% across the upper midwest. The fresh worsening of the coronavirus pandemic in the US comes as temperatures cool during the approach of winter, forcing people indoors where the virus is believed to spread more readily and may presage another wave. It is also happening ahead of the Thanksgiving national holiday where tens of millions of Americans are expected to travel all over the country as families gather together in homes for the annual feast. NHS England officials said the health service is ready to extend the availability of vaccines quickly when and if expert recommendations for who should receive them change, after a report suggested plans to give the Covid jab to children aged five to 11 could become reality next year. Covid-19 vaccines are licensed in the UK only for children aged 12 and over, and any decision on extending them to children younger than 12 would be made by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). According to a report in the Sun newspaper, leaked proposals suggest that health bosses are preparing to roll out the jab to children aged between five and 11 in spring. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid has commissioned a review into possible racial and gender bias in medical devices as he vowed to “close the chasms that the pandemic has exposed”. He said it is “totally unacceptable” that even an inadvertent bias could lead to a poorer health outcome for some people. Javid said he is “determined to take a fresh perspective” to his role within government and “do whatever it takes” to fix disparities, citing the disproportionate effect of the pandemic on black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups. Writing in The Sunday Times, he said: “I want to make sure that the benefits of the incredible advances in technology and treatments we’ve seen in recent years are widely shared, so they help not hinder this work.” France sent dozens of elite police and counter-terrorism officers to its Caribbean island of Guadeloupe on Saturday following looting and arson overnight in defiance of an overnight curfew. The island’s prefect on Friday introduced the night-time stay-at-home order after protests against the coronavirus vaccine pass spiralled into violence the previous night. “The night was very turbulent,” a police source told AFP. The security forces recorded “some 20 incidents of looting or attempted robbery” in the seaside towns of Pointe-a-Pitre and Le Gosier, including at a jewellery shop, a bank, a betting shop and a shopping centre. The Covid pandemic turned off the cheap labour tap. That has delivered a “come to Jesus” moment for employers of farm labour in Australia. But people shortages are not a new thing in the bush. The underemployment dilemma has been building for a while. John Goldsmith, the former principal of Longerenong Agricultural College, said a decade ago: “It’s not a skills shortage, it’s a people shortage.” The declining rural population and subsequent reliance on non-family employees has been bubbling away. Until now though, this void was somewhat filled by people who will put up with less than ideal pay and conditions. France has reported 22,678 new coronavirus cases, Reuters reports. The country has had over 7.37 million cases in total. More than half of Iran’s population has been fully vaccinated against Covid-19, the health ministry said, as infection and death rates in the country have started to drop. More than 44.2 million of Iran’s 83 million population have received two coronavirus vaccine doses since the country began its inoculation campaign in February, according to ministry figures. Another 12.2 million people have received a single vaccine dose, AFP reports. France has reported a total of 91,520 coronavirus deaths in hospital, an increase of 23. It also recorded that 1,333 people are in intensive care units with Covid-19, a decrease of 20, Reuters reports. Dozens of care homes in the UK are still denying people access to their elderly relatives 20 months after the pandemic began, according to support groups. Although ministers have urged care homes to allow relatives to visit, groups including the Relatives &amp; Residents Association and Unlock Care Homes say that many are still unable to see elderly residents. Since March, families have been able to nominate an “essential caregiver” (ECG) who can provide regular close support to a relative in a care home. About 70% of older care home residents have dementia, and research from John’s Campaign shows that relatives are often able to better interpret their behaviour and provide comfort. The UK government said a further 150 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Saturday, bringing the UK total to 143,866. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 168,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. There were 40,941 Covid-19 cases in the latest 24-hour period. As of 9am on Saturday, there had been a further 40,941 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases in the UK, the government said. Here is more on Prof John Edmunds of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, who has said the surge in coronavirus infections across Europe shows the “critical” need for people in the UK to get vaccinated He pointed out that “many millions” across the UK were still not fully vaccinated, some of whom had not had a jab at all. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said during a visit to Dakar’s Institute Pasteur biomedical research centre that Washington was working with partners to generate more financing for vaccine manufacture in Senegal, Reuters reports. More data from Italy. The number of patients in hospital with Covid, not including those in intensive care, rose to 4,250 on Saturday from 4,145 on Friday. There were 50 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 39 on Fridayqnd bringing the total to 512 patients, Reuters reports. The health ministry said 574,812 tests for Covid-19 had been carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 534,690. Hundreds of people gathered in Belfast city centre on Saturday to oppose the planned introduction of Covid-19 certification. A large crowd formed outside City Hall, with many carrying placards and banners, according to PA Media. There were cheers and applause as speakers promised to resist certification in Northern Ireland. Traffic was temporarily disrupted in the city centre as shoppers crowded into the Christmas markets in City Hall while the protest took place on the street outside. Italy reported 11,555 coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 10,544 on Friday, and a further 49 deaths, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 133,131 deaths linked to Covid-19 in total since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe. The country has reported 4.9 million cases to date. Here is more on the protests in Vienna against coronavirus restrictions a day after Austria’s government announced a new lockdown and said vaccines would be made compulsory next year. The World Health Organization has said another 500,000 people in Europe could die of Covid by March next year unless urgent action is taken. The WHO’s Europe director, Dr Hans Kluge, said he was very worried about a fresh wave of infections that had spread across the continent and led countries to announce new restrictions. Kluge said factors such as the winter season, when there is normally an increase in viral infections, and low vaccine coverage were responsible for the increase in cases. He called for more people to get vaccinated, basic public health measures to be implemented and new treatments to be developed, but said mandatory vaccination should be the last resort. He told the BBC: Covid-19 has become once again the number one cause of mortality in our region. We know what needs to be done [to fight the disease]. More here: Here’s a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Two people were being treated in hospital in Rotterdam after they were seriously injured when police fired shots during violent riots against Covid measures. Crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests in the Dutch city on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water cannon. 51 people were arrested, half of whom were under 18. Rotterdam’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, condemned the protests which had turned into “an orgy of violence”. The Dutch justice minister, Ferd Grapperhaus, added in a statement that the “extreme violence” against police and fire fighters in Rotterdam was “repulsive”. Protesters had gathered to voice opposition to government plans to restrict access to indoor venues to people who have a “corona pass”, showing they have been vaccinated or have already recovered from an infection. The Netherlands re-imposed some lockdown measures last weekend for an initial three weeks in an effort to slow a resurgence of coronavirus, but daily infections have remained at their highest levels since the start of the pandemic. Story here. The UK cannot afford to be complacent and must be prepared to introduce tougher measures to control the spread of Covid this winter if necessary, a government adviser and leading epidemiologist warned. With Austria planning to introduce mandatory vaccinations from February as well as a new lockdown starting on Monday, and German ministers having declared a national emergency, Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, was asked whether the UK could be forced to take similar action in the coming weeks or months. He said the UK was “on a knife edge” and that much depended on the booster jab campaign and the speed of uptake. Story here. Surging coronavirus infections across Europe show the “critical” need for people in the UK get vaccinated, a government scientific adviser has said. Prof John Edmunds, a member of Sage, said soaring cases on the continent underlined “how quickly things can go wrong”, and pointed out that there were still “many millions” across the UK who were still not fully vaccinated while some had not had any Covid shots at all. Several thousand demonstrators have already gathered in central Vienna to protest against the new tough pandemic measures in Austria, with up to 15,000 people expected to demonstrate in the capital on Saturday. The country faces its fourth general lockdown from Monday, which will also be in place for those who have been vaccinated, and is set to become the first European country to mandate Covid vaccination. The nationwide lockdown will last for a maximum of 20 days, the government has said, and will be followed by a lockdown for unvaccinated people. Thousands of people in Australia marched in “freedom” rallies in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, with the largest crowds in the Victorian capital as protests against the state government’s pandemic legislation ramped up again. Story here. World No 1 Novak Djokovic and all other players will have to be vaccinated against Covid to compete in the Australia Open next January, the tournament’s chief, Craig Tiley, said on Saturday. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, quickly made it clear that no exemptions would be sought for unvaccinated players. Story here. Hong Kong approved lowering the age limit for the Covid vaccine from China’s Sinovac Biotech to three years old, down from 18, as it pursues a broader campaign to incentivise its 7.5 million residents to get vaccinated. Story here. Surging coronavirus infections across Europe show the “critical” need for people in the UK get vaccinated, a government scientific adviser has said. Speaking to Sky News, Prof John Edmunds said soaring cases on the continent underlined “how quickly things can go wrong”. He pointed out that there were still “many millions” across the UK, who were still not fully vaccinated while some had not had any Covid shots at all. Whitehall sources this weekend played down the immediate need for so-called “Plan B” restrictions, pointing to data published this week showing the protection offered by a booster shot. Alongside maximising the uptake of third doses, officials hope the lifting of restrictions earlier in the year will mean Britain avoids the winter surges currently being experienced on the continent. But Edmunds, who is a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said: There are still many millions of people here in the UK who have not been fully vaccinated - it’s essential now. What you see now particularly in central Europe with this very rapid increase in cases, you see the importance of vaccination, how critical it is that people who need their boosters should come forward as rapidly as possible and get vaccinated. Those who are still unvaccinated - and there are many unfortunately out there - should come forward and be vaccinated as rapidly as possible. He added: [The current surge in Europe] shows how quickly things can go wrong. I am concerned about waning immunity. The booster doses, it is pretty clear, do give a clear boost to your immune system, which may last some considerable time so I think it’s really essential that the booster doses are rolled out as fast as possible. Sky News has the story. Two people were being treated in hospital in Rotterdam on Saturday after they were seriously injured when police fired shots during riots against Covid measures, authorities said. Crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests in the Dutch city on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water canons. Rotterdam police said on Twitter on Saturday that 51 people had been arrested, half of whom were under 18. “Two rioters where wounded when they were hit by bullets, they remain in hospital,” the force added. The city’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, said protest had turned into “an orgy of violence”. “Police were forced to draw their weapons and even fire direct shots,” he told a press conference early on Saturday. The Dutch justice minister Ferd Grapperhaus said in a statement that the “extreme violence” against police and fire fighters in Rotterdam was “repulsive”. “The right to protest is very important in our society but what we saw last night was simply criminal behaviour,” Grapperhaus said. Read more: Rotterdam police open fire as Covid protest turns into ‘orgy of violence’ Protesters had gathered to voice opposition to government plans to restrict access to indoor venues to people who have a “corona pass”, showing they have been vaccinated or have already recovered from an infection. The pass is also available to people who have not been vaccinated, but have proof of a negative test. Organisers of a planned protest on Saturday in Amsterdam against the coronavirus measures said they had cancelled the event after Friday’s violence. Even so, several hundred protesters showed up in the city’s central Dam square, monitored by a heavy police presence. In the southern city of Breda, a musical protest called by local DJs against current Covid measures, which include the 8pm closure of bars, restaurants and clubs, attracted a few hundred people. The Netherlands re-imposed some lockdown measures last weekend for an initial three weeks in an effort to slow a resurgence of coronavirus, but daily infections have remained at their highest levels since the start of the pandemic. Ski resorts in northern Italy are reopening for the winter season after prolonged shutdowns due to the pandemic, although a recent rise in infections is spreading worries over possible new restrictions. Fabio Sacco, the president of the Skirama consortium that brings together several resorts in the Trentino-Alto Adige region, said he had been waiting to restart since March last year, when Italy imposed a lockdown. “It is really an exciting moment,” he told Reuters. Europe is being swept by a fourth wave of the pandemic that has already forced Austria, one of Italy’s neighbours, to announce a full national lockdown. Germany has not ruled out similar measures. Italy has also seen a rise in daily cases in recent weeks, especially in some northern areas where many ski slopes are located. Hospitalisations remain under control nationwide but operators are aware of the risks rising infections may pose. “There is some uncertainty and fear due to the worsening of the pandemic trend, but the resorts in our consortium and across Trentino are prepared to handle different scenarios,” Sacco said. A Covid health pass – which shows if someone has completed the vaccination cycle, has recently tested negative or recovered from the disease – is required to access ski lifts along with face masks and social distancing rules. Skiers, enjoying clear blue skies and perfect skiing conditions, were feeling upbeat about the forthcoming winter season. “Finally, after a year of closure we are happy. There is a desire to ski. The snow and the day are beautiful. I expect many positive things from this season,” said skier Filippo Laureti. The UK cannot afford to be complacent and must be prepared to introduce tougher measures to control the spread of Covid this winter if necessary, a government adviser and leading epidemiologist has warned. As mainland Europe is gripped by a new Covid wave, some countries have imposed strict measures to control the spread of Covid. With Austria planning to introduce mandatory vaccinations from February as well as a new lockdown starting on Monday, and German ministers having declared a national emergency, Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, was asked whether the UK could be forced to take similar action in the coming weeks or months. Hayward said the UK was “on a knife edge” and that much depended on the booster jab campaign and the speed of uptake. Read the full story here: Slovakia has joined other European countries in reporting new records for daily infections. Covid-19 infections in Slovakia are at their peak now, with a daily average of 6,598 new infections being reported each day now, the highest so far. The ministry of health on Saturday logged 9,171 new infections in a 24-hour period, the highest daily tally of confirmed cases since the pandemic began. The country of 5.5 million introduced what the prime minister, Eduard Heger, called a “lockdown for the unvaccinated” earlier this week. Covid-19 testing at workplaces is also among the new measures. According to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker, Slovakia has administered at least 4,895,694 doses of Covid vaccines so far, which, assuming every person needs two doses, is enough to have vaccinated about 44.9% of the country’s population. Slovakia has reported 13 818 coronavirus-related deaths since the beginning of the pandemic. Several thousand demonstrators have already gathered in central Vienna to protest against the new tough pandemic measures in Austria, with up to 15,000 people expected to demonstrate in the capital on Saturday. On Saturday, 15,297 new infections were registered in the country. Austria faces its fourth general lockdown from Monday, which will also be in place for those who have been vaccinated. The nationwide lockdown will last for a maxium of 20 days, the government has said, and will be followed by a lockdown for unvaccinated people. Symbols such as a yellow star with the word “not vaccinated” are just as ubiquitous as the terms “fascism” and “dictatorship” in the crowd in Vienna, while protesters shout slogans such as “We are the people” and “resistance”, Austrian daily Der Standard reports. At just under 66 percent, the vaccination rate in Austria is one of the lowest in Western Europe. Hello, I’m taking over for the next hour while my colleague Lucy Campbell has a break. As always, feel free to get in touch with tips and updates, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can drop me an email. A demonstration planned for Saturday in Amsterdam against coronavirus curbs was cancelled after riots in Rotterdam injured seven people, and police fired warning shots last night, AFP reports. More than 20 people were arrested in the protests against government moves to restrict access to certain sites for unvaccinated people and impose other restrictions. A police car and several electric scooters were torched and fires set off. “Last night, all hell broke loose in Rotterdam,” United We Stand Europe, which had called Saturday’s protest, said on Facebook. Chaos broke out in the centre of the port city on Friday night. Rotterdam’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, denounced an “orgy of violence”, adding: “The police have felt the need to draw a police weapon in the end to defend themselves.” [see 8.50am.]. Keeping the demonstration in Amsterdam “didn’t feel right”, United We Stand Europe said, lamenting the injuries to two protesters, which had also been reported in Dutch media. “The riots and extreme violence against police, riot police and firefighters last night in Rotterdam are horrifying,” the Dutch security and justice minister, Ferd Grapperhaus, said on Saturday, deploring the “considerable” destruction. “The men and women who take to the streets every day for our safety have been pelted with stones and fireworks,” he said, referring to the police. “The police and the public prosecutor’s office are doing their utmost to track down, prosecute and punish these rioters.” “After major disruptions yesterday... order is now being restored. There is a lot of damage, people have been injured and people have been detained,” the local police said on Twitter on Saturday. “At the moment the full picture is being drawn up. The investigation into the rioters is starting,” it added. A planned protest in the southern city of Breda on Saturday is still on, according to local media. Rotterdam police quashed rumours on social media that someone died during the violence. “Both from our side and from the National Criminal Investigation Department, this has not been reported,” police stressed. The number of deaths of people being treated under the Mental Health Act in England rose during the coronavirus pandemic, estimates suggest. The Care Quality Commission’s (CQC) findings come amid concerns over staff shortages in psychiatric units. Some 490 people died while detained under the act between the start of March 2020 to the end of March 2021. The regulator said 166 of those deaths were due to Covid-19, while 324 of them for “non-Covid” reasons. BBC analysis found that between 2012 and 2019, an average of 273 people died per year either while detained in hospital or being supervised in the community in England while subject to the act. The Tory former health secretary Jeremy Hunt warned that staff shortages were now compromising patient safety in “every part of the NHS”. He called the figures on deaths in psychiatric detention “very concerning”, adding: “It’s not just mental health, but every specialty now has shortages of doctors and nurses.” Hunt argued a “radical overhaul” of the training system was needed to ensure there were enough doctors and nurses in the coming decades. The BBC has the story. The Coronavirus infections rate in the Czech Republic hit a new record for the second time this week, the health ministry said on Saturday. It announced that the daily tally rose to 22,936 on Friday, almost 500 more than the previous record set on Tuesday. The country’s infection rate has risen to 929 new cases per 100,000 residents over the past seven days. A further 110 people died on Thursday, the ministry said, with the daily death toll surpassing 100 for the first time since April. The government has approved new restrictions to tackle the surge in infections, targeting the unvaccinated in an effort to increase a vaccination rate that is below the European Union average. Starting on Monday, most unvaccinated people will no longer be allowed to show negative coronavirus tests in order to attend public events, go to bars and restaurants, visit hairdressers, museums and similar facilities or use hotels. Only people who are vaccinated or have recovered from Covid in the last six months will remain eligible. Testing at workplaces will also be required. On Thursday, the Czech prime ministr, Andrej Babiš, warned that the country was facing a “serious” situation as cases surge. “I am glad that after many negotiations in the last two days, there has been an agreement between experts and the government,” Babiš tweeted, adding that they were inspired to announce the restrictions based on the measures planned for the state of Bavaria in Germany. He added: “And please: Limit contacts and get vaccinated. It’s the only way you can protect your health.” Thread here: Overall, the country of 10.7 million has registered over 1.94 million cases and 31,769 deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Thousands of people have marched in “freedom” rallies in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, with the largest crowds in the Victorian capital as protests against the state government’s pandemic legislation ramped up again. Protesters marched from Victoria’s state parliament, down Bourke Street and up to Flagstaff Gardens, carrying Australian flags and placards bearing anti-vaccination, anti-lockdown and anti-government slogans, while chanting “kill the bill”, “sack Dan Andrews” and “Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, oi, oi, oi”. The rally drew a significant increase in numbers following weeks of protests against the Victorian premier’s public health and wellbeing (pandemic management) bill 2021, which previously came to a head last weekend, when thousands of people marched through central Melbourne in a demonstration that included a prop gallows, protesters posing with nooses, and chants of “hang Dan Andrews”. The bill as introduced by the Victorian government would allow the premier to make an indefinite declaration of a pandemic and state of emergency, give the health minister power to make broad public health orders, and grant authorised officers the power to detain people under quarantine. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has been racing to pass the pandemic legislation before the state of emergency is due to lapse on 15 December. If the bill fails to pass, the Victorian government may not have the legal framework to enforce and create Covid-19 orders to manage the pandemic. The bill has been criticised by the Law Institute of Victoria, the Victorian Bar Association, and the Human Rights Law Centre, who say it lacks oversight and transparency. In Sydney on Saturday, several thousand protesters also marched through the CBD. The sound of bagpipes echoed through York Street as a man dressed in white screamed “destroy the new world order” and others chanted “walk with us”. A Sydney demonstrator carried a “kill the bill” sign, despite there being no such bill in NSW, while others waved Australian flags. The full story is here: Some 200 vaccinated foreign tourists arrived in Vietnam’s beach-fringed island of Phu Quoc on Saturday, the first wave of visitors to the country in nearly two years as it seeks to resurrect its pandemic-ravaged tourism economy, Reuters reports. Vietnam imposed tight border controls at the start of the pandemic in an effort to keep Covid out, with some initial success, but that harmed its burgeoning tourism sector, which typically accounts for about 10% of gross domestic product. Vaccinated tourists now do not have to undergo mandatory two-week quarantine, according to the authorities, but are required to enjoy their holiday only inside the mega complex resort Vinpearl and will be tested twice during their trip. “This is the first and vital step to revive our tourism sector and to prepare for the full resumption next year,” Nguyen Trung Khanh, chairman of the country’s tourism administration said in statement. “We want to offer tourists a new experience amid new normalcy which they can live fully in Phu Quoc and then live fully in Vietnam,” Khanh added. The island’s authorities expect to welcome 400,000 domestic and international tourists to the end of this year. Other Vietnamese destinations such as the Unesco world heritage site Hoi An and Danang beach are also welcoming international tourists back. The move follows similar steps taken by neighbouring Thailand, which hosted vaccinated foreign tourists for quarantine-free holiday earlier this month. Foreign arrivals to Vietnam slumped from 18 million in 2019, when tourism revenue was $31bn, or nearly 12% of its gross domestic product, to 3.8 million last year. Vietnam, which has inoculated more than half of its 98 million people, is seeking to resume international commercial flights from January next year and eyeing a full tourism reopening from June. World No 1 Novak Djokovic and all other players will have to be vaccinated against Covid to compete in the Australia Open next January, the tournament’s chief, Craig Tiley, said on Saturday. Djokovic has declined to disclose whether he is vaccinated and said that he would wait until Tennis Australia revealed the health protocols before he made a decision about playing at Melbourne Park. “There’s a lot of speculation about vaccination and just to be really clear, when the [state] premier announced that everyone on site ... will need to be vaccinated ... we made that clear to the playing group,” Tiley told reporters. “[Novak] has said that he views this as a private matter for him. We would love to see Novak here, he knows that he’ll have to be vaccinated to play here.” The announcement brings to a definitive conclusion months of negotiations between Tennis Australia and the Victoria state government, which had insisted throughout that everybody at Melbourne Park would need to be vaccinated. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, had opened a window for unvaccinated players when he said that they would be allowed into the country if they served 14 days quarantine and Victoria applied for an exemption. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, quickly made it clear that no exemptions would be sought for unvaccinated players. Get the full story here: Iraq said it has received 1.2 million doses of Pfizer/BioNTech’s Covid vaccine through the Covax sharing scheme, amid fears of a fourth wave in the country, AFP reports. Nearly 7 million Iraqis have received at least one dose of coronavirus vaccine, amounting to just 17.5% of the country’s 40 million population, based on government figures. Plagued by years of conflict, corruption and neglect, the country’s health system has struggled to cope with the pandemic. The health ministry announced on Saturday the arrival of a shipment of more than 1.2 million doses of “Pfizer’s anti-Covid vaccine through the Covax programme and Unicef”, the UN Children’s Fund. “Iraq is still facing danger from the coronavirus pandemic,” ministry spokesman Saif al-Badr said on Thursday. “We expect to enter a fourth wave, [and] it could be a new variant,” he told state television. More than 2 million Iraqis have contracted coronavirus and 23,628 have died in Iraq since the outbreak of the pandemic, according to official figures. Despite an increase in the number of people getting jabbed, the government has been unable to overcome general scepticism about vaccines and measures aimed at preventing the spread of the virus. There is a high level of public mistrust of institutions in Iraq amid the circulation of misleading information about the pandemic. Covax was set up to ensure equitable distribution of vaccines, particularly to low-income countries, and has already delivered more than 80 million doses to 129 territories. Visitors will need to show proof of their Covid status to gain entry to Belfast Christmas market, which opens on Saturday. All visitors will need to show proof of either their Covid vaccination, a negative test or lateral flow test taken in the last 48 hours, or evidence of a positive PCR test taken in the previous 30 to 180 days, in order to attend the market, which takes place in the grounds of Belfast city hall. Organisers had previously said the rule would only apply on busier days and weekends. But they announced on Friday that it would apply at all times. The decision was taken ahead of Northern Ireland’s Covid passport scheme, which is likely to come in on 29 November. Organisers said safety of staff and customers was of “paramount importance”, and are also recommending that visitors wear face masks and pay by card where possible. The mayor of Rotterdam has condemned “an orgy of violence” at protests against Covid measures in the Dutch port city, in which seven people were wounded and more than 20 arrested. Reuters reports that crowds of several hundred rioters torched cars, set off fireworks and threw rocks at police during the protests on Friday evening. Police responded with warning shots and water cannon. Read more: Rotterdam police open fire as Covid protest turns violent “Police were forced to draw their weapons and even fire direct shots,” the mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, told a press conference early on Saturday. Asked to characterise the event, Aboutaleb said it was “an orgy of violence, I can’t think of another way to describe it.” Authorities said they had arrested more than 20 people and expected to detain others, as the city centre where the riots took place is extensively monitored by security cameras. Protesters had gathered to oppose government plans to restrict access to indoor venues to people who have a “corona pass”, showing they have been vaccinated or have recently recovered from an infection. The pass is also available to people who have not been vaccinated, but have proof of a negative test. The Netherlands re-imposed some lockdown measures last weekend for an initial three weeks in an effort to slow a resurgence of coronavirus, but daily infections have remained at their highest levels since the start of the pandemic. Authorities reported a record of more than 23,000 new cases on Thursday, well above the previous daily high of 13,000 reached in December 2020. Related: Netherlands imposes lockdown measures as Covid cases hit new high Hong Kong has approved lowering the age limit for the Covid vaccine from China’s Sinovac Biotech to three years old, down from 18, as it pursues a broader campaign to incentivise its 7.5 million residents to get vaccinated, Reuters reports. “Adolescents aged 12 to 17 will be accorded priority to receive the CoronaVac vaccine, with a view to extending to children of a younger age group at a later stage,” Hong Kong’s secretary for food and health (SFH) Sophia Chan said in a statement published on Saturday. According to the statement, the SFH considered that the benefits of approving the extension of the age eligibility to cover those aged three to 17 “outweigh the risks”. A Hong Kong government advisory panel on Covid vaccines had earlier recommended the SFH to approve the new age limit, the statement added. The extension of the age eligibility comes as the vaccination campaign in the Asian financial hub which started in February has lagged many other developed economies, with about 67% of the population vaccinated with two shots from either Sinovac or Germany’s BioNTech. In a separate statement on Friday, the city’s government said it purchased 1 million extra doses of BioNTech vaccine for the implementation of third dose Covid vaccination. Hong Kong has followed Beijing’s lead in retaining strict travel restrictions to curb new outbreaks, in contrast to a global trend of opening up and living with the coronavirus. International business lobby groups have warned Hong Kong could lose talent and investment, as well as competitive ground to rival finance hubs such as Singapore, unless it relaxes its restrictions on travel. Despite barely any recent local cases and an environment virtually free of Covid, Hong Kong has imposed mandatory hotel quarantine of up to 21 days for arrivals from most countries at the travellers’ cost. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_Manchester United’s board decided to sack Ole Gunnar Solskjær at an emergency meeting on Saturday night and Joel Glazer, the co-chairman who heads the American family’s ownership, has agreed to rubber-stamp the move. A meeting, which lasted several hours, was called after the team’s chastening 4-1 defeat at Watford. The plan is for an announcement to avoid describing Solskjær as sacked and refer to a mutual agreement. Compensation and other final touches were being attended to after the board completed their discussions. Solskjær admitted after a fourth defeat in five Premier League games that his team were “outfought” by Watford and had let the fans down but insisted he was able to turn their fortunes around. The board disagreed, however, and decided to make a change. The first-team coach, Michael Carrick, and the club’s technical director, Darren Fletcher – both successful former United players – are understood to be ready to take interim charge when Solskjær’s departure is confirmed. Glazer backed Solskjær late last month despite the 5-0 humiliation by Liverpool after the executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, and managing director, Richard Arnold, joined Sir Alex Ferguson in throwing their support behind the manager. But the directors concluded there was no way back for Solskjær after the latest defeat and chose to act before Tuesday’s Champions League game at Villarreal. United responded to the Liverpool result by winning 3-0 at Tottenham but have since scrambled a late draw at Atalanta in the Champions League and been comprehensively beaten by Manchester City and a struggling Watford whose only previous home league victory came on the opening day against Aston Villa. The disastrous outing at Vicarage Road brought to 15 the number of goals conceded by United in their past five league games, and David de Gea described the performance as “embarrassing”. Solskjær was booed by United fans, some of whom also remonstrated with Bruno Fernandes, at full time. “I always have belief in myself,” Solskjær said. “Of course at the moment it’s a difficult time for us. I can trust every single one out there to give their all. The staff are fantastic, but the results are difficult. I believe we can turn this around. “Watford away from home, you need to give them a harder time than we did. They outfought us, we allowed them to put the ball in our box too easily. There are so many things that can go wrong in football and too many did in the first half.” United were 2-0 down by half-time but their misery was compounded by late goals from João Pedro and Emmanuel Dennis, prompting a furious reaction from behind De Gea’s goal. “I understand fans who follow the club through thick and thin,” Solskjær said. “We’ve had a hard time since Sir Alex left and the fans who’ve been with us have been unbelievable. The signings this summer raised expectations, we hoped to kick on and at the moment we can’t seem to find our form.” Jadon Sancho, Cristiano Ronaldo and Raphaël Varane were signed after United finished second last season and the club gave Solskjær a contract extension to 2024 with an option for an extra year. He is leaving with the club seventh, six points off the Champions League places. Solskjær said the first half at Watford was “the worst we’ve played” and told of the devastation in his dressing room. “The boys are in a terrible place in their heads now,” he said. “We have let ourselves down and the fans down. It’s hard to stand here and explain that but that’s football and we have to take the flak for it.” De Gea, who saved a twice-taken penalty from Ismaïla Sarr early on, could not hide his disappointment. “It was embarrassing, the way we played today,” he said. “The first half was very poor, it’s not acceptable for this club and the level of players that we have. It’s another nightmare. There’s been some difficulties but I don’t really know what to say. “I have been in difficult moments with this club but we are in a difficult situation. We don’t know what to do with the ball, we are conceding a lot of goals. It’s a horrible moment.”After the needle entered his right arm, the man raised his left fist in a brief salute. Surgical mask covering parts of his facial tattoos, he nodded to the nurse. A long ponytail cut a line through the blue and white letters covering his back: a patch, signifying membership of one of New Zealand’s largest and most infamous street gangs. Mark Pitman, leader of Black Power New Zealand, was getting vaccinated on national television. “I want to do it and I want the rest of our organisation around the country to know I’ve got it done,” Pitman told the camera. “I’m a leader. And I lead from example.” Pitman is one of a small but growing cohort of New Zealand gang leaders who have found themselves in the spotlight of the country’s vaccination rollout, as it aims to get shots in the arms of the most vulnerable and hardest to reach. About 8,000 New Zealanders are members of street gangs, the best-known of which are the red-branded Mongrel Mob and blue Black Power, two usually competing factions with chapters across the country. Some gang members are involved in criminal activity, while many others are no more criminal than the communities from which they come, says Dr Jarrod Gilbert, director of criminal justice at University of Canterbury, who researches and documents gangs. However, gangs have an intimidating reputation in New Zealand. Pitman was previously sentenced to three-and-half years in prison and had a gang pad seized under the proceeds of crime act for masterminding what prosecutors alleged was a million dollar-plus a year drug-selling operation. Now, in its pursuit of some of the world’s highest vaccination rates, New Zealand’s government and health officials have found themselves working with unusual bedfellows. Cabinet ministers are meeting with gang leaders to hash out a strategy – and some have even been granted essential worker status in the Covid response. As some of New Zealand’s most alienated, marginalised and distrustful communities, the gangs provide a microcosm of the challenges facing New Zealand’s Covid response and vaccine rollout. But some experts and leaders say the Covid cooperation also presents an opportunity – to re-examine how the gangs and government relate, and to confront some of the social problems that feed their existence. A history of distrust “I’ve been on the road since Friday last week,” says Harry Tam through a speaker phone intermittently cut out by GPS directions. The long-time affiliate of the Mongrel Mob, who has not been accused of involvement in organised crime, is behind the wheel again during this interview, reeling off destinations: “Went to Rotorua to talk to some of the mob leaders from the Bay of Plenty … Waihau Bay, to the East Cape chapter … Kawerau, working with the president of the Te Teko chapter of the Notorious Mongrel Mob to vaccinate his members and their families – we did 27 that day.” Tam, who got involved with the Mongrel Mob when he was a teenager, has kept a foot in two worlds: as well as maintaining honorary Mob membership, he works in social service provision and spent years as a senior policy adviser. For the last two months, much of his time has been dedicated to sketching a line back and forth across New Zealand, town to town, gang pad to gang pad, patched member to member. “We are trying to beat the casualties,” Tam says. But he says doing so involves trying to dismantle some of the distrust of government that has been bred over many years. “And of course, our people have good reason to be suspicious of the government, because many of them come from a background where government hasn’t been good to them.” Many of the country’s original gang members were raised in brutal circumstances as wards of the state. In the years since, families have often experienced multiple generations of abuse, family separation and poverty – interacting with the state primarily through the criminal justice system. Now, he says the government must learn from the Covid experience: neglecting communities like these can have repercussions through all of New Zealand. “There’s one hell of a lesson here to be learned. It’s amazing, governments have neglected this community for decades, and conveniently forgotten about it and then all of a sudden, Covid comes out, all of a sudden, they’re all worried that if this community won’t get vaccinated, they may infect us,” he says. “This community is kicked around like a political football at the whim of politicians, never paying any attention as to why these communities exist and why they behave in the way that they do. There’s no pro-social policies directed at them. The only policy is law enforcement, law enforcement and more law enforcement,” Tam says. ‘Gangs are often a petri dish’ Government has acknowledged that “Gangs are in our community everywhere,” says Māori development minister Willie Jackson. “It was a no-brainer to actually support some of their ideas in terms of getting them vaccinated.” It was Jackson who suggested to cabinet that he meet with the gang leaders – arguing that if they remained unvaccinated, the gangs and their networks around the country were not only at risk themselves, but putting others at risk too. The pathway forward, he said, had to be one of cooperation. “How do you get to them? Well, you’ve got to get to them with their own.” He says the strategy has worked. Last weekend, Jackson spent Saturday at his local marae (Māori meeting ground), vaccinating the local king cobra gang. “I’m not a huge great gang supporter or whatever. I’m a supporter of our community and other people.” “The gangs are often a petri dish: you see reflected in there the acute examples of whatever is happening in society,” say Gilbert. “If you can understand the gangs, you understand poverty, you understand intergenerational violence,” he says. “It’s no different now with the Covid response.” The latest examples of government dialogue with the gangs could inform other future programmes, he says. “The pragmatic moves here to address the Covid and vaccine issues within the gangs could just as easily be used to tackle the social problems that surround the gangs more generally.” A political risk But working with the gangs has risks – especially for politicians, who are acutely aware of the potential for blowback and negative headlines. Tam, as well as at least one Mongrel Mob president, was granted essential worker status by the government to do this work, a fact that immediately generated headlines and accusations. Former deputy prime minister Winston Peters accused him on national television of using the status to smuggle a Covid-positive woman out of lockdown – a false claim that Peters was forced to retract and apologise for. Gilbert says how the response to Tam illustrates the wider political challenges to the government of working with gang communities. “The government did take some highly pragmatic and – I would argue – very important moves to work with certain gang leaders to influence their communities. But of course it only took five minutes for that to be in the media before there were howls of protest,” he says. “This situation is of our own making, because for the longest time, we’ve talked about the gangs in wholly negative and quite sensationalist ways.” As minister, Jackson says those howls have been mostly silenced in the face of Covid. Pragmatism has won out. “You can’t run your political strategy or your political party based on what’s the next poll gonna be. You’ve got to run it based on principle.”Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers has blasted prime minister Scott Morrison for wanting to “embrace” the violent politics of anti-vaccine protests, accusing him of trying to divide the country for political gain. After mass “freedom” rallies held across the country on Saturday, Chalmers said Morrison’s failure to strongly condemn the violent threats seen in Victoria last week was a “dangerous game with dangerous consequences”. “What the prime minister is doing is he’s trying to divide us and he’s trying to diminish that collective effort and undermine all of the good and all of the progress that Australians have made together,” Chalmers told the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday. “He does that with this dangerous, dog-whistling doublespeak that we see from him. He does it by claiming credit for high vaccination rates without taking responsibility for the measures that are necessary to get those rates up. “And I think what’s especially troubling to mainstream Australia is the rest of us see the kind of violent politics that has emerged in the United States in the last couple of years and we want to reject it, and the prime minister seems to want to embrace those kind of violent views and violent threats. “If he wants to keep playing this dangerous game with dangerous consequences, then the country doesn’t just have an opportunity to throw him out of the election, they’ve got an obligation to do that.” Chalmers said he condemned “without reservation, without qualification” the threats being made in the anti-government protests, which have included calls for premiers to be hanged and protesters in Melbourne parading with gallows and nooses. But the broadside from Chalmers came as the employment minister, Stuart Robert, doubled down on remarks made by Morrison last week. Morrison’s comments were seen as siding with the protesters, saying governments should not be “telling Australians what to do”. “The Doherty modelling makes it clear – and it’s locked in place with the national plan – that at 80% we want freedoms to open up,” Robert told Sky News. “Let business determine their own risks and let’s get governments out of their lives.” While Morrison told reporters on Thursday he had “no tolerance” for violent protests, he also appeared to sympathise with their anti-government message, saying it was time for “Australians to take their lives back”. “Over the last couple of years, governments have been telling Australians what to do,” Morrison said. “Now there has been a need for that as we have gone through the pandemic, but the time is now to start rolling all of that back. “We now have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, we have one of the strongest economies to come through the pandemic and we have one of the lowest fatality rates from Covid in the world. “Businesses can make their own choices on the law but we aren’t about telling Australians what to do.” The issue of vaccine mandates is expected to overshadow the final sitting week of parliament for the year, with at least two government senators withholding their vote from government legislation over the issue. Morrison has said vaccine mandates are a state matter, despite backing the requirement in the aged care sector, and is resisting calls from his own MPs to remove a federal indemnity for the vaccines which they claim underpins the mandates. Clive Palmer’s United Australia party and One Nation are also tapping into the anti-vaccination movement, attending rallies in all capital cities and vowing to make the next election a referendum on “freedom”. The former Liberal MP and now UAP leader, Craig Kelly, told a Sydney protest on Saturday that Australia was now a “prison camp”. “On my watch, I am not going to stand by and let this happen and neither are you guys. We have got to protect our kids, that’s our first priority.”New videos of the missing tennis star Peng Shuai have been released by Chinese state media amid growing global pressure for Beijing to provide verifiable evidence of her whereabouts and safety. The latest footage, posted on Sunday by Hu Xijin, editor-in-chief of state newspaper the Global Times, appears to show the player being introduced at a youth tennis match in Beijing. Hu said on Twitter – a platform that is officially banned in China – that the footage was taken on Sunday, though this claim could not be verified. A Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) spokesperson said the latest footage was “insufficient” and still did not address the association’s concerns about her wellbeing. Responding to earlier footage, Steve Simon, the chair and CEO of the WTA, said: “While it is positive to see her, it remains unclear if she is free and able to make decisions and take actions on her own, without coercion or external interference. “This video alone is insufficient. As I have stated from the beginning, I remain concerned about Peng Shuai’s health and safety and that the allegation of sexual assault is being censored and swept under the rug. I have been clear about what needs to happen and our relationship with China is at a crossroads.” A further clip of Peng signing tennis balls for children as “a way of inspiring more kids to play tennis” emerged from other state media reporters later on Sunday. It follows previous footage released by Hu showing the 35-year-old eating at a Beijing restaurant, purportedly on Saturday night. Sunday’s footage appears to have done nothing to assuage concerns from sports authorities and western leaders who say the videos cannot be verified and fail to prove she is safe and well. It followed an announcement on Saturday by the editor of a party newspaper on Twitter, which can’t be seen by most internet users in China, that the Olympian would “show up in public” soon. Peng, a former doubles world No 1, has not been seen or heard from publicly since she accused former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli, who is now in his 70s, on 2 November of sexual assault. Britain’s Foreign Office has said it was “extremely concerned” and urged China to provide “verifiable evidence of her safety and whereabouts”. It said in a statement: “Everyone should be allowed to speak out without fear of repercussions. All reports of sexual assault, anywhere in the world, should be investigated.” The White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Friday that president Joe Biden’s administration wanted China to “provide independent, verifiable proof” of Peng’s whereabouts and expressed “deep concern” about the former top-ranked doubles player. The United Nations has also insisted on a fully transparent investigation into the claims made by Peng against Zhang – the first time China’s #MeToo movement has touched the highest echelons of the country’s Communist party. “It would be important to have proof of her whereabouts and wellbeing,” Liz Throssell, a spokesperson for the UN Human Rights Office, told reporters in Geneva. “We are calling for an investigation with full transparency into her allegation of sexual assault.” Hu wrote in English on Twitter that the restaurant video shows “Peng Shuai was having dinner with her coach and friends in a restaurant. The video content clearly shows they are shot on Saturday Beijing time”. The conversation revolved around “tennis matches” and a man sitting with Peng and two other women says “tomorrow is November 20th”. But one of the women quickly interrupts him to say “It is the 21st”, or Sunday. The chat appears to be staged. It was filmed in the evening hours with a mobile phone. Peng appears relaxed and attentive in the footage. Peng has not been seen publicly since alleging earlier this month that Zhang had “forced” her into sex during an on-off relationship spanning several years. The claims, made on Chinese social media site Weibo, were quickly deleted from the platform. On Friday, photos of a smiling Peng emerged on a Chinese state-affiliated Twitter account, but their authenticity also could not be verified. The four undated photographs were posted by the Twitter account @shen_shiwei, labelled “Chinese state-affiliated media” by the social network. After the pictures emerged, Hu tweeted in English: “In the past few days, she stayed in her own home freely and she didn’t want to be disturbed. She will show up in public and participate in some activities soon.” Earlier this week, state-run CGTN published a screenshot on Twitter of what it said was an email written by Peng to the WTA, which has threatened to end lucrative contracts with China unless it gets word that Peng is safe and well. In it, Peng claims her earlier accusations are “not true” and that she is “resting at home and everything is fine”. But doubts were flagged about the awkward language and the cursor visible in the screenshot. China has repeatedly refused to comment on the case. Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this reportFour children have died in a fire that tore through a home in Melbourne’s south-west, in the early hours of Sunday morning. As investigators from the Victorian arson squad dug through the remains of the home on Mantello Drive in Werribee on Sunday, police confirmed a 10-year-old and three-year-old boy, and a six-year-old and one-year-old girl had died in the fire. Emergency services were called to the fire at about 1am on Sunday. Despite about 40 firefighters attending the scene, crews described feeling “helpless” as they arrived, with Country Fire Authority official Damien Molloy telling reporters that by the time help arrived the blaze was “very well alight”. “Fire had already broken through the roof and was already coming out the front door,” he said. “[It was] likely to be a recovery situation from the outset.” Molloy told reporters at the scene that crews were made aware that there were likely to be people trapped inside the home while en route to the scene. While it “upped the ante”, the collapse of parts of the roof meant it was unsafe to enter the home. “With the distress of the parents and the eight year old, it was very difficult to get accurate information early on to be able to focus our search areas initially, externally, and then internally,” he said. Witnesses reported neighbours attempting to help the family to free the children from the home, but Molloy said the extent of the blaze meant it was beyond the capacity of bystanders to assist. “It was well beyond anything that a neighbour would be able to assist in without putting themselves in serious danger,” he said. CFA commander David Clancy said the heat from the blaze meant firefighters were unable to enter the house. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Firefighters had a fairly arduous task to undertake the fire fight and were unable to conduct an internal attack due to the heat of the fire,” he said. One firefighter was taken by ambulance to hospital after experiencing chest pains, but Molloy said he believed the man had recovered. Police said that the home was occupied by a family, and that the parents and another eight-year-old boy had managed to escape the fire. They were in hospital with non life-threatening injuries. Detective senior sergeant Ashley Ryan told reporters that officers from the arson and explosives squad were conducting investigations at the scene, but did not comment on what may have caused the fire. “It’s very early stages at the moment,” he said. “It’s a terrible set of circumstances, very difficult for members of the family, and our hearts go out to them. “But also very distressing for members of Victoria police and the emergency services, given the circumstances.” The three survivors from the fire are all in hospital. Police said the man had serious smoke-related injuries while the woman is being treated for smoke inhalation. The eight-year-old boy has been taken to hospital with minor injuries.Tim Paine says he always knew the texting scandal that cost him the Australian Test captaincy would eventually be made public, revealing media had approached him about it “numerous times” over the past three years. His comments come as former Cricket Australia board members on Sunday criticised the current administration over its handling of the saga, with then-chairman David Peever accusing it of “abandoning” Payne via a “knee-jerk reaction” and former director Mark Taylor defending the decision to keep the investigation “in house”. Paine sent Australia’s Ashes preparations into chaos on Friday afternoon when, less than three weeks before the start of the series against England, he stood down over explicit text messages and a graphic image sent to a female former Cricket Tasmania employee in 2017. At the press conference in Hobart, the 36-year-old said he “deeply regretted” his actions and, although an integrity unit investigation in 2018 cleared him of any breach of Cricket Australia’s code of conduct, he had become aware the private exchange was about to be released. Two days later, in an extensive and personal interview alongside his wife Bonnie for News Corp, Paine said he “absolutely” believed the controversy was a ticking time bomb, based on previous attempts to have it published. “I thought the issue was dealt with, but it always popped up around a big series, or at the start of the cricket season,” Paine said on Sunday. “Over the last three years, there have been numerous times where media agencies have put to us that they had evidence, yet they never chose to write it. As to why, I’m not sure, but nobody else had chosen to write the story, but I knew it was going to come out at some point, as much as I didn’t want it to.” Paine remains adamant the texts were fully consensual and said they did not make him reluctant to take up the Test captaincy in March 2018. He says he was not aware they were an issue until May 2018, when then-Cricket Tasmania chief executive Nick Cummins rang to ask him about them. “Because it was a consensual exchange of messages months beforehand, I didn’t think it was anything to consider,” Paine said. “I never thought for a moment that it would become an issue. I was just excited and honoured to be asked.” Paine’s admissions pose further questions about why CA management did not further scrutinise the investigation given it occurred only a couple of months after appointing him to replace Steve Smith in the fallout of the ball-tampering scandal during Australia’s infamous South Africa tour. On Saturday CA chairman Richard Freudenstein and chief executive Nick Hockley blamed previous administrators for allowing Paine to remain as skipper, and said he should have been stood down when he was first investigated. “I can’t talk about the 2018 decision, I wasn’t there,” Freudenstein said. “But I am saying, based on the facts as they are, today the board of Cricket Australia would not have made that decision. “I acknowledge the decision clearly sent the wrong message that this behaviour is acceptable and without serious consequences. The role of Australian cricket captain must be held to the highest standards.” But Peever on Sunday attacked CA for trying to claim the moral high ground, describing Paine as “an incredible servant of the game” and accusing the governing body of trying to “make up your own rules as you go”. “Cricket Australia’s decision seems knee jerk and unfortunately shows double standards. The issue has been doing the rounds in cricket circles for some years now,” Peever said in a statement to News Corp. “The current chairman has been on the board for two years and it is implausible he didn’t know about it. If he and his board felt so strongly about it, why wait until now to act?” Freudenstein said he considered the case closed when he joined CA’s board in 2019 in his explanation as to why action on Paine’s behaviour was not taken earlier, adding that background checks would be conducted on potential captaincy successors, with pace-bowling spearhead and vice-captain Pat Cummins favoured to take on the role and Smith a possible alternative. Taylor, who was a member of the CA board for 13 years before resigning in late 2018 as one of the final casualties of the ball-tampering saga, agreed Paine’s call to stand down but defended the decision not to make the investigation public in 2018. “A decision was taken by the integrity unit and supported by the board to keep this in house,” Taylor told the Nine Network. “There’s obviously been a lot of conjecture about the rights and wrongs of that. That decision was made not just on what is best for cricket, but what was best for Tim Paine, Bonnie Paine and also the woman involved.” Paine, a wicket-keeper batsman who resurrected his Test career against England in late 2017, remains available for Ashes selection and on Sunday indicated his desire to end his Test career on the “ultimate high” of an Australian series defence at home. He said national team coach Justin Langer had encouraged him to continue as captain, but reiterated he felt a responsibility to stand down. “JL told me he’s devastated,” he said. “He was pretty firm that he wanted me to continue as captain, and again, once I explained to him the reasons that I thought resigning was the best thing to do, he was with me all the way. “I’ve got messages from all my teammates saying they’ve got my back, and that we all make mistakes, and we move on.”Police have continued their search on the New South Wales mid-north coast where William Tyrrell disappeared seven years ago, despite bad weather conditions. For almost a week, a team of officers have combed through three locations near the home of Tyrrell’s foster grandmother in the small town of Kendall where he was last seen in September 2014. The search was resumed on the back of coronial orders, and officers have also seized a car that previously belonged to the now deceased foster grandmother. It continues to undergo forensic examination expected to take weeks. On Sunday detectives discovered a piece of fabric near a creek bed at the centre of the search efforts, which will also be taken for forensic testing. It followed the discovery of another piece of blue fabric on Friday which has also been sent for testing. Police were digging down through about half-a-foot of soil, based on recommendations from experts assisting officers with the search. Police have previously confirmed they are focused on one person of interest as part of the investigation. Dozens of officers are taking part in the search, which has been hampered by continued wet weather. The Bureau of Meteorology issued a severe thunderstorms warning for the mid-north coast on Sunday, as well as a warning about the potential for flash flooding. The weather saw tarpaulins and tents set up by the search team disturbed over the weekend. The search for Tyrrell has focused on three areas, including the former home of Tyrrell’s foster grandmother where he was last seen, a patch of bushland about a kilometre away, and a nearby creek on private land which police have pumped water from. Police have used earth moving machines and a large electric sifter during their search.Shirin has paid heavily for both Afghanistan’s conflict, and its abrupt end in Taliban victory. Three years ago her husband lost his leg when a roadside bomb hit his bus. Then in the summer the militants’ victory brought peace to her corner of Helmand, but a halt to the foreign aid funds that paid her salary as a hospital cleaner and kept the family afloat. They fell behind on rent, were evicted from their home and began running out of food. Three weeks ago, worn down by cold, hunger and disruption, Mohammad Omar died from wounds that had never fully healed, leaving her a single mother to their four children. “He died because of a lack of money. No one would even give us a loan,” said Shirin, 50. “We are suffering too much, but if we just got our salaries, everything would be solved.” But even when she wasn’t being paid, she kept coming to the Gereshk district hospital to work at the maternity unit. “We are needed here,” she said, as a newborn girl was rushed off for oxygen and she prepared to move the mother into a recovery room and sterilise her bed for the next patient. The wards need a cleaner in order to remain as safe as possible for new mothers, even in a hospital starved of cash and slowly grinding to a halt, like this one. Last month the operating theatre had to shut down, because there was no money for fuel for the generator – there is no grid power in this rural corner of Helmand near former Camp Bastion – or any gas to sterilise their equipment. So women whose lives depended on having a caesarean, a car accident victim who needed open chest surgery, and people with inflamed appendixes all had to be sent off in taxis with a prayer that they would survive the hour’s drive to Lashkar Gah, where the Boost hospital supported by charity Médecins Sans Frontières still had power and supplies. The roads may have been clear of the bombs and gunfights that prevented so many people in Helmand’s villages from reaching medical care, but the hospitals and clinics were no longer functioning properly. “I could tell you about many cases,” said surgeon Karim Walid. “There was a woman who needed a caesarean because of the baby’s position. She had no money so we went round collecting a few thousand Afghanis for a car to take her to Boost.” The lab ran out of test equipment, for diseases from malaria to HIV, for blood counts or blood sugar levels. “All we had left were pregnancy and TB tests,” said lab manager Bashir Ahmad Majar. Eventually, even gloves ran out for midwives on the labour ward. “We asked those who could afford them to buy their own,” said Malalai, a midwife who worked with Shirin. For the others, the hospital went into debt. “I get calls every day from the shopkeepers, asking me why aren’t you giving us the money you owe us,” said Haji Mohammad Barak, director of the Gereshk hospital until early November, now provincial manager for a healthcare programme. Fortunately, they had managed to patch up a hole in the inpatient ward roof, made by an air strike in the last days of fighting, before money totally ran out, he said. The bomb miraculously landed just between the five beds lining the walls of the ward, without causing any serious injuries. The head of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, visited Kabul in September and warned the whole healthcare system was on the brink of collapse, prompting the UN to arrange payment of one month’s salaries. The operating theatre in Gereshk has reopened, the lab is restocked and medical staff say they have been promised another three months of pay. But these are temporary solutions that will run out in the middle of Afghanistan’s bitter winter. “We need something permanent; we can’t manage just getting a few months’ salary then everything goes again,” said the midwife, Malalai, who is the family’s main breadwinner. “Don’t leave us here without hope.” Western governments that had supported the health and education sectors and were stunned in August by the unexpectedly rapid victory of a group they had sanctioned as terrorists, cut off all funds without making plans to support schools and hospitals that had been built to rely on overseas aid. They worried about giving legitimacy to a government that has brought in sweeping restrictions on women’s rights to work and study, and been linked to other human rights abuses, including targeted killings and mass displacements. But it is not senior Taliban officials who are paying the price for the freeze on funds. “Don’t make the mistake of thinking that I will suffer from sanctions,” said one senior Taliban official in Kabul. “I will always get my salary, my meals, and money to keep my office warm.” It is the lives of ordinary Afghans that are on the line. Tedros warned that the abrupt halt in international funding had left health providers to make terrible decisions about “who to save and who to let die”. The reality in Gereshk was even worse. With the hospital barely functioning, they could only tell patients in serious need to head to the Boost hospital. It was the only fully functioning medical centre for at least 1.5 million people in the province, and unofficially for hundreds of thousands more in neighbouring provinces. On some days more than 700 patients crammed into an emergency room designed for little more than half that number. “The health system of Afghanistan was very donor dependent, and the donors withdrew their support,” said Emmerson Gono, project coordinator for MSF in Helmand. The implications of that cut-off are tragic, and felt immediately. “We are getting overwhelmed with the workload, people are coming from all over the province and even other provinces,” he said. “We go far beyond our capacity, because we will not turn away someone we see is critically ill.” It is perhaps hard to picture a healthcare system “in collapse”, but you can see the human cost of the funding cuts at Boost hospital, in the fragile bodies of children racked with disease and malnutrition, or being wheeled to the morgue. On a bright, crisp morning last week, hospital orderlies wrapped the small body of a six-year-old boy to take away. He had just lost a battle with bacterial meningitis, which he should have survived. “We gave him a very strong antibiotic, but it was too late,” said the lead Afghan doctor on the ward, whom MSF asked not to be named. The clinic in Garmsir district where ther boy first went for help had no capacity to test his blood, mistook his illness for poisoning and tried to treat him for that. Outside, a 12-year-old diabetes patient, paralysed from the waist down, was soaking up the sun as he slowly recovered from bed sores that had reached his bones and left him in the intensive care unit. Zabihullah’s family is caught in a cycle of poverty and poor healthcare, said nurse Alyssa Tianna Ranger. The family have to travel to Lashkar Gah to get insulin for his treatment, because no local clinics can provide it and because the family struggle to feed him well, and manage his blood sugar, sores develop easily and rapidly. “It is expensive for our family to get here,” said his mother, Marzia, as her son smiled despite his pain. “We were already poor before his diagnosis three years ago. Now things are worse, but we have no other choice.” Like many of the poorest, they have been hit with multiple crises. Taliban control sent the economy into freefall: it contracted by at least a third. The government is not paying wages, internationally funded jobs have vanished, and food prices have soared. The impact is felt particularly on the badly overcrowded malnutrition wards, where the number of painfully skeletal children has soared. Autumn usually brings some respite because dehydration is worse in the summer, heat, but not this year. Children who get little nutritious food are extremely vulnerable when other diseases – stomach problems, respiratory illnesses – ravage their small bodies and leave them unable to eat. Nazdana came here in a desperate effort to keep three-year-old Khalida alive, after clinics in her home village of Yakhchal couldn’t stop the vomiting that was wasting her child away. To get the money to travel, she had weigh up the value of two daughters’ lives, and make a betrothal contract for the girl’s five-year old sister. The wedding won’t be for 10 years, but Nazdana got a 15,000 Pakistani rupee (£63) advance on the 600,000 rupee dowry payment, enough for the journey. “I spent some of the money to come here the very next day,” she said. In a working health system, Khalida should eventually be discharged to the care of local clinics which hand out feeding supplements like calorie-rich “plumpy nut”. Without these operating, some children are trapped in a cycle of malnutrition that sees them returning to the ward again and again. As the international community weighs up whether to commit to long-term funding for the healthcare system again, they are likely to look with particular concern at the decision to put senior Taliban into all administrative positions overseeing clinics and hospitals. Most were fighters just a few months ago, and Gereshk district health commissioner Mohammad Nasim admits that he has no background or expertise in the sector. “It is a decision of the Islamic emirate, I don’t know why they chose me for this position,” he said, using the group’s name for itself. “It is time for me to serve the people.” But problems were also reported with the officials they had replaced; several healthcare sources said they found the new Taliban director for the province, Ahmad Alghazi, easier to work with and less corrupt than his predecessor under the Republic government. He pledged in an interview that female medical staff would remain in their roles, and female patients would be able to access healthcare without a guardian, and that polio vaccination campaigns – which the Taliban have sometimes opposed in the past – would continue. But he also warned the west against throwing away goodwill by cutting off the hospitals in their hour of need. “The international community should prioritise the needs of poor people, who have seen too many problems,” he said. “This is a good chance, because there is no corruption now, to support the health sector. It won’t be there for ever.” From the Boost hospital director who works below him, there was a simple plea to donors to put Afghan patients’ lives ahead of their dispute with the new government. “I hope the international community won’t mix health and human rights up with political issues,” said Faizullah Mohammadi. “We strongly need your support, and as a fellow human being, I ask that you don’t leave Afghanistan alone in this disaster.”Terrence Crawford stopped Shawn Porter in the 10th round by technical knockout Saturday night in one of the most anticipated bouts of the year. Crawford (38-0) retained his WBO welterweight title and extended his streak of stoppages to nine in front of a sold-out crowd of 11,568 at the Mandalay Bay. Crawford knocked down Porter early in the 10th round with a left uppercut and then delivered an exclamation point with a devastating right hook to the temple, followed by a left hook to the face. Porter’s trainer and father, Kenny, threw in the towel and called for referee Celestino Ruiz to stop the fight. Porter stunned reporters by announcing his retirement from boxing at his post-fight press conference. “I know I caught him with a good uppercut and then when I caught him with another left hook clean in his face that he was real hurt and his dad did the right thing by stopping it because I was coming with a vengeance,” Crawford said. “I didn’t really want to fight him. We always said we would fight each other when the time was right and I guess the time was right for this fight to happen.” Crawford was ahead on all three of the judges’ scorecards at the time of the stoppage. Dave Moretti and Steve Weisfeld had Crawford leading 86-85, while Max De Luca had him ahead 87-84. (The Guardian had it 86-85 to Crawford.) Porter (31-4-1), who has risen to become a legitimate top-five welterweight, and was easily the best opponent of Crawford’s career, displayed relentless aggression in the early rounds. Crawford’s switch-hitting flex didn’t necessarily work when he turned to southpaw early in the fight, as Porter adjusted accordingly and connected often. “Shawn Porter is a slick fighter. He was doing some things in there and made me think,” Crawford said. “I can’t say nothing bad about him.” After playing defense and smiling more than punching, Crawford finally showed signs of offense in the sixth round and came alive in the ninth and 10th rounds – the final two rounds, as it turned out, of Porter’s career. “I’m prepared to retire,” Porter said. “I was prepared to announce my retirement tonight – win, lose or draw. Even if it was a draw, we had a date. They were telling us we were going to have to do it again. I was not going to do it again. I am announcing my retirement right now.” On the undercard, Esquiva Falcao (29-0) beat Patrice Volny (16-1) by way of a technical decision at 2:18 of the sixth round, after the fight was stopped because of an inadvertent head butt. Janibek Alimkhanuly (11-0) remained undefeated with an eighth-round TKO over Hassan N’Dam (38-6). Adam Lopez (15-3) and Adan Ochoa (12-2) fought to a no-decision. The bout was stopped due to a cut to Ochoa caused by a headbutt. Karlos Balderas (11-1) scored his second straight KO win with a fourth-round TKO over Julio Cortez (15-4). In his pro debut, Tiger Johnson had a fourth-round TKO over Antonius Grable (3-2-1).Home secretaries from both main parties have scapegoated asylum seekers in attempts to endear themselves to voters in recent decades. But none with the fervour of Priti Patel, who in her two-year tenure at the Home Office has announced a series of initiatives to put people off seeking asylum in the UK. Wave machines in the Channel, flying asylum seekers to inhospitable islands thousands of miles away to be processed, criminalising those who rescue people drowning at sea: all are recent measures proposed by the home secretary regardless of their compatibility with international law and Britain’s moral obligations. Patel gives the impression that there is an escalating crisis in terms of the numbers of people arriving in the UK and trying to illegitimately claim refuge. This is not true. There is absolutely a crisis for asylum seekers trying to reach British shores by making the treacherous Channel crossing in small boats and dinghies. The British government should be doing all it can to clamp down on the people traffickers making a fortune by charging desperate people to attempt the crossing. But the number of people coming to the UK to claim asylum fell by 4% last year and stands at less than half what it was in the early 2000s. Britain receives a fraction of the asylum applications of Germany and France and fewer per resident than the EU average. Low-income countries host nine out of 10 displaced people worldwide. What has happened is that the flow of people has been made more visible by the pandemic; the number reaching the UK by air has dropped steeply, which has pushed people to attempt the Channel crossing. Patel has wrongly claimed that 70% of those arriving on small boats are “not genuine asylum seekers”, but data shows that two-thirds have been granted refugee status. No system will be immune to people without a legitimate claim attempting to seek asylum, but the best approach is to process applicants quickly and fairly and return those for whom there is genuinely no risk to their home countries. Instead, Patel has sought to over-egg the idea that Britain faces an unsustainable crisis of people arriving to try to claim asylum in bad faith and that the best way of reducing Channel crossings, or any attempt to reach the UK to claim asylum, is to make Britain as inhospitable as possible for those fleeing their homes, often in fear for their lives. This is surely why the Home Office refuses to release its research on why people travel to the UK to claim asylum, as we report. Thanks to 30 years of anti-asylum measures taken by successive governments, Britain is already an overwhelmingly hostile place for asylum seekers. Those fleeing persecution and torture are forced to subsist on less than £5.50 a day – less than in France – and are not allowed to work while their claims are being processed, unlike in many other countries, which makes them vulnerable to exploitation by criminals. They are often housed in damp, dirty and vermin-infested conditions or disused army barracks. Many are trapped in this limbo for years thanks to long delays in the system. Unaccompanied and traumatised children are put up in hotels in Kent with virtually no adult care or supervision; some fall prey to county lines grooming gangs and traffickers. Asylum seekers still try to reach the UK in modest numbers, some because they have family here, others because they already speak English. Making the material conditions once they get here even worse is unlikely to put off people fleeing conflict who are desperate to reach somewhere where they can build a new life. That has not stopped Patel putting new measures to parliament in the nationality and borders bill. They include the forcible return of boats to France, removing the £38 a week for those who arrive by any other route other than a government settlement scheme, housing asylum seekers in large reception centres, scrapping the appeals system, despite the Home Office’s dire track record on decision-making and offshoring the processing of asylum seekers in the same way that Australia has done, to international condemnation. Many of these measures break international maritime law and the 1951 refugee convention and would be subject to legal challenge. Patel just last week claimed to be negotiating with Albania regarding the offshoring and processing of asylum seekers who are Britain’s responsibility; Albanian government officials have dismissed this as “fake news”. It is not only Britain, of course. We live in a world where rich nations increasingly shun their obligations for political reasons, even as climate change will boost irregular migrations and levels of abject poverty are worsened through cuts to international aid. Rather than take a co-operative approach, the EU has left poorer countries on Europe’s borders to deal with far larger flows of people than the UK has ever seen. It has struck deals with unsavoury despots in Turkey and failed states such as Libya to keep people away from Europe’s shores in contravention of their human rights. The product of this approach is evident in the tragedy unfolding on Poland’s border with Belarus, where desperate Syrians are freezing to death as a result of being used as pawns in the dispute between Belarus and the EU. The world urgently needs renewed moral leadership on asylum and refuge of the sort that led to the creation of the 1951 convention. But we cannot expect it from Priti Patel, who is more interested in using asylum seekers as pawns in the government’s culture war and is thus leading the UK in the charge to the bottom.Tapa Roja Monastrell, Yecla, Spain 2019 (£7, Marks &amp; Spencer) Of the big three European producers, France and Italy usually produce the most wine each year. 2021 has been a different story, however. According to figures released earlier this month by the international wine research body the OIV, a year of extreme weather events including unseasonal frost and record high summer temperatures saw wine production drop dramatically across the continent. The weather gods were particularly unkind to France, where output fell by almost a third on the previous vintage. That means Spain, which itself experienced a significant but lesser drop of 14%, and which is still some way behind Italy, is currently Europe’s second-largest wine producer. Similar movement is afoot if we turn from quantity to quality: over the past decade, Spanish wine has become so much more exciting and diverse. It’s now a genuine challenger on both scores to France and Italy, while still providing some of the continent’s best-value red wines, such as this spice-edged plummy number from the southeastern Spanish DO, Yecla. Baldovar 923 Cañada Paris Blanco, Valencia, Spain 2018 (£19.95, stroudwine.com) One of the more exciting recent developments in Spanish wine is the way that producers in what were once considered lesser, out-of-the way regions have embraced various neglected and often very obscure local grape varieties. This is a big change on what was happening in the years just before and after the millennium, when big name “international” varieties such as cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay and syrah, or the big Spanish hitter, tempranillo, were dominating new vineyard plantings. Baldovar 923 Cañada Paris Blanco is an absolute archetype of new-wave Spanish white: it’s made from a grape variety exclusive to southeastern Spain, and rarely found on labels, and which most guides still deride as easy to grow, but not very interesting to drink. Grown at high altitudes (around 1,000m) above sea level, using organic methods, and made by a dedicated, low-production winemaker, using sensitive, low-intervention techniques, it produces something very lovely indeed: all gently flowing waves of stony minerals, white fleshy fruit and a squeeze of lemony citrus. La Petite Agnès, Priorat, Spain 2019 (£14.99, Waitrose) For all the strides made by new-wave winemakers in remote, often very high-altitude vineyards from Valencia to the Gredos mountains around Madrid, to Ribeira Sacra in the northwestern province of Galicia, there is still plenty of fun to be had exploring Spain’s more established names and more familiar grape varieties. Certainly, two regions that were big players in Spain’s first wave of post-Franco vinous creativity in the 1980s and 1990s, Priorat and Ribera del Duero, seem to be having a productive second wind at the moment, as producers learn to tame the once popular, but now rather unfashionable excesses (of alcohol, oak and sheer bruising power) that had threatened to overwhelm their red wines. There’s a lovely balance for example in Waitrose’s introduction to the rocky Catalan region of Priorat, with a sensation of freshness underscoring the dense brambly fruit in this blend of garnacha and samso (aka carignan). Over on the high plateau of Castilla y Leon’s Ribera del Duero, meanwhile, the dark finger-stainingly vivid mulberry juiciness of the tempranillo in Quinta Milu Roble 2020 (£16.50, thesourcingtable.com) is an unalloyed joy to drink. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachWhile the common focus on MPs’ second jobs is the vast amounts of money paid, there is the other consideration of the time spent away from their primary duties (“The only people MPs should be hustling for are their constituents”, Andrew Rawnsley, Comment). During my working life, my employers had the old-fashioned idea that, in order to be paid, I had to turn up and do work to their benefit. If MPs are working up to 30 hours a month at a second job, how much does that eat into their working week? Is an MP’s job so undemanding that they can fit in the extra hours? If they contend that the work is in addition to their parliamentary commitments, do they contravene the working time directive? Do you want to be represented by an MP who is exhausted? Rawnsley states that the public do not mind MPs working as doctors, the argument being that they are kept abreast of NHS matters from the inside. If working in a casualty department allows sufficient time to wander around inquiring into the state of services generally, I suggest all the talk of NHS crisis is exaggerated. In the time it takes to earn a day’s pay in a hospital, they could visit several health service premises in their constituency and use their expertise to ask challenging questions. The only way to prevent all this is to pay them a proper salary, elect by proportional representation to eliminate ultra-safe seats and ban all second jobs. Nick Crook Hanham, Bristol Talking about my generation Catherine Bennett’s article superbly demonstrated the absurdity of labelling generations in a broad-brush way and then treating them accordingly (“If Adam Boulton has to slip quietly away at 62, how long before they come for you too?”, Comment). However, that did not stop me wondering to what named age tranche I belong. Google informs me that, having been born during the war, I am one of the “silent generation”. It is true that, as the grim reaper takes his toll, more of us are inevitably falling silent. However, I recently entered my 80th year and I find that it’s really weird being the same age as old people. But your publication of this letter proves that we are not all silent just yet awhile. Dick Spall Cavendish, Suffolk A convenient truth I was delighted to see our local repurposed loo occupy prime position in your article (“Skip to the loo? Easier said than done as Britain loses hundreds of public toilets”, News). The Theatre of Small Convenience has a high profile in Malvern where we welcome many visitors every year. It takes its place in a theatre-loving community; for those who worry about being caught short, there is a real public convenience immediately opposite. Suzi Macintyre Hereford Just another freeport freeload I fear that the new freeport initiative (“Low taxes and levelling up: the great freeport experiment comes to Teesside”, Business) will be yet another familiar round of subsidies, low rates and rents offers for industry plus cheap power to turn the wheels. Teesside and Hartlepool, where I was born and brought up, need real, guaranteed jobs that are unionised and protected from the excesses of zero-hours contracts. Otherwise, it’s a freeport freeload that expires when the subsidies run out. Jonathan Hauxwell Crosshills, North Yorkshire A flare for communication I understand that David Mitchell is put out by the migration to Digital Voice (“It’s good to talk, unless you’re a BT customer”, the New Review). Not least, he has probably had to upgrade his telephonic instrument from the candlestick device he may be accustomed to using to something more in keeping with the 21st century. However, I must point out that he speaks from the viewpoint and mindset of what many of us non-metropolitans identify as “a resident of that London”. Here in rural south-west Scotland, we can only dream of effective broadband. Unlike Mr Mitchell, we will benefit from Digital Voice when this is rolled out (possibly in four years’ time). By default, instead of the 2Mbps we currently “enjoy”, as a team of trained snails inch their way along the copper phone line, it will deliver modern broadband speeds. He has a point about the loss of a back-up voice channel. Since we have no reliable mobile network signal, the removal of the copper cable may have a more significant downside in these parts, but I am looking at buying in a stock of emergency flares to cover this eventuality. Has Mitchell considered this option? Jo Lynch Stoneykirk, Dumfries and Galloway Sewage: the big picture I agree entirely with Tim Adams’s “Swimming in sewage” article (the New Review). However, Southern Water is not the only culprit; the system under which it has to operate is absurd. • The legal framework is flawed. The water company is not allowed to refuse connection to a development passed with planning permission, while the council is strongly discouraged to refuse planning permission on the grounds of lack of sewerage capacity. • Licensed capacity is based entirely on dry weather conditions. Capacity problems and discharges regularly occur due to wet weather. Water company contracts permit virtually unlimited storm discharges during wet weather. • For a decade, water companies have been self-regulating with virtually no oversight of daily activities by the Environment Agency. The whole system is clearly unfit for purpose and can only be rectified by overhaul at government level. Roy Seabrook Nutbourne, Chichester, West Sussex Ever-boozy Brits “Tipsy at 30,000ft? It’s the British way” (Focus): it was ever thus. Killing time in 1984 at a busy Washington airport. Sitting in an all but deserted bar a couple of hours before the flight home. A customer came in and commented on how quiet it was. “Not for long,” replied the barmaid wearily. “The Brits are due in soon.” Rod Evans Charlbury, OxfordshireBrook’s, 6 Bradford Road, Brighouse, West Yorkshire HD6 1RW (01484 715284). Small plates £7.50-£10, large plates £16.50-£25, desserts £6.50-£7, wine from £21 My name is Jay Rayner and I am powerless in the face of good bread. I am especially powerless in the face of the treacle and malt bread with a whipped peak of Marmite butter, served to me at Brook’s, a startlingly good modern brasserie opposite the civic hall in Brighouse, West Yorkshire. It arrives oven hot and shaped as a tall, pert muffin. The top is glazed to a shine with a slick of sticky treacle. I tear at it, so that it puffs warm, sweet-savoury gusts of come-hither hot air. The texture seems open until I chew and it becomes satisfyingly cakey. When spread lavishly with the butter, it reminds me of the dark slices of Soreen paved with salted Anchor, eaten on winter afternoons when I was a kid. Only this malt loaf has grown up a bit. It is Soreen’s older brother, the more sophisticated one who has seen things. Now I’m faced by a conundrum, one known well to those with what we like to call a “healthy appetite”. The quality of this £3.50 bread course, the very obvious attention to detail and the Stanley knife-sharp execution, suggest the food to come could be very good indeed. Which means I must leave room for it. But look: some of the bread remains. And I am but a man; a mess of human frailties and urges. What am I supposed to do? I must eventually ask our waiter to remove the plate, unfinished. I wave it off like a parent sending their most beloved child abroad for their own good. Full disclosure: booking Brook’s was a punt. I had to be in Leeds. It was a perfect opportunity to pick up a review in the city. If only it were that simple. Very new readers start here: the UK recently introduced a post-Brexit immigration and employment policy which told the tens of thousands of EU nationals who made up a significant vertebra or two in the very backbone of the hospitality industry, that they were no longer welcome here. Many of them took the hint and went elsewhere. And if you do not like your restaurant reviews served with a massive eye-roll of political comment, do not blame me. Blame those who voted for this madness. Of course, there are also Covid issues and salary issues. But the fact is, a significant slab of the workforce has simply left. As a result, restaurants have shortened their working hours. Every place I considered worth reviewing in Leeds was not open for lunch. I cast my net wider and, courtesy of Amanda Wragg, who writes for the Yorkshire Post (and is one half of the duo behind the brilliant Yorkshire restaurant blog Squidbeak), found my way to Brook’s. In late 2019, Darrell and Petra Brook retired after 30 years of noble service to the town. Lauren Midgley and Greg Foggo took over. They kept the name, gave the space a clean, modern makeover in shades of ultramarine, and installed in the kitchen a chef named Dan Maxwell, whom they had met while working together at the Gray Ox in Hartshead. You may not know Maxwell’s name. You should. His lunchtime menu is a mixture of small plates priced at a tenner or less, and large plates which barely nudge into the teens. It reads a little restlessly, but makes total sense on the plate. The flavours are reliably big and self-assured. In a few places the cooking nods towards the Middle East. There is, for example, a duck egg, breaded and deep fried so that when you cut into it, the sunrise of a yolk leaks across a punchy mess of baba ghanoush. Rather than a purée for those short on teeth, the roasted aubergine still has bite and texture, given extra crunch by the addition of honey cashews and salty discs of sliced green olive. Some may take exception to the use of the word tagine in the title of a seafood dish, heavy with the waft of cinnamon, and built upon harissa-spiced chickpeas, mussels, smoked almonds, samphire and one fat prawn. As ever, tangles over nomenclature are trumped by the punch and poise of the cooking. Slices of spiced duck breast pastrami arrive with a large dollop of celeriac remoulade. But the high-kicking star is a long-braised and deeply sauced pig’s cheek tottering upon a disc of their own black pudding. That black pudding, made here from scratch, is a luscious joy, full of plumped pearl barley, chopped apple and golden sultanas and with a loose texture that moves it an ocean away from the dense tile grouting that clumsy attempts often become. This will now be the black pudding against which all others must be judged. There are doll’s-house onion rings for crunch and sautéed wild mushrooms and, underneath, a silky turnip purée. It’s a serious and significant plateful for £8. The side dishes include a Jerusalem artichoke aligot, a fancy name for outrageous mash spun through with encouraging amounts of cheese. The artichokes arrive as bronzed crisps, drowning cheerfully in the mash. And then there are the sliced, confited potatoes, pressed, then deep-fried (made famous by London’s Quality Chophouse) that arrive looking like so many compacted golden Kettle Chips. It’s not my most elegant description, but it’s accurate. We locate space for their caramelised fig and pecan tarte tatin, which is a dark confection of caramel and crisp pastry with, for balancing acidity, a sparkling scoop of a crème fraîche sorbet. In the evenings, the menu expands a little, as is customary, and some of the mains hover around the £20 mark. Even so, the value is obvious, helped by a concise wine list apparently priced to make you consider ordering another bottle, even on a school night. Do look up the Sunday brunch menu that includes their own crumpets, a bacon chop and pumpkin spiced pancakes. Service is cheery and efficient. The place hums with a comfortable contentment, which may be down to the mere fact of survival. Six months after the new owners took over, Storm Ciara swept through the Calder Valley, causing flooding along its length, including in Brighouse, which impacted upon Brook’s. Then came the pandemic. But they’re back. And they’re thriving. Come for the bread. Stay for the black pudding. Don’t miss the confit potatoes. Or the seafood tagine. Heck, stay for all of it. News bites It is the encouraging trend for 2022. Argentine steakhouse chain Gaucho has announced plans to open a carbon-neutral branch in Glasgow by Valentine’s Day. They will be working alongside charity partner Not For Sale to offset their footprint through a reforestation programme in the Amazon. Meanwhile, the entirety of the Hawksmoor steakhouse chain has pledged to become carbon-neutral in 2022, and in Liverpool, the Middle-Eastern restaurant and bar company Maray has announced that it is now carbon-negative. It’s a big hello to Qavali, a new restaurant on Birmingham’s Broad Street, which takes its inspiration from the route travelled by qawwali music, associated with Sufism, from Turkey and Iran through Afghanistan to the Indian subcontinent. In effect this means an eclectic menu of Turkish-inspired dips, charcoal grilled kebabs, biryanis cooked under puff pastry lids and various Indo Persian stews. At qavali.com. Dipna Anand, whose family launched the venerable Brilliant Restaurant in Southall in 1975, is opening a new venture inside Somerset House on London’s Strand next week. The short menu will be Punjabi and South Indian including grills and fish curries, while the décor will reflect her family’s heritage both in India and Kenya. Visit dipnasomersethouse.co.uk Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1 Guardian Live is hosting an online event with Jay Rayner on 1 December. Book tickets hereThe dilemma I have kept secrets for my mother for many years. She has had several extramarital affairs and I am the only one who knows about these. She has never held back in telling me about her feelings for the people she has been involved with. She despises my father and tells me whenever we meet of his failings and of her disappointments in life. She discusses – and has discussed since I was 10 – leaving him, but she has never gone through with this. I am now in my 50s. To her friends and the rest of the family, she is considered kind and compassionate. She is, though, a troubled woman. However, my daughter considers her to be the perfect grandmother and has invited her to her graduation ceremony. There are not enough tickets so I will not be able to attend. I am crushed by this. I wonder if I have reached the point where I should cut her out of my life. I am fortunate to have a happy life, fulfilling work and good relationships with my children, husband and friends, but this relationship is toxic for me. My concern is that to cut ties, I would need to tell people that I have chosen not to have her in my life and as she is seen as perfect, it would seem very odd. I have no desire to reveal her secrets, I do not want to share the damage from her life with my children, but I do not know how to proceed. Philippa’s answer: Secrets can burn away at you. Someone lightens their load by dumping them on to you and then you are left with the heavy load. No wonder you have had enough. To add to this, for years your mother has been trying to alienate you from your father. I was wondering, could you tell her how her confidences have affected you? How it feels that she has taken your place at your daughter’s graduation? I realise the idea of talking to her might make you flinch. I expect a part of you has remained 10 years old, defenceless, inarticulate. Maybe you feel by cutting her out of your life you would free this imprisoned part of you. I feel you need to take back control and re-parent that 10-year-old girl inside you. But how? You find your mother toxic. What is the poison? Maybe the bombardment over most of your lifetime, with images, hate and stories from her that seem to rot away inside you, so that you do not want to examine it and sort it out. But I think you must. I think you need to list what your mother said about your father, list the stories of the affairs she told you about, organise the secrets she has dumped on you with dates, put them in order. This is how you take control of it, so it isn’t swimming about in you. I suggest you cannot do this all in one go, but in stages, a little every day. Notice how you feel as you document it and how you breathe when you get it out and order it away. There may have been a generational system in your family that complaints and secrets are never talked about, but often whispered, maybe just to one chosen person. Maybe that person was your mother when she was a child. Maybe she is only passing on what was done to her. This could explain why you do not want to share what has been dumped on you with others, you want to stop this being passed down another generation. Looking at it from her point of view, I suppose your mother thought she was treating you well by elevating you to confidant status. Maybe she herself had enjoyed that role. She might not realise how inappropriate it was for you to have to carry all this around. She might have seen herself as bestowing favours upon you. It isn’t a healthy way to behave in relationships, but nothing brings two people closer than having a common enemy. This might be how she learned to be close to people. She might not be behaving with malice aforethought, but merely automatically. I’m suspicious this is how she has become close to your daughter. How has being your mother’s confidant affected your relationship with your father? How much of her vindictiveness towards him is he aware of? Maybe it was because she could dump all her complaints about him on you that she could carry on living with him. This system may have worked well in some respects, but not well for you. I think after the information is down on paper, it may feel more contained and less overwhelming and you may feel more confident in your next course of action, whether that is cutting her out of your life and telling – or not telling – other people the effect she has had on you or, indeed, talking to her, maybe even building some sort of bridge towards mutual understanding. But whatever course you decide, it would be good to feel in charge of everything that has been put on you, rather than that poison being in charge of you. Organising and taking control of all that information, listing it, will be hard on you emotionally. You may want a friend, or even a therapist, to help you. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk Philippa Perry and Bernardine Evaristo will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 6 December. Join the conversation in-person or online, book tickets hereAn Audience With Adele Sunday, 7.25pm, ITV Unless you’ve been living under a rock (fair enough, given the last two years), you’ll know that Adele is back with a new album. In this one-off concert at the London Palladium, the singer returns from LA to bask in some “hometown glory” for the night. She belts out sure-to-be-huge hits such as Easy on Me, as well as the reliable classics (makeshift mics at the ready). But it’s those in between bits – sweary “Oh my god!” anecdotes, that mighty cackle, tearful moments of gratitude – that make Adele one of our very best. Taking questions from stars such as Stormzy and Alan Carr, she is also surrounded by family, friends and fans. Everyone is welcome at the Adele love-fest – so join in. Hollie Richardson I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! 9pm, ITV Ant and Dec return with the 21st series of the reality series, based at Gwrych Castle in Conwy for a second time. The relocation didn’t seem to hinder the show’s popularity last year, so prepare for a fresh cohort of tormented celebrities, including Richard Madeley and Louise Minchin, to dominate screens and social media for the next few weeks. HR Doctor Who: Flux 6.20pm, BBC One After some frenetic episodes, the Flux series throws old fans a bone with a set-up reminiscent of simpler, classic Who. The gang are in Devon in 1967, in a village where a weird professor (Kevin McNally) is up to something sinister. Plus, a modern-classic monster returns: eyes wide for the Weeping Angels. Jack Seale Showtrial 9pm, BBC One As the trial begins in the penultimate episode of this stylish whodunnit, duty solicitor Cleo attempts to mitigate the evidence rapidly stacking up against Talitha, and clashes with Talitha’s dad Damian over whether to call her as a witness. Meanwhile, Dhillon’s mum Meera sees her son in a new light after a damaging statement. Ali Catterall Close to Me 9pm, Channel 4 One minute Jo is reconnecting with emotionally estranged husband Rob over fish and chips, the next she’s saying she wants to “cleave his head open” for secrets while he sleeps. Yes, there’s still much confusion in this juicy amnesia drama. But Jo’s latest flashbacks provide some shocking clarity. HR Walter Presents: Partisan 11pm, Channel 4 Organic farming and Midsommar collide in a new Scandi thriller from Walter Presents. Newcomer Johnny (played by the brilliantly named Fares Fares) joins a gated agricultural community only to discover things are not as they seem. His first task? To dig a grave. Fans of the genre will know what to expect, though a jaunty soundtrack and striking visuals maintain the intrigue. Henry Wong Film choice Steve Jobs, Amazon Prime Video “Completely incompatible with anything.” What is true of the Apple Macintosh is also true of its designer, Steve Jobs, in Danny Boyle’s fascinating 2015 biopic of the computer magnate. Structured around three product launches – 1984 (Macintosh), 1988 (the NeXTcube, anyone?) and 1998 (iMac) – it exposes the insufferable yet visionary nature of Jobs through Aaron Sorkin’s rat-a-tat script and walk-and-talk dialogue. Michael Fassbender plays him with the right balance of self-preening and self-loathing, and Kate Winslet is also excellent as marketing executive Joanna Hoffman, acting as Jobs’s occasional conscience as he alienates friends, colleagues and his daughter. Simon Wardell Live sport Women’s Super League Football: Manchester United v Arsenal 12noon, BBC Two. From Leigh Sports Village. International Rugby Union: Ireland v Argentina 1.45pm, Channel 4. From Aviva Stadium, Dublin. Women’s International Rugby Union: England v USA 2.20pm, BBC Two. At Sixways Stadium in Worcester.The environmentalist we spoke to about water pollution at Swalecliffe, Kent, is Andy Taylor, not “Andy Turner” or even “Hunter” (Swimming in sewage, 14 November, the New Review, page 8). An article said Barclays bank had to report annually to regulators on its handling of whistleblowers after the then chief executive, Jes Staley, tried to unmask one in 2016. That reporting requirement ended last year (“The task was to restore Barclays’s reputation, but will Staley’s scandals undo his work?”, 7 November, page 63). In France, people in at-risk groups, including over-65s, who have not had a booster jab will no longer be entitled to a Covid health pass from 15 December, not 1 December (Why is Europe returning to the dark days of Covid?, 14 November, page 40). The pass is needed to enter bars, restaurants, leisure venues and some shopping malls, but not shops in general. We described Molly Scott Cato as an MEP, but the Green party’s economics spokesperson finished in that role in 2020 when the UK left the EU (Treasury green savings bond offers ‘paltry’ incentive for helping planet, 14 November, page 62). In our early edition last week, the late BBC newsreader Richard Baker was misidentified as Kenneth Kendall in a picture caption (Anchors away: why the golden age of TV news presenters has had its day, 14 November, page 44). Mao Zedong spoke of letting “one hundred flowers bloom”, not one thousand, as an article suggested (From Nicaragua to China, reckless autocrats betray the promises of revolution, 14 November, page 35). Other recently amended articles include: On trial for saving lives: the young refugee activist facing a Greek court Found: the club where Geoffrey Cox’s cash gets thumbs-up Bucket lists: are they really such a good idea? Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736The Observer Magazine of 28 April 1968 (‘Falling in love’) wondered, ‘In this increasingly permissive and casual society, what are the prospects for the survival of romantic love?’ Robert Shields wrote that romantic love was ‘a state of ecstasy, of romantic sentimentality, which turns the grass greener and the sky bluer, and’ – he’d been going so well up to this point – ‘the plain, plump girl we adore into Venus herself.’ ‘There is a regressive babyishness about being in love,’ he noted. ‘Even the language of the romantic phase is infantile – baby, sweetie, darling, ducky, adorable.’ Mature love, on the other hand, ‘may not have the euphoria, excitement and frenzy of the “in love” experience, which prepared the ground for it, but it carries its own calm conviction.’ There was an interview with Nancy Mitford, author of The Pursuit of Love. ‘To fall in love you have to be in the state of mind for it to take, like a disease,’ she said. ‘You have to be very much wanting it, expecting it.’ ‘While making love is very delightful,’ Mitford continued in her forthright manner, ‘in fact all descriptions make it sound very off putting. Even DH Lawrence made it sound so frightfully unattractive.’ One young man described how he proposed to his fiancée after seeing Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev at Covent Garden. ‘When we got home it was 3am and there was no one we could tell at that hour so we rang Directory Inquiries and told them.’ Not quite an announcement in the Times, but it was a start… Another young man hymned the delights of young love thus: ‘I woke up the other day at 4am and I felt this glorious sense of happiness in her presence, despite the fact that that week she was 1,500 miles away.’ The next line read: ‘The affair ended not long after Mr Hardy gave us this interview.’ Absence makes the heart grow fonder. Not necessarily for both parties.That’s all for tonight. Thanks as always for following along with us and be sure to check out the full fight report here. Here’s a look at the official scorecard. Crawford was leading by scores of 86-85 (twice) and 87-84 at the time of the stoppage. (The Guardian had it 86-85 to Crawford.) “He’s been in there with everybody,” Crawford says. “He did what he could. I was just the better man tonight.” Asked when he was able to figure Porter out, Crawford is to the point: “Round one. I figured out I had the reach. He had to take chances to get in. I was stronger than him.” The most devastating finisher in the sport did what he does best. Ring announcer Jimmy Lennon Jr makes it official, calling it at 1:21 of the 10th round. Terence Crawford improves to 38 wins in 38 fights with 29 coming inside the distance. Crawford catches Porter with a left uppercut in an exchange early in the round and Porter goes down! Porter doesn’t look hurt, beating the count easily. And moments later Crawford drops Porter again with a lightning-quick combination capped by a right hook to the temple ... and Porter’s father and trainer Kenny is up on the apron and he’s stopping the fight. It’s over! Terence Crawford wins by stoppage! Round 9 Porter is looking for the overhand right that’s been giving Crawford such trouble. Crawford lands a sneaky check hook out of the southpaw stance. A crisp body shot from Porter, who’s slowed down his work rate somewhat. Porter now looks to be taking a round off to economize energy. Two nice body shots by Crawford, who’s landed the cleaner, more effective blows in the frame. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 10-9 Porter (Crawford 86-85 Porter) Round 8 Porter lands a massive overhand right hand in the center of the ring that appears to buckle Crawford, then follows it up with another one. And another! Crawford roars back with a crunching left to the body that seems to hurt Porter. High-level stuff from both men but probably the best round of the fight for Porter. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 9-10 Porter (Crawford 76-76 Porter) Round 7 Porter closes the gap and lands a sharp right hand. He’s mixing it up beautifully and giving Crawford different looks. Crawford catches Porter with a counter left as he rushes in but Porter walks right through it. Porter looking very fit, still bouncing on the balls of his feet, brimming with confidence. Very, very close round in what’s been a difficult fight to score. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 10-9 Porter (Crawford 67-66 Porter) Round 6 Lots of infighting as the dogfight between these two continues. Crawford lands a couple of sharp hooks as he times Porter for the big shot. Left hand by Crawford down the middle. Another accidental headbutt as a result of the orthodox-southpaw matchup and now Crawford is cut. A close round where Crawford landed the more effective shots but Porter was busier. Crawford nicks it on our card. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 10-9 Porter (Crawford 57-57 Porter) Round 5 Porter is the busier fighter, throwing a lot more punches even if most of them aren’t landing. Crawford is unable to do much against the overwhelming volume, even though few of them are connecting with the target. Porter, fighting the perfect fight so far, takes the round on this card. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 9-10 Porter (Crawford 47-48 Porter) Round 4 The fascinating matchup we were promised is coming to pass. Porter forcing the issue and making Crawford fight at his pace but Crawford, alternating stances but fighting mostly as a southpaw, popping Porter with counters every time he bullrushes in. Great round for Bud, clearest of the fight so far. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 10-9 Porter (Crawford 38-38 Porter) Round 3 A more cautious round though it’s playing to the pace of Crawford, who ominously appears to be finding his rhythm. Some good body work from Porter but Crawford is getting his licks in. Porter comes inside and lands a flush uppercut. What a shot! But it’s not without a cost: Porter appears cut over his right eye and it appears to have been from a clash of heads. Porter goes down but the referee correctly rules it a slip. Bell rings and that’s a Porter round. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 9-10 Porter (Crawford 28-29 Porter) Round 2 Crawford and Porter measuring one another in the center of the ring. Porter lands a flush counter right. Crawford follows with a counter left followed by a left to the body. Another good 1-2 combo by Crawford. Big exchange that Porter gets the better of. Two-way action breaking out as the crowd is whipped into a frenzy. A close round but Crawford takes it. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 10-9 Porter (Crawford 19-19 Porter) Round 1 Porter springs from his corner and throws a combination at Crawford. The lefty Crawford fighting off the back foot early as usual, absorbing Porter’s fire. Crawford lands a sharp left that snaps Porter’s head back. Bell rings and first round goes to Porter, who threw more and landed more. Guardian’s unofficial score: Crawford 9-10 Porter (Crawford 9-10 Porter) The fighters are making their ringwalks. First it’s Porter, the two-time welterweight champion, accompanied by the rapper Rapsody as he makes the long walk to the squared circle. And then comes Crawford, ambling to the ring in white robe and black trim to LL Cool J’s I’m Bad. Hello and welcome to tonight’s WBO welterweight title fight between Terence Crawford and Shawn Porter. Crawford, the longtime champion at 147lbs who’s been on the shelf since a TKO win over Britain’s Kell Brook last year, is out to bolster his claim as the world’s best pound-for-pound fighter opposite Porter, who’s fresh off a dominant win over Sebastian Formella in August. Fascinating scrap, this. Crawford is a heavy favorite on merit – most oddsmakers list him as a 5/1 favorite – but no one ever looks good against the crafty, athletic Porter, a two-time beltholder at boxing’s glamour division. The consensus is tonight’s showdown will either be a virtuoso performance for Crawford against perhaps the highest quality opponent of his career or an all-out war between two of the best welterweights of their generation. Bryan will be here shortly.MPs in safe seats are far more likely to have taken up second jobs than their colleagues in marginal constituencies, according to new analysis that has led to renewed calls for reforms to Britain’s voting system. In findings that undermine Boris Johnson’s suggestion that voters who disapprove of their MP’s outside work can simply unseat them at an election, the research found that more than three in five of the 103 MPs with second jobs had majorities of more than 10,000 votes. Some 87% had majorities of more than 3,000 votes. The research, by the campaigning group Best for Britain, found that almost all of the MPs who earn more than their £82,000 parliamentary salary from a second job have majorities in excess of 17,000 votes. It will also anger Tories in newly won “red wall” seats, where majorities are more precarious. The group has been the most frustrated by colleagues taking up second jobs on top of their role as an MP. Several have complained that only those in safe Tory areas have taken on extra roles. Geoffrey Cox, the former attorney general who has earned almost £6m in addition to his MP’s salary since entering parliament, was among those who claimed that his constituents would simply vote him out if they disapproved. Cox faced a new wave of criticism after it emerged that he had voted remotely from the British Virgin Islands while advising its government on corruption allegations.Cox has a 25,000 majority. Of the nine MPs who earn more from their second jobs than from their parliamentary salary, seven have majorities in excess of 17,000 votes and all are Conservative MPs. Overall, 83% of all MPs with second jobs are Conservative MPs. The Commons standards committee is now examining the issue of second jobs and is to publish recommendations. Clive Lewis, a Labour MP who backs electoral reform, said the correlation between MPs with safe seats and second jobs highlighted the problem with the first-past-the-post voting system. “First past the post has clearly given some MPs a brass neck and the leadership of opposition parties must accept that the only way they can give the public a realistic opportunity of unseating the worst offenders is by working together to secure a fairer voting system,” he said. Naomi Smith, chief executive of Best for Britain, said: “First past the post delivers disproportionate outcomes, doesn’t represent the majority opinion, and delivers safe seats for too many MPs emboldening those who put personal financial gain ahead of voters.”Is Europe entering a dangerous new age of instability? Not since the height of the cold war with the Soviet Union has it looked so vulnerable to hostile forces. Accumulating external threats and internal divisions, coupled with a weakening US security alliance, relentless Russian subversion, and power-hungry China’s war on western values are exposing fundamental strategic weaknesses. Europe increasingly resembles a beleaguered democratic island in an anarchic world, where a rising tide of authoritarianism, impunity and international rule-breaking threatens to inundate it. Some European leaders understand this, notably French president Emmanuel Macron, yet long-term policy remedies elude them. For example, Belarus dictator Alexander Lukashenko’s use of migrants to pressure the EU is plainly outrageous. Yet it worked, in the sense that Germany’s caretaker chancellor, Angela Merkel, phoned him for a chat, ending his post-coup isolation. Her unilateral demarche understandably infuriated Baltic states. It was a concession to a thug, not a lasting solution. Talking of thugs, Russian president Vladimir Putin’s ongoing intimidation of Ukraine risks widening conflagration. The latest border build-up of 90,000 Russian troops may be sabre-rattling, similar to provocations in the Donbas and Black Sea last spring. If not, Europe will only have itself to blame. Putin’s importunities stem directly from its de facto acquiescence in his illegal 2014 annexation of Crimea. Instability on Europe’s periphery extends to the Balkans amid well-founded fears that Bosnia-Herzegovina is slipping back into conflict 26 years after the Dayton peace accords. Resurgent ethnic nationalism, embodied by the separatist Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, is fuelled by Belgrade and Moscow. A larger, strategic problem is the EU’s inability to fulfil promises of closer integration with the region. Europe’s relationship with Turkey, a key gatekeeper, is dysfunctional, too, thanks partly to Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, its deeply unpleasant president. When he menaced EU members Greece and Cyprus last year, Macron sent naval forces to the eastern Mediterranean. The rest of Europe sat on its hands. Erdoğan is also meddling in Ukraine and the Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict, which flared up again last week. Yet Brussels pays him to keep out Middle Eastern refugees, so it hardly dares challenge him. The vice-like circle of instability squeezing Europe is about more than actual or potential armed conflict. One of its bigger dilemmas is migration. Despite the searing 2015 Syrian refugee crisis, the EU still lacks an agreed, humane policy. That guarantees more trouble down the road. One of the main objectors, ironically, is Poland, which rejects migrant quotas. Yet faced by border mayhem, its hypocritical rightwing leaders who, like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, are in a bitter fight with Brussels over rule of law and democracy issues, appealed for EU solidarity. Disturbing, too, is the way much European opinion appears to have accepted illegal pushbacks and routine mistreatment of asylum-seekers, whether in camps in Libya or on the beaches of Greece, in breach of EU law. This reflects another self-inflicted wound: the increased influence of xenophobic, rightwing populists and the re-normalisation of circa 1914 ultra-nationalist politics across Europe. If Europeans will not stand up for western democratic values in a world overrun by Donald Trump clones and copycats, who will? Sadly, they cannot look to Britain. No longer a trusted friend, the UK under Boris Johnson, sniping and sneering from the sidelines, has become another peripheral conflict zone for the EU. Britain is more irritant than ally. Defence minister Ben Wallace used the linked Belarus-Ukraine crises last week to advance the Brexit agenda and seal arms deals with Warsaw and Kiev. Tellingly, the UK sent troops, not humanitarian aid, to the Polish border. Europe’s age of instability also owes much to events beyond its control. Few forecast Trump would try to blow up what Franklin D Roosevelt called the “arsenal of democracy”, and the western alliance with it. He may yet try again. Likewise, few predicted, as Merkel now admits, that China would emerge as such a domineering, economically aggressive, anti-democratic global competitor. US president Joe Biden reassures Europeans that Nato, even after Afghanistan, is as vital as ever. But his edgy video summit with China’s Xi Jinping last week showed where his true focus lies. Putin sees this, and smells blood. Europe’s gas supply is one pressure point. Covert cyber-attacks are another. Russia’s reckless anti-satellite missile test, scorning European safety concerns, was the first recorded act of hooliganism in outer space. Europe’s inability to make Putin pay a serious price for aggression in Georgia and Crimea, his decimation of Russian democracy, his foreign election meddling, and his murderous attacks on Alexei Navalny – and other opponents on European soil – heightens a sense of decline. On China, there is nothing close to a united front. Such weakness encourages other predators. So what is to be done? Europe, as ever, is a house divided. East Europeans continue to place their faith in Washington rather than Brussels, despite clear portents of another transatlantic rupture if the Democrats lose the White House in 2024. The EU bureaucracy is feebly led, its parliament toothless. Germany lacks a proven leader. In France, Macron faces a vicious spring election scrap against the Russian-backed far right. Yet it is Macron’s ideas about enhanced European political, security and military “strategic autonomy”, and a stronger, more fiscally and economically integrated EU, that offer the most hopeful path forward. EU defence ministers last week discussed a “Strategic Compass” plan to boost joint capabilities. But agreement on proposed “rapid-deployment forces” and the like seems a long way off. As France prepares to assume the EU presidency, will other leaders recognise this critical moment and back Macron? In a world of sharks, snakes and scary monsters, Europe’s independence, cohesion and values are on the line like never before.There is a ruthlessness to some roof terrace gardening that doesn’t sit well with me. I try to bend with it, but it doesn’t always work. It’s too often gardening without growing. Planting in pots requiring culling. Our autumn terrace was mostly about blues – tall lobelia and even taller salvia. Impulse buys from my local garden centre to replenish fading spring/summer. People were swarming garden nurseries. Stocks were depleted, choices limited. But we will always have salvias now. We fell deeply in love with the colours, the flowers, the spikes, some nearing 6ft tall. These we’ll cut back and try to nurse through winter. We’ll take cuttings à la Monty Don. November is when we hear the siren call of spring bulbs. And we have a limited amount of space. We are buying and planning for two very different sites: a small London terrace and a larger seaside plot. I have been buying for London. Henri for Denmark, her home country. We both edit my selection ruthlessly. A small but varied group of short and tall tulips (including last year’s obsession: acuminata). We’ll do the three-flowers lasagne thing. There will be single narcissi in pure white and a pheasant’s eye style – I love the scent. This year we bought our bulbs from Farmer Gracy, though we also happily shop from Peter Nyssen, Bloms Bulbs and Sarah Raven, among others. The Danish spring show will be narcissi in greater numbers and on a broader palette. There’ll be no tulips as deer culled 98% of the 200-plus we planted last time. They particularly liked the stems, but left the narcissi alone. We love to see families of deer trot through, so we’re trialling planting only from the daffodil family. I’ll report back in spring. Fingers until then firmly crossed. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comExfoliator. Exfoliating. Exfoliants. They don’t sound particularly friendly do they? Admittedly, in the past, exfoliating – this act of resurfacing our dull, congested skins for brighter, clearer, smoother, blackhead-free, light-reflecting skin – was brutal. Thankfully brands (and people) are coming to the realisation that we don’t have to scrub our faces to smithereens in order to get a good glow. Which is why I love AHAs – aka acids: most commonly glycolic, lactic, salicylic and, increasingly, mandelic. These exfoliating liquids dissolve dead skin cells and help increase cell turnover so your skin looks brighter. And you don’t have to rinse it off. Of course you can’t literally see the dead skin cells that build up, but the signs are obvious – dullness, congestion, sluggishness and your once brilliant skincare products become ineffective. So what’s best? A chemical (liquid) or a physical (scrub) exfoliator? I never used to prescribe scrubs – stories of people scrubbing their faces into oblivion were all too common. Today, scrubs are better formulated. Still, I’d advise anyone to be discerning about both scrubs and liquids. Start every other day – less for sensitive skins. 1. Balance Me BHA Exfoliating Concentrate £20.80, balanceme.com 2. Murad Daily Clarifying Peel £37, johnlewis.com 3. Dennis Gross Ultra Gentle Daily Peel £89 (5 pack), spacenk.com 4. Paula’s Choice 2% BHA Liquid Exfoliant £28, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. Alpha-H Liquid Gold with Glycolic Acid £40, marksandspencer.com 6. Sunday Riley Charcoal Smoothie Jelly Body Scrub £32, spacenk.com 7. Drunk Elephant TLC Glycolic Body Lotion £21, boots.com 8. REN Ready Steady Glow AHA Tonic £22.95, feelunique.com 9. Kate Somerville Exfolikate Intensive Exfoliating Treatment £21, lookfantastic.com 10. StriVectin Daily Reveal Exfoliating Pads £39, strivectin.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoEric Zemmour is unlikely to be the next president of France. In the first place, he is not yet officially a candidate. Second, his repellent brand of racist, far-right codswallop already has a well-established mouthpiece: Marine Le Pen, leader of the National Rally (formerly the National Front). That said, Zemmour is doing well in opinion polls and is significantly influencing the election agenda. Known as a TV pundit and polemicist, his latest bestseller, France Has Not Had Its Final Word, is a pseudo-intellectual requiem for “the death of France as we know it”, by which he means white, Catholic France. In short, Zemmour claims Muslims are out to capture the state. Such drivel might be dismissed out of hand but for the fact that, according to one recent survey at least, 61% of French people believe it is certain or probable that the white, Christian populations of Europe face extinction because of Muslim immigration from Africa. A civil war is coming, Zemmour warns; France could become an Islamic republic. A lot of voters appear to have taken fright. This pernicious argument is rooted in the “great replacement theory” peddled by French far-right “thinkers” and adopted by likeminded bigots in Donald Trump’s America and elsewhere. “The French people, their customs, their history, their state, their civility, their civilisation” are at existential risk, Zemmour claims. In the past, Protestants or Jews were the whipping boys. Now it’s Muslims. Zemmour, like Le Pen, blames “elites”, typified by President Emmanuel Macron and the EU, for France’s problems. He would suspend Schengen free movement rules (which would please Priti Patel). He wants France to defy the European court of justice. Britain and France are historical foes, he says, but the UK should not be punished for Brexit. All disturbingly Johnsonian. If he stands in April’s election, Zemmour is predicted to attract 14.9% of the first-round vote, against 19.6% for Le Pen. This prospective split suggests she, not he, would face the president, currently on 26%, in a second round. That’s what happened in 2017, when Macron triumphed by a margin of 2-1. He would be expected to do so again. More intriguing, and alarming for Macron, is the possibility that either Xavier Bertrand, Valérie Pécresse or Michel Barnier, if chosen to lead the centre-right Les Républicains, could overtake Le Pen and make the run-off, as François Fillon very nearly did in 2017. That scenario poses a bigger danger for Macron. Zemmour’s rampage of hate would merely have ensured defeat at the ballot box for his ugly ideas. Thus it seems clear the real threat posed by Zemmour is not electoral. It’s ideological and cultural. It’s a threat to the social fabric of France and, by extension, of other European countries where febrile questions of identity, security and perceived national decline have fuelled the rise of xenophobic populist politicians. Divisive Zemmour feeds off fear of change, fear of difference, fear of each other. Britain, where Brexit brought such sentiments to the surface, surely understands. Zemmour controversially visited London last week to spread his insidious bile. Yet fundamental differences persist. The inquest into shocking racism in English cricket, for example, is extremely painful. But it has revealed a country determined, however imperfectly and clumsily, to root out such poison and find better, inclusive ways. Can France honestly say the same? What the Zemmour phenomenon dramatises in both countries, and across Europe, is the continuing failure of the political and intellectual left to develop credible alternative platforms to repulse the right’s lies and distortions. Support for France’s Socialists, in power under François Hollande only four years ago, has collapsed to 4.8%. In Britain, on all precedents, Labour should be winning hands down, but it’s not. The struggle against the political weaponisation of fear and hate is far from won.That’s where I’ll leave you. Thanks as always for reading. Here’s what we learned today: Labor stepped up its criticism of prime minister Scott Morrison’s handling of anti-vaccine protests, with shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers accusing him of “dangerous, dog-whistling doublespeak” and trying to divide the country for political gain. Victoria was “very, very close” to reaching the 90% mark for double vaccinations among residents, the premier Daniel Andrews said, an important milestone as the state recorded another 1,275 new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday. Meanwhile New South Wales is inching closer to the 95% double-vaccination mark. On Sunday the state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, said he wouldn’t budge on his decision to continue to force restrictions on unvaccinated people until the mark was reached, or 15 December, despite protests in the city over the weekend. Two remote communities in the Northern Territory were pushed into a “hard” lockdown after a spike in cases in the areas. The territory’s chief minister, Michael Gunner, instituted the harder lockdown on the two towns near Katherine because of what he described as low vaccination rates among residents. Four children aged between one and 10 have tragically died in a house fire in Melbourne’s south-west overnight. Firefighters described feeling “helpless” as they arrived at the scene of the ferocious blaze. The search for William Tyrrell, who went missing on the NSW mid-north coast in 2014, continued despite wet weather hampering police efforts. Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, whose whereabouts have been a matter of international concern for weeks, attended a tennis tournament in Beijing on Sunday, according to official photos published by the tournament organised by China Open. Peng could be seen among guests at the Fila Kids Junior Tennis Challenger Finals, dressed in a dark blue jacket and white trousers, according to the pictures published on the event’s official WeChat page, Reuters reports. The former doubles world number one had not been seen or heard from publicly since she said on Chinese social media on 2 November that former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli had coerced her into sex and they later had an on-off consensual relationship. Neither Zhang nor the Chinese government have commented on her allegation. Peng’s social media post was quickly deleted and the topic has been blocked from discussion on China’s heavily censored internet. World tennis bodies have expressed concern, with the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) threatening to pull tournaments out of China. The United States and Britain have called for evidence of Peng’s whereabouts and safety. The photographs and video footage of Peng that emerged on Sunday remain “insufficient” and do not address the WTA’s concerns, a spokesperson for the group told Reuters by email. The US and British embassies in Beijing did not immediately respond to Reuters requests for comment on Peng’s Sunday appearance in the Chinese capital. Peng also visited a popular restaurant in downtown Beijing on Saturday night. Hu Xijin, editor-in-chief of the state-backed Global Times posted a video of the outing, which a restaurant manager confirmed to Reuters on Sunday. Seven people including Peng were at the Sichuanese restaurant, said the manager, Zhou Hongwei, adding that they ate in a private room and were joined by the restaurant’s owner. “It was crowded at the restaurant as usual,” Zhou said, showing a bill that included noodles and bamboo shoots. “They didn’t have much. I think they mostly chatted.” A NSW police officer who rescued two boys from a flood-affected river will be recommended for a bravery award, as wet weather continues to batter much of the state. Emergency services were called to the Lachlan River in Condobolin on Saturday afternoon after two 11-year-old boys jumped in, AAP reports. They were swept 60m away by the fast-moving current, made worse by the flood level, which the Bureau of Meteorology warns will worsen by next weekend. They were rescued by a police officer who swam out to them with a flotation device. There are warnings of more to come from the severe storms that have hit parts of northern NSW, delivering damaging winds and more heavy rain to saturated catchments. There is a gale warning for the Hunter Coast for Monday and strong wind warnings for the Sydney and Macquarie coasts. The bureau has predicted an inland low pressure system from the Northern Territory is on track to deepen on Sunday and spread rain across the mid-north coast, Hunter region and the central north, causing minor flooding across inland rivers. There are heavy rainfall warnings in place for the Central West Slopes and Plains, northern parts of the Hunter region and on the mid-north coast. On Saturday night those storms reached the coast at Grafton bringing damaging winds and large hailstones. Twenty millimetres of rain fell in an hour south of Grafton and at Port Macquarie on Saturday night. Police have continued their search on the New South Wales mid-north coast where William Tyrrell disappeared seven years ago, despite weather conditions creating headaches for investigators. I’m finishing up for today and am handing the blog over to my colleague, Michael McGowan. Four children have died in a fire that tore through a home in Melbourne’s south-west, in the early hours of Sunday morning. As investigators from the Victorian arson squad dug through the remains of the home on Mantello Drive in Werribee on Sunday, police confirmed a 10-year-old and three-year-old boy, and a six-year-old and one-year-old girl had died in the fire. Read the full story from Michael McGowan here: Victoria’s premier says the state will reach 90% full vaccination against Covid in a matter of hours, as he encourages people to honour their second dose appointments, AAP reports. With 89.1 % of Victorians aged over 12 fully vaccinated in the 24 hours to Sunday, premier Daniel Andrews said the 90% milestone would be reached soon. We’re very, very close today, so if not by the end of today then probably tomorrow. If you’ve got a second-dose appointment, please honour that. One dose doesn’t get you through, you need two. It’ll keep you out of hospital and it’ll help to keep us open. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a thunderstorm warning for the northern inland of NSW, including Walgett. Tim Paine says he always knew the texting scandal that cost him the Australian Test captaincy would eventually be made public, revealing media had approached him about it “numerous times” over the past three years. Paine sent Australia’s Ashes preparations into chaos on Friday afternoon when, less than three weeks before the start of the series against England, he stood down over explicit text messages and a graphic image sent to a female former Cricket Tasmania employee in 2017. Two days later, in an extensive and personal interview alongside his wife Bonnie for News Corp, Paine said he “absolutely” believed the controversy was a ticking time bomb, based on previous attempts to have it published. Read the full story here: Australia will probably avoid the new burst of coronavirus cases that are enveloping Europe, although problems could arise entering winter next year, AAP reports. Several European countries are being forced to impose new lockdown restrictions in the face of a fourth wave of Covid-19 cases. Australia is enjoying a relatively high level of vaccination with over 84% of people aged 16 and over now fully vaccinated with two doses. “Because we will have a relatively newly minted, highly vaccinated population, we will probably be OK in summer and go through a bit of a honeymoon period,” Australian Medical Association vice-president Chris Moy told the ABC. “The problem will be later when vaccination rates, vaccinations possibly start to wane in terms of effectiveness into winter next year.” As such it will be critical to keep the vaccine booster program going, Dr Moy says. However, the Northern Territory’s Covid-19 outbreak is expected to grow beyond currently locked-down areas following nine new cases detected at remote Binjari, about 320km south of Darwin. The Australian Defence Force has been called in to help with transferring positive cases and close contacts to the centre of national resilience. “What has become clear to us based on the level of movement that has been happening in some communities outside of Katherine, is there is a real risk the virus has reached the connected communities further away,” NT chief minister Michael Gunnar told reporters. From Monday, visitor restrictions will ease at all ACT hospitals, community health centres and walk-in centres to allow two visitors per patient, per day during visiting hours. “The decision to restrict visitors to our health facilities is always a difficult one, but it ensures we can protect the health and safety of everyone,” ACT Health said in a statement on Sunday. “This is especially necessary for our most vulnerable, particularly patients whose health is already compromised.” Queensland has also not recorded any new local Covid-19 cases today. There are currently four active cases in the state. The state reported that 84.4% of Queenslanders aged 16 and older have received their first Covid-19 vaccine dose, while 73.1% are fully vaccinated. South Australia has not recorded any new locally acquired Covid-19 cases today. 87.1% of those aged 16 and older have received at least their first Covid-19 vaccine dose, while 77.2% are fully vaccinated. *adds to cart* NSW premier Dominic Perrottet says unvaccinated people will not be granted freedoms any earlier than 15 December despite thousands rallying against vaccination requirements, AAP reports. “All of these measures are not tailored for rules for the sake of the government, they are tailored to keep people safe and that’s what we’re focused on,” Perrottet said in Sydney on Sunday, the day after unmasked protesters descended on the city. Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers has blasted prime minister Scott Morrison for wanting to “embrace” the violent politics of anti-vaccine protests, accusing him of trying to divide the country for political gain. Read the full story here: Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath has confirmed she has received threats due to the state’s Covid-19 vaccination mandates but says “nothing is going to stop me” doing her job, AAP reports. D’Ath is among the Queensland politicians who have received a beefed-up security presence after receiving threatening emails. Member for Keppel Brittany Lauga alerted police on Friday of an email sent to state and federal MPs warning of “terrorism, extremism and violence” over the state government’s policy of banning unvaccinated people. D’Ath said on Sunday she was concerned by the threats but felt safe. “I do. Nothing is going to stop me doing my job,” said D’Ath, who was accompanied by security. “You have to take it (threats) seriously. It’s disappointing that we have to do (increase security) but it is part of the job. “I am just going to get on with it.” Police minister Mark Ryan said on Sunday there had been an “escalation in the intensity of threat” toward state politicians. Tensions rose again on Saturday at an anti-coronavirus vaccine mandate protest in Brisbane. When the Brisbane crowd was asked by a protester what they thought of premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, someone yelled: “Hang the b****”. Ryan said the onus was on protest organisers to monitor behaviour at their events. “There are a very small cohort of people I think who are trying to hijack quite legitimate protest activity,” he said. “You’ve also got a responsibility to the broader community to ensure those people who are attempting to hijack your democratic process don’t use what you want to do for a lawful purpose, for something which could quite seriously escalate into something very concerning.” D’Ath said the state government supported the right to protest but not inciting violence. “I am concerned about some of the rhetoric, some of the threats going around,” she said. “I do think people need to be very clear in their language, to not be inciting or be encouraging this kind of behaviour.” Meanwhile, D’Ath ruled out removing a requirement for interstate travellers to undergo costly PCR tests before entering the state after Queensland hits the 80 per cent fully vaccinated mark. Figures show 84.35 per cent of eligible Queenslanders have had one jab and 73.06 per cent are fully vaccinated, with no new Covid-19 cases in the past 24 hours. NT health authorities have said they expect more Covid-19 cases, after nine cases were reported in Binjari, outside Katherine, yesterday afternoon. The virus has spread to at least six families. One of the nine cases – a woman in her 70s – has been taken to hospital with moderate to severe symptoms. The other eight cases, along with close contacts, have been taken to Howard Springs quarantine facility. NT chief minister Michael Gunner said he couldn’t give out exact vaccination rates for Binjari because it was an Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation community. But he said that less than 70% of the community had received their first Covid-19 vaccine dose. Gunner warned that the lockdowns are likely to be in place for a few weeks. I’ll hand you back to Justine Landis-Hanley now. Thanks for reading. The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, is speaking to media about the “hard” lockdown imposed on communities near Katherine. The lockdown was imposed after a further nine cases of Covid-19 were announced yesterday. The territory recorded no new cases since then. The NT government announced this morning that the communities of Binjari and Rockhole, both home to about 200 and 130 people respectively, would go into a “hard lockdown”. The communities had already been caught under the Katherine lockdown, but hard lockdown rules mean residents are only able to leave their homes and yards for medical treatment or in an emergency. Gunner said the federal government had provided Australian Defence Force assistance, and the government was considering what extra resources may be needed. Binjari was a “low vaccination community”, he said. The nine new cases reported on Saturday range in age from 17 to 78. The latter is a woman who presented at Katherine hospital with symptoms and was taken to Royal Darwin hospital on Saturday night. The men’s world number one tennis player, Novak Djokovic, says he is yet to decide whether he will take part in the Australian Open in January, after tournament organisers confirmed players would need to be vaccinated to compete in the grand slam. Following his semi-final defeat against Alexander Zverev in the ATP finals on Saturday, Djokovic told reporters he had yet to make a call on competing in the Open. “We’ll see. We’ll have to wait and see,” Djokovic said. “I haven’t been talking to them, to be honest ... I was just waiting to hear what the news is going to be and now that I know we’ll just have to wait and see.” On Saturday tournament chief Craig Tiley confirmed all players would need to be vaccinated to compete in the tournament. It came after months of uncertainty and negotiations between Tennis Australia and the Victorian government. Djokovic is currently tied on 20 grand slams with both Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, and the Australian Open would offer him the opportunity to surpass both players. But he has remained non-committal about whether he would take part in the tournament due to the vaccine rules. “[Novak] has said that he views this as a private matter for him,” Tiley said on Saturday. “We would love to see Novak here, he knows that he’ll have to be vaccinated to play here.” As NSW inches closer to the 95% mark for first dose vaccinations, parents in the state have been warned to remain vigilant about the virus and monitor their children to prevent outbreaks in schools. NSW Health reported on Sunday that 94.4% of residents over 16 years have now received one dose, with 91.8% of the population fully vaccinated. But on Sunday NSW Health’s deputy chief medical officer Jeremy McAnulty said there had been multiple cases in schools across the state. We are urging parents to remain really vigilant to help protect the rest of the school community. Symptoms in children can be quite mild and not obvious so if they get any symptoms at all please take your children to a testing clinic. Two Sydney schools and one in Newcastle remain closed due to Covid outbreaks. Of the 12 to 15-year-old age group, 75.3% are fully vaccinated and 81% have received at least one vaccine. There were 176 cases of Covid-19 reported across NSW on Sunday, and two deaths. An unvaccinated women in her 40s died at Royal Prince Alfred hospital. She had underlying health conditions. A fully vaccinated man in his 80s who also had underlying health conditions Sydney died at Liverpool hospital. I’m handing over the blog to my brilliant colleague, Michael McGowan. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe thunderstorm warning for south-west WA, including parts of the Perth metropolitan area. A man has died while working at a coal mine in central Queensland. AAP has the story: Police confirmed a man died early on Sunday morning at Curragh mine, 30km north of Blackwater. Officers attended the scene about 2.15am and will prepare a report for the Mines Inspectorate, which is part of Resources Safety and Health Queensland. A Coronado Global Resources spokeswoman said mine operations had been temporarily suspended to allow authorities to investigate. “A full investigation is being conducted into the accident and Coronado is working with the Queensland police, the Department of Natural Resources, Mines and Energy and other authorities,” the spokeswoman told AAP. NSW Health has provided more information about today’s Covid-19 update. The state recorded 176 new locally acquired Covid-19 cases. There are 192 people with Covid-19 currently in hospital in NSW; 32 are in intensive care, 15 of whom require ventilation. Of those in intensive care, 25 are not vaccinated, three have received their first dose, and four are fully vaccinated. NSW also recorded two new Covid-related deaths. An unvaccinated woman in her 40s with underlying health conditions died at Royal Prince Alfred hospital. And a vaccinated man with underlying health conditions in his 80s died at Liverpool hospital. As of 19 November, 97% of those aged 12 years and older are fully vaccinated. Weekly transport costs for the average Australian metropolitan household have risen past $400 a week for the first time. AAP reports: A peak motoring body study says regional areas have also been hit in the hip pocket, with the average Australian household paying $367.63 per week or 14.8 per cent of their income on transport costs – up almost $60 from last year. The Australian Automobile Association’s (AAA) latest affordability index shows the cost of transport has gone up across all states and territories, with capital city households spending an average of $401.86 a week or 15.5 per cent of their income and $328.51 (14 per cent) over seven days in regional centres. AAA says there are concerns rising fuel prices may blow out costs even further with their survey showing Australian motorists were likely to drive for both work and holidays in coming months as Covid-19 restrictions ease. “Rising fuel prices are a significant contributor to rising costs across both regional and metropolitan Australia,” AAA managing director Michael Bradley said. “With a federal election and two state elections due next year, this report is a timely reminder that cost of living pressures are rising and that policies that further increase transport costs need to be avoided.” Fuel prices were the biggest contributor to increased transport costs with an average of $77.57 spent a week by households in capital cities (up $5.38 in the last quarter alone) and $79.26 a week in regional centres (up $5.16). Sydney is still the most expensive capital city with households coughing up $477.56 a month on transport ahead of Melbourne ($446.97), Brisbane ($444.05), Perth ($390.45), Canberra ($386.38), Adelaide ($362.36), Darwin ($356.96) and Hobart ($350.14). While Hobart had the lowest total transport costs, when measured as a percentage of typical household income it was ranked as the last affordable capital city. Many are concerned about the apparent disappearance of tennis star Peng Shuai, urging the Chinese authorities to offer “verifiable evidence” of her whereabouts and safety. Peng, a former doubles world No 1, has not been seen or heard from publicly since she accused a former high-ranking Chinese government official on 2 November of forcing her to have sex after playing tennis at his home. Videos of Peng Shuai having dinner with her coach and friends in a restaurant were released by Chinese media today. But Women’s Tennis Association Chairman and CEO Steve Simon said that “it remains unclear if she is free and able to make decisions on her own, without coercion or external interference”. Labor’s Chris Bowen and Liberal MP Stuart Robert talked on Sky News’ Sunday Agenda program this morning about the Morrison government’s religious freedom bill, expected to be tabled in parliament this week. Our friends at AAP have the story: It was a promise at the last federal election, but with only months remaining of this term of the Morrison government it is only this week bringing its religious freedom bill to parliament. Parliament gathers for what could be the final sitting fortnight before Australians go to the polls. Labor frontbencher Chris Bowen said his party wants to be constructive on the bill, but it has yet to see it. “The government has now been in office three years,” Bowen told Sky News’ Sunday Agenda program. “It was a big issue at the last election. Here we are at five minutes to midnight, three years of fiddling around and nothing.” But government frontbencher Stuart Robert insists the government has been consulting extensively and widely on the issue and is now able to bring it forward. However, the final result may not please everyone. “No one gets everything they all want in public policy, I think that’s a given on all sides of debate,” Robert told Sky News. “There always different voices in a debate, you have always got to try and find balance that can be really difficult.” But Bowen says the religious freedom bill is not the only issue the government has dragged its heel on. There was also the promise of the integrity commission, which Bowen said the prime minister has been fiddling around on, but again done nothing. But Robert said the government continues to consult extensively about an integrity commission, as it is in terms of an Indigenous voice to parliament, also promised at the last election. “We’ve always said we want the voice to be something that is a bipartisan agreement, we want something that Australians can embrace,” he said. He said Indigenous Australian minister Ken Wyatt is doing an extraordinary job working through 51 Indigenous Australian peak bodies to try and bring something to the table that everyone agree with. “The election is still a good six months way, so there is plenty of time for us to move forward on what we took to the Australian people three years ago,” Robert said. Victoria police have confirmed that four children – two boys and two girls – were found deceased after a house fire in Werribee, Victoria. A 10-year-old boy, three-year-old boy, six-year-old girl and one-year-old girl were found dead. Four people, believed to be children, are unaccounted for after a house fire in Werribee, Victoria. Investigators believe the house fire started in the Mantello Drive property just after 1am. Victoria police said that a man, a woman, and an eight-year-old boy were able to escape the fire. The man has been taken to hospital with smoke-related serious injuries. The woman is in hospital, being treated for smoke inhalation, and the boy has been taken to hospital with minor injuries. Police are investigating the cause of the fire. Finally, Speers asked Chalmers whether Labor has settled on a 2030 climate target yet? Chalmers said no, and that Labor would be coming to a view on that in the coming weeks. Chalmers: Well, we are having a discussion about the best target and the best suite of policies. At the next election it will be a choice. The government has a pamphlet, we’ll have a plan. We will announce our plan in the coming weeks... Speers asked why the hold up on Labor’s position. Are you still waiting for inputs, or is it just an argument amongst yourselves as to where to land? Chalmers: I wouldn’t describe it that way, David. We are having really constructive conversations with Anthony Albanese and Chris Bowen and the shadow cabinet. I will say this: we will strike the right level of ambition when it comes to climate policy. Good climate policy is good economic policy. If we get cleaner energy into the system, there will be more jobs, more investment and more opportunities for people in the regions. As a Queenslander, I think it is tremendously important that we recognise there is an appetite right around Australia for us to do something meaningful about cleaner and cheaper clean energy. The regions stand to be among the biggest beneficiaries according to the Business Council modelling. We could do something meaningful, be practical problem solvers and do something that doesn’t abandon communities or our traditional income streams. Speers turned the conversation to debt. You mentioned debt. Gross debt is already higher than $850bn, on track to pass $1tn. What would you do about this debt mountain, should you inherit it? Chalmers: Well, this trillion dollars in debt comes courtesy of a budget which is absolutely riddled with rorts and waste and mismanagement. This government is THE most wasteful government since federation. We need to prioritise growth in the first so any new spending we propose is about growing the economy. The second thing is to deal with the legacy of rorts and waste and mismanagement left to us by the government if the government changes hands. And thirdly there is an opportunity for tax reform in areas like multinational taxes. But our priority in the near term is to make sure we get wages growing again, we get the secure work and we don’t turn what has been a decade of missed opportunities and wasted opportunities in the economy into another decade of that. And that means doing things like growing the economy by getting cleaner and cheaper energy, by training our people for opportunities as they emerge, turning our ideas into jobs. All of these things are absolutely crucial to growing the economy. We will get bang for buck in the budget. It will be a responsible budget, not another three years of the and waste and manage management we’ve seen from the most wasteful government since federation. Speers: It sounds like some tax change on multinationals, not really any spending cuts beyond the areas that you have described as rorts. You will still be largely relying on growing the economy to fix that debt problem? Chalmers: I don’t think we should lightly dismiss the opportunities to wind back some of the rorts and mismanagement in the budget. We are talking about tens of billions of dollars that the government has wasted on car park rorts and settling the robodebt case and all the money they’ve sprayed around for political purposes. We shouldn’t dismiss the opportunities there to have a far more responsible budget when it comes to spending, at the same time as we do something about multinationals, but, yes, the priority, with all of our spending and the reason we hold every proposed policy up to the light and we judge it by what it means for growth, what it means for secure work, because we would inherit a trillion dollars of Liberal debt with not enough to show for it and we need to be and will be much more responsible with the budget than the Liberals have been over the last eight years. Speers asked Chalmers whether any taxes would be higher under a Labor government? Chalmers confirmed that Labor will focus on multinational taxes, but to watch this space for everything else. Our priority is multinational taxes. We haven’t finalised our full suite, as you would appreciate. There are still two budgets between now and next. The mid-year budget and then the pre-election after that, so it makes sense to maintain flexibility on our final set of policies. We’ve said repeatedly we won’t take an identical agenda on tax or anything that we took to the last election to the next election. But we will finalise our policies, all of our policies, including on tax, with an emphasis on multinational taxes between now and the election. Speers asked what Labor would do to help lift wages. I know unions are now saying they want industrywide bargaining, or the power to negotiate across multiple employers. Would that help lift wages? At first, Chalmers avoided talking about industrywide bargaining. Instead, he talked about getting “productivity growing against and ... business investment at acceptable levels”. He also said that Labor has “a policy out there about making work more secure”. But Speers pressed on about the union’s calls for industrywide bargaining, specifically comments from ACTU secretary Sally McManus that this is the best way to secure wage increases. Chalmers responded: When it comes to comments made by the ACTU, I think for the last few years, people on all sides of the employment relationship have expressed their concerns about enterprise bargaining, and have proposed ways to make it better and we take suggestions made by the unions and made by the employer groups very seriously... [Industrywide bargaining] is not part of our policies. We announced our policy on industrial relations some time ago. Speers turned the conversation towards the cost of living. Speers: “[The prime minister] said that power prices, petrol prices would all rise more under a Labor government than a Coalition government. Are you prepared to debate that? Chalmers: I would absolutely be delighted to have an election about cost of living and real wages going backwards and the fact that the prime minister has been lying to Australians about the economy and that has real consequences for working families. If he wants to have an election on the fact that petrol prices have gone up on average over the last year something like $900 for an average family with an average car, at the same time as real wages have gone backwards $700 over the last year, then we say bring it on. Under the Morrison government, petrol prices are skyrocketing, real wages are going down and working families are going backwards, and I think that should be central to an election about the economy, about living standards, and about the prime minister’s failures on economic management. Speers has asked Chalmers about the anti-lockdown and anti-vaccination protestors that took place in Victoria yesterday. Do you accept that there are some people concerned about vaccine mandates who aren’t necessarily extremists? Chalmers took the opportunity to condemn the violent threats against state politicians, and criticise Scott Morrison for his alleged inaction on the issue. You can express a view in this country without dragging around gallows and noose and calling for premiers to be hanged. I condemn without reservation, without qualification, the violent threats being made here, even if the prime minister won’t. We live in a society, and that means we have obligations to each other to try to tame this virus, to look out for each other, to protect each other, to try to keep each other safe and what the prime minister is trying to do is trying to divide us, trying to diminish that collective effort and undermine all of the good and all of the progress that Australians have made together. He does that with this dangerous dog whistling double-speak that we see from him. He does it by claiming credit for high vaccination rates without taking responsibility for the measures that are necessary to get those rates up. And I think what is especially troubling to mainstream Australia is the rest of us see the kind of violent politics that have emerged in the United States in the last couple of years, and we want to reject it, and the prime minister seems to want to embrace those kind of violent views and violent threats. And so I think the country is crying out for leadership and they are not getting it from this prime minister, and if he wants to keep playing this dangerous game with dangerous consequences, then the country doesn’t just have an opportunity to throw him out at the election, they have an obligation to do that. Shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers is speaking to David Speers on ABC Insiders. Food banks in Australia were overwhelmed during the Covid-19 pandemic. Guardian Australia has collated data from the past decade from the three major food relief providers nationally – Foodbank, OzHarvest and SecondBite – and spoken to organisations working in or connected to the food relief sector, as well as people directly using these services. The evidence is overwhelming: demand for food relief was rising before the pandemic hit, even before the black summer bushfires that preceded it. Read the full story here: Meanwhile in Victoria, 89% of those aged 12 years and over are fully vaccinated. Let’s take a look at updated vaccination rates. In NSW, 94.4% of people aged 16 years and older have received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine; 91.8% are fully vaccinated. United Australia party MP Craig Kelly won The Australian Skeptics award for “the proponent of the most preposterous piece of pseudoscientific or paranormal piffle”. On the other hand, Guardian Australia journalist Melissa Davey was named as the winner of the Barry Williams award for skeptical journalism for her work exposing false claims about ivermectin and its promotion. Read the full story here: International students have arrived in Australia from Singapore for the first time since November last year. The head of the country’s peak university body hopes they are the first of many. Our friends at AAP have the full story: International students returning after almost two years separated from Australian campuses during the pandemic will hopefully be the first of many, says the head of the nation’s peak university body. The contingent has arrived on flights touching down in Sydney and Melbourne from Singapore as part of the two-way travel bubble between the two countries. None of the fully vaccinated passengers are required to enter quarantine. Universities Australia chief executive Catriona Jackson says the students are the first from overseas since small numbers returned in November last year. “Universities have worked closely with government and health authorities for more than 18 months on plans to safely welcome back our international friends,” she said on Sunday. “Around 130,000 international students remain outside Australia and they are all very eager to re-join their classmates.” Those landing on Sunday will be joined on 7 December by about 500 others as part of a NSW government initiative. Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the news today, Sunday 21 November 2021. Severe weather warnings are in place across New South Wales, with heavy rainfall expected over the central west slopes and plains. the Hunter, and the mid-north coast. The Northern Territory yesterday recorded nine new local Covid-19 cases in the Binjari community just outside of Katherine. Residents of Binjari, as well as the neighbouring community Rockhole, are now in a hard lockdown and only allowed to leave their homes for essential services. Meanwhile, fully vaccinated travellers will be allowed to travel into South Australia from Tuesday, as long as they test negative for Covid-19 within 72 hours before departing.Sunday morning? My daughter comes in at 6am. She’ll be wearing a long nightdress, with her hair over her face, like a horror movie character. She gives me a cuddle and says, ‘I appreciate you, Mum.’ She’s not a teenager yet like my boys, which is probably why I like her. I’ll make a tea and then I pray, before scrolling through tabloid fodder. A morning routine? Frying pancakes in my dressing gown before a stroll through the woods with Abdal, my husband. We walk at the same time every day, I love the familiarity; saying hello to the same dogs and people. Halfway along – opposite a retirement home – there’s a bench where we sit, looking out for deer and talking about growing old together. How do you have fun? Ridiculous as it sounds, getting all the housework done. It’s so satisfying. If I’m downstairs doing laundry, I’ll play my Renault Clio Spotify playlist: it’s a mixture of Bollywood and noughties pop. It’s what I listened to when I started driving. Upstairs political talk radio is always on – that’s all my son’s budgie Raphe is into. Sundays growing up… It was hectic, I’m one of six children. And we were considered a small family compared to our aunts, uncles and cousins. All weekend we’d have relatives everywhere. Today, I treasure the day being ordered and calm, though I do miss the madness. A special Sunday? The weekend before my first TV cooking show aired in 2017, that Sunday night – waiting for the week to start – was just so exciting and daunting. I was buzzing: it was me, stepping out into the unknown, alone. This huge moment. Abdal bought a cake to celebrate – he wouldn’t let me bake one. Sunday evening? I’ll have a maintenance bath to prepare myself for the week ahead: face scrubbed; hair washed; there’s shaving. Then I’d like to relax, but I suddenly have to share my living room with two teenagers and a PlayStation. Instead I’ll snuggle up in bed with Sophie Ellis-Bextor’s autobiography, and look through all the weird selfies my daughter has taken that day. Nadiya’s Fast Flavours airs on Thursdays at 8.30pm, BBC TwoAs a child labourer working in the flower markets of Madurai, there was nothing more exciting for PS Vinothraj than when the film crews would descend. He would put down his sacks of petals and look up in awe at the camera operators who sat atop cranes to get dramatic sweeping shots. It was, to his nine-year-old mind, intoxicating. “I knew that’s what I wanted to do with my life,” he said. “My passion for cinema was born in that flower market.” The odds were stacked heavily against him. Vinothraj was born into a poverty-stricken family of daily wage labourers in Tamil Nadu. He left school, aged nine, to support his family after his father died and by 14 was working in the sweatshops of Tiruppur. This month, his debut film Pebbles, a Tamil-language movie made on a shoestring budget and set in the arid landscape where he grew up, was unanimously selected as India’s entry to the Oscars. In February this year, it had won the Tiger award for best film at the 50th International Film Festival Rotterdam. In a New Yorker review, Vinothraj was described as an “extraordinary observational filmmaker” whose film presents “a gendered vision of rage”. Pebbles is, as Vinothraj describes it, a “snapshot of a life”. It depicts the journey of an abusive, alcoholic father and his son as they walk back home through the barren, overwhelmingly hot landscape of rural Tamil Nadu, after the father has dragged the boy out of school and taken him to a village where he wants to force his estranged wife to return home. It was inspired by true events; as Vinothraj says, “the story chose me”. When his sister married a man from a neighbouring village, the family were unable to provide a dowry. In a humiliating march, his sister was sent back to the family home by her new husband through the parched landscape. It was this walk of shame, that so many women are still forced to endure, that Vinothraj wanted to capture. “But I wanted to make it so it was the husband who had to make the walk, not the woman,” he said. “It was my small way of taking revenge for this humiliation of my sister.” He also chose to portray the journey through the eye of a child, the son, to inject “hope and humanity” into their journey. The film focuses on the small but devastating tragedies and inequalities that life in rural Tamil Nadu inflicts on women, often at the hands of men. Women forced to flee from the violent hands of husbands who drink too much. Women forced to get off buses in blazing heat when their babies, awoken by men aggressively coming to blows, need to be breast fed. Women forced to patiently scoop water from the ground and into jars as the merciless sun beats down. Tamil Nadu’s oppressive environment is omnipresent in Pebbles. “The landscape is the third main character in the film,” Vinothraj said. “I wanted to explore it in detail, the role it plays in the plight of the people.” For authenticity, he filmed during the hottest days of the year in May. Temperatures got so high during the 27-day shoot that cameras began to malfunction. Vinothraj’s determination to make films never wavered. While working in garment factories at 14, he enrolled into college between 6am and 10am before back-to-back shifts, realising he would need education to go into cinema. Small things would bring glimmers of joy. In Pebbles a girl, whose family are depicted in such abject poverty that they hunt for rats to eat, is pictured momentarily euphoric as she collects helicopter seeds in her dress and then scatters them into the air. “This was how I used to feel when I was a child,” said Vinothraj. “The conditions of my life were bad but I could still find moments to be happy. I did not feel like I was suffering because I did not know anything else.” At 19, after his bosses tried to marry him off – a tactic used to keep child labourers working in factories once they grow up – he decided it was time to leave. He had heard that Chennai, the bustling main metropolis of Tamil Nadu, was where films were made and movie people mingled. “I had no idea how I would survive; my only thought was that I had to pursue my passion for cinema,” he said. On arriving in Chennai he slept in the streets until he convinced a DVD shop to hire him. “In the DVD shop, I used to watch three films a day,” he said. “English films, Korean films, Japanese films, Latin American films. I loved Charlie Chaplin’s The Kid, and Children of Heaven, an Iranian film from the 1970s, and my favourite was Eternity and a Day, by a Greek director. I could never understand the dialogue or subtitles but I was just watching the visuals. That helped me form my own film language.” The DVD shop also gave Vinothraj access to film directors, who would borrow or buy films, often on his recommendation. After almost three years, he was hired as an assistant on a short film and began to work his way up the industry until eight years later he was an assistant director on a major Tamil film. He finally began working on Pebbles three years ago. The success of the film has left Vinothraj in a state of disbelief. He thought its only audience would be the villagers whose lives inspired the story. “I’m awestruck at how this story has travelled, how people from all over the world have connected to the film and understood its essence,” he said. “This is all I ever wanted.”Nestled among towering Cumbrian hills and accessible by just a handful of roads, Alston Moor is said to be the highest market town in England. There are few amenities on the doorstep – getting a takeaway delivery is out of the question – so it may not immediately seem like the most desirable place for a doctor to settle down, especially if they are used to the hustle and bustle of a city. But what may have been a bit of a challenge in the past has now become a major headache for the town, one of the most remote places in England, which is in desperate need of a GP. A nine-month-long search has so far yielded not a single application. Alston Moor needs two GPs to run its practice but only has one, due to the retirement of a longstanding doctor who left after 30 years of service. The remaining GP, Dr Claire Corlett, is holding the fort, looking after 2,000 patients – virtually the town’s entire population – alone. “We haven’t even had one application,” Corlett said. “Historically, we’ve always found it difficult to recruit. But I think it’s because of where we are, because we’re so remote and rural.” Alston’s dilemma comes amid a general shortage of GPs, with the Royal College of GPs (RCGP) in September saying doctors were “finding it increasingly hard to guarantee safe care” for millions of patients because they were unable to cope with soaring demand. GP numbers have fallen by 4.5% since 2015 – in some parts of Cumbria, by as much as 24% – while demand has risen with a growing and ageing population. In May, the British Medical Association said Covid-19 had tested GPs “like never before”, and warned that they would need considerably more financial support from the government while coming out of the pandemic. What makes the role in Alston slightly more unusual is that the new doctor would need to be on hand for medical emergencies that happen locally, as the area is so cut off that it can take a while for an ambulance to arrive. Residents are currently trying to save their local ambulance service, which is due to be cut and replaced by a community first responder – a trained member of the public rather than a medical professional. Corlett, who has been at the practice for four and a half years, was worried about taking on this work when she first started the job but says it has not been as daunting as she expected. “We do, if needed, go out to emergencies. If we think somebody’s having a heart attack and might need a defibrillator before the ambulance can get here, then we will go with the defib. “That’s something when I first came here I was frightened about because that’s not really my thing,” she said. The hands-on element of the job became a welcome change from what she felt was essentially directing patients to other services as a GP in a busy urban practice, which almost drove her to quit general practice altogether. She said: “I wasn’t really sure whether I wanted to be a GP any more, and then ended up here, and I love it. It’s amazing, it’s beautiful. It’s a lovely community.” Alston Moor is in an area of outstanding natural beauty, with breathtaking views across rolling green hills and wild moorland. Corlett thinks the area could be misunderstood as a kind of backwater, where the people are old-fashioned, but that could not be further from the truth. “It’s a lovely, lovely, lovely practice. And I wish I could bring people here and kind of show them and let them work here for a day because then I think they’d drop their inner-city jobs and come and live up here,” she said. “I ended up here very serendipitously. I saw a job advert and thought I’d go have a look, and I’d been here for about five minutes when I knew I wanted to come.” The residents embraced her immediately, offering suggestions as to where she should live. She was even taken down a mine to be shown the work done by the local rescue unit. “You feel very much part of the community and that you’re not just a person’s GP,” she said.After a particularly difficult few days for Boris Johnson and his government, a senior figure involved in decision making in Whitehall was tearing his hair out on Friday afternoon. Johnson and transport secretary Grant Shapps had spent the previous day announcing almost £100bn of spending to improve rail links across the north of England. It was supposed to be great news for levelling up and for people behind the red wall. But despite the colossal expenditure, the announcement had gone down like a lead balloon, and the north was crying betrayal. “The great train station robbery,” said Bradford’s Telegraph and Argus front page. “Second class ticket for the north,” declared the Manchester Evening News, while the Doncaster Free Press described the axing of the eastern section of the HS2 high-speed line to Leeds as a “slap in the face”. Many of its readers, it said, had been forced out of their homes to make way for the line’s construction, only to be told, too late, that it would never be built. Back in Westminster, this PR disaster from a government committed to levelling up was being blamed in part on a Treasury cutting up rough on costs, but mainly on a prime minister who had broken rule number one in the manual of expectation management. His cardinal error was to have overpromised, only to have to scale back after chancellor Rishi Sunak spelled out the brutal post-Covid financial realities. “It was all the hyperbole, all spoiled by over-egging it early on,” said the Whitehall official. “We should have come off the full-fat version far earlier. What we ended up with is still a good plan. What really angers me, though, is that it really is pretty hard to fuck up £100bn of spending on a great announcement like this, so that people who will get the benefits get annoyed about it. That takes some bloody talent, it really does.” The damage had been done. Northern Tory MPs who won their seats in 2019 thanks to Johnson’s promises of improved infrastructure were angry, and getting it in the neck from constituents. The red wall was up in arms. Those MPs had already had to explain a recent manifesto-busting rise in national insurance that will hit their constituents’ pockets next April. Then came the Owen Paterson affair and a torrent of sleaze allegations that had led Labour to label Johnson’s party as corrupt. And then this – the great rail betrayal, as it was being called. In the parliamentary Conservative party at Westminster, the rail announcement had sharpened feelings between red wallers and southern Tory MPs, many of whom had opposed HS2 on cost grounds. The talk in the Commons bars was more and more of Tory factions, divides, and tensions in the tribe. “I have seen it and felt it. The red wall MPs are not just angry with Boris – they’re angry with the rest of us,” said one veteran southern Tory. A young southern Conservative MP from the 2019 intake tried at first to downplay the seriousness of it all, saying things were not yet at crisis point for the party or for Johnson. But he was clear that relations between backbenchers on the one hand, and No 10 and the whips on the other, were strained in a way he had never known. “Many of us used to think Boris was a guy who just won everything with the exception of Chesham and Amersham [the byelection won by the Lib Dems last year]. There was tremendous faith in the idea that while he might do a few things that cause difficulties for us, overall he was an election-winning machine. It was a case of ‘in Boris we trust’. Now we think, hang on, was it Boris who has done this thing that has caused us so much shit?” All last week, Johnson was struggling in a way that has given Labour new hope. As with the Paterson saga – during which he tried to please a few old Brexiter friends of Paterson like Iain Duncan Smith and John Redwood only for his endeavours to backfire – the northern rail plans had ended up pleasing almost no one. The Tory party appeared more fractured and fractious than at any time since Johnson became leader. Last week, an announcement on social care further infuriated Tory MPs from less well-off areas, as it meant poorer pensioners paying the same as wealthier people. The idea that a government led by Johnson would be progressive had fallen victim again to lack of money and the Treasury’s wariness of further tax rises. Senior backbenchers such as Damian Green and former health secretary Jeremy Hunt criticised the plan as unprogressive. A Commons rebellion is brewing ahead of a vote on the issue early this week. Many of the Tory party’s recent problems can be put down to poor judgments and poor presentation. But as Johnson struggles to keep a grip, it is also becoming clearer that a core problem is that of how to govern for a new, post-2019 coalition of Tory voters that is so wide and disparate, and includes Tory conquests behind the red wall. As one former minister put it: “What we are seeing is that the very nature of the coalition of voters we put together in 2019 to win an 80-strong majority may be what causes us the greatest problem. Our apparent strength could turn out to be our biggest weakness.” New analysis by Robert Ford, published today in the Observer, divides Conservative seats into groups, and notes both how different they are socially and economically, and how difficult it will be for the prime minister to please any one batch without seriously alienating others. Ford’s message is that because the Tory seats are so varied, as recent events are beginning to show, Johnson’s majority may not be as impregnable as it once seemed. Ford, who is professor of politics at the University of Manchester, says there are around 70 “red wall” seats, which he defines as “newly competitive seats with Labour as the local opponent in leave-voting areas” in England and Wales. Then there are at least 50 “traditional swing seats”, which he categorises as “market towns and swingy suburbs whose mixed demographics reflect the nation and where party control has shifted over many cycles”. Next are seats affected by post-Brexit realignments. These include around two dozen Tory-held seats in remain areas where the threat is from Labour and another 30 where the danger to the Conservatives is posed by the Liberal Democrats. His analysis identifies two broad new groups that the Tories will have to defend at the next election: the “red wall” and the “remain wall” seats. All this poses serious challenges for Johnson. “Seat losses in the traditional swing areas are a certainty if the government’s popularity falls,” writes Ford. “But if these are combined with substantial losses on either of the new fronts, the Tory majority is immediately at risk. “The government therefore cannot afford to alienate either the ‘red wall’ or the ‘remain wall’. But these seats are poles apart. The red wall seats cluster in the Midlands and north; the remain wall in the south. Red wall seats are working-class and graduate-light. Remain wall seats are middle-class and graduate-heavy. Red wall seats have low house prices and more council housing; remain wall seats have sky-high house prices and high rates of home ownership. This divide in outlook and priorities stretches beyond the electoral battleground: many of the 200 or so (currently) safe Tory seats resemble one of the new battlegrounds, and their MPs will often align with less secure colleagues.” Ford adds: “The two new fronts … are different worlds, at odds over the government’s domestic policy agenda. Ambitious ‘levelling-up’ investment is what red wall voters want to see; remain wall voters fear higher tax bills will follow.” Last week, the strains of recent political setbacks appeared to be taking their toll on Johnson’s authority and his confidence. Nowhere was the prime minister’s reduced hold over his MPs more evident than at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, when the Tory benches were conspicuously empty. Later that day, at a meeting of the backbench 1922 committee, Johnson was hoarse with a cold as he apologised for the Paterson affair. One senior MP who was there said that after the mea culpa he tried to revert to type but couldn’t pull it off. “He was not on form, and the audience was not up for being boostered. He started by apologising and said he had crashed the car over the Paterson business. But then he tried to go on to the usual stuff, saying, ‘But let’s remember we got Brexit done!’ … You could hear people thinking ‘oh come on, Boris’. It was not time for that kind of speech.” There is as yet no serious talk of a leadership challenge. As one young backbencher put it: “No one is saying, ‘It would all be great if only we had Rishi or if only we had Liz [Truss]’. He is not in that kind of trouble.” But there are seeds of serious discontent. Many younger MPs are angry at the way they have been disregarded since entering parliament. One from the 2019 intake said: “What unites us is that neither the whips nor No 10 is in tune with the parliamentary party. They don’t seem to listen to us or see things coming. They don’t seem to listen when we warn because a lot of us had conversations with them saying it was appalling to even think about getting Paterson off. “They are only worried about what Iain Duncan Smith and David Davis think. With the Paterson thing, they were reading those two as a guide, while there were 300 of us saying, ‘What are we doing? This is madness’.” Some of Johnson’s old party enemies also appear to sense a new weakness. Yesterday, George Osborne accused the prime minister of timidity over the axing of the eastern leg of HS2. “It’s not often you can say this about Boris Johnson but he lacks ambition,” Osborne told the Financial Times. “Levelling up, at the moment, feels more like a slogan than a plan. You can talk about big infrastructure but unless you actually deliver it, it’s going to sound a bit hollow.” Increasingly over recent days there have been signs that Johnson will back away from triggering Article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol and avoid a potential trade war with the EU and all the damaging economic consequences that could have in the run-up to Christmas and beyond. Some Tories have also seen the decision by former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre to withdraw from the contest to be chair of broadcasting regulator Ofcom as a sign that No 10 is no longer quite as confident and is curbing its appetite for conflict. A former cabinet minister said: “I think the period of Boris thinking he can do as he pleases when he pleases may be over. Something has changed in his demeanour in recent days, which suggests he knows he is not as invincible as he thought he was only a few weeks ago.”Last Monday, James Martin was sentenced to four and a half years in jail for killing Stella Frew. They had argued in his van, then he accelerated away with her hanging off its side, eventually running Frew over, causing her catastrophic injuries. Martin sped away with her handbag in the van, which he later dumped. The cause of their altercation? Martin refused to pay her for the sex act she had just performed on him. Like many women who sell sex, Frew struggled with drug and alcohol addiction and was under their influence when she approached Martin. Her daughter described her for the court as the “kindest, most warm-hearted woman” who had been abused and hurt by men her whole life. The judge commented that Martin had shown barely any empathy for his victim. And so it has always been. Prostitution is laced with mortal peril: women who sell sex are 18 times more likely to be murdered than women who don’t, according to one study. Yet these women have throughout history been cast as second-class citizens, not worthy of the same concern as other victims. How best to prevent violence against those selling sex, the vast majority of whom are women, is a question that has long divided feminists. For some, it is about decriminalising the selling and buying of sex, which in England and Wales would mean dropping criminal offences such as kerb crawling, soliciting and running a brothel. There will always be prostitution, so the argument goes, so best to keep it out in the open. Others agree that the selling of sex should be decriminalised in all circumstances and think women should be provided with ample support to get out of prostitution, but argue that the buying of sex, an almost exclusively male activity, should always be a crime. The full decriminalisation argument is driven by a belief that it is possible to sufficiently strengthen the agency of those who sell sex to transform it into “sex work”, like any other job. You can see what makes it an appealing frame, powered by an archetype that has evolved from the Pretty Woman male saviour narrative, to the sex-positive woman sticking two fingers up at a socially conservative society by making bags of money doing something she loves. Sex work is a choice that should be respected and we should destigmatise it by decriminalising the men who buy it and regulate it to make it safer. Women railing against this are depicted as prudes constrained by their own squeamishness about sex. There are two reality checks that bring these theoretical arguments crashing down to earth. The first is that for every woman or man selling sex who regards it as a positive choice, and there are some, there are many more who have been trafficked or exploited and are effectively enslaved to criminal networks, working for a pittance, or for drugs to forget the trauma of being forced into selling yourself to be penetrated again and again, or for nothing at all. In one investigation into sex trafficking, Leicestershire police reported that 86% of the women in brothels they visited were Romanian; in Northumbria, it was 75%. Numerous studies have shown just how dangerous prostitution is: a majority of women selling sex have experienced severe and repeated violence, with more than two-thirds suffering from PTSD at levels comparable to war vetera ns. Women who are actually or effectively being forced into selling sex have little voice in policy debates, although there are prominent survivor networks that argue for abolition. Second, as the feminist campaigner Julie Bindel exposed in her 2017 book The Pimping of Prostitution, decriminalisation and regulation has not been the success its advocates claim. Bindel visited and interviewed women working in legal brothels in the Netherlands, Germany, Nevada, New Zealand and Australia and found exploitation to be rife, with legalisation acting to empower brothel owners. In one Las Vegas brothel, women weren’t allowed out unaccompanied or without their manager’s permission. In a German brothel, women had to service six men a day at the minimum rate just to make back the room rent. In a New Zealand brothel, women said men could simply complain to the manager and get their money back, leaving them with nothing. Decriminalisation increases the overall extent of prostitution in a country without decreasing its harms or delivering any of the promised benefits of regulation. In New Zealand, Bindel revealed there were only 11 brothel health and safety inspections over a 12-year period. And decriminalisation makes it even harder for the police to combat trafficking; Spanish police describe how difficult it is to investigate when they enter a brothel and clearly frightened and distressed young women tell them they are working there by choice. Decriminalisation can’t make prostitution safe because it is inherently dangerous and exploitative. How is a woman selling sex supposed to maintain safe boundaries or withdraw consent when a man physically capable of killing her is hurting her? The men who buy sex all too often escape scrutiny. The Invisible Men project documents the nauseating way men talk online about their experience of women selling sex, very little of it printable. Research finds that men who buy sex are also more likely to abuse their partners, have a stronger preference for impersonal sex and to commit rape and other sex offences. Correlation may not equal causation, but it’s not hard to imagine how using women for a price, even if it hurts them, further hardens already toxic attitudes towards women. These men have a vested interest in the sanitisation of their sex-buying. Perhaps the most extraordinary example is the former MP Keith Vaz, who chaired a home affairs select committee inquiry that came down against criminalising those who buy sex, and who a few months later was exposed as having offered to buy cocaine for two men selling sex. There should be zero stigma, only help and support for those caught up in prostitution. But we legitimise the men who engage in the harmful practice of buying sex to our detriment. In the UK, it is estimated about one in 10 men have paid for sex; in Spain, where it is decriminalised, it is much higher. To accept that prostitution is always going to happen, and therefore the best we can do is regulate it, not only means tolerating the abuse of women: it is to be complicit in its expansion. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistStanding in front of the partial ruins of Rome’s Colosseum, Boris Johnson explained that a motive to tackle the climate crisis could be found in the fall of the Roman empire. Then, as now, he argued, the collapse of civilization hinged on the weakness of its borders. “When the Roman empire fell, it was largely as a result of uncontrolled immigration – the empire could no longer control its borders, people came in from the east and all over the place,” the British prime minister said in an interview on the eve of crucial UN climate talks in Scotland. Civilization can go into reverse as well as forwards, as Johnson told it, with Rome’s fate offering grave warning as to what could happen if global heating is not restrained. This wrapping of ecological disaster with fears of rampant immigration is a narrative that has flourished in far-right fringe movements in Europe and the US and is now spilling into the discourse of mainstream politics. Whatever his intent, Johnson was following a current of rightwing thought that has shifted from outright dismissal of climate change to using its impacts to fortify ideological, and often racist, battle lines. Representatives of this line of thought around the world are, in many cases, echoing eco-fascist ideas that themselves are rooted in an earlier age of blood-and-soil nationalism. In the US, a lawsuit by the Republican attorney general of Arizona has demanded the building of a border wall to prevent migrants coming from Mexico as these people “directly result in the release of pollutants, carbon dioxide, and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere”. In Spain, Santiago Abascal, leader of the populist Vox party, has called for a “patriotic” restoration of a “green Spain, clean and prosperous”. In the UK, the far-right British National party has claimed to be the “only true green party” in the country due to its focus on migration. And in Germany, the rightwing populist party Alternative for Germany has tweaked some of its earlier mockery of climate science with a platform that warns “harsh climatic conditions” in Africa and the Middle East will see a “gigantic mass migration towards European countries”, requiring toughened borders. Meanwhile, France’s National Front, once a bastion of derisive climate denial, has founded a green wing called New Ecology, with Marine Le Pen, president of the party, vowing to create the “world’s leading ecological civilization” with a focus on locally grown foods. “Environmentalism [is] the natural child of patriotism, because it’s the natural child of rootedness,” Le Pen said in 2019, adding that “if you’re a nomad, you’re not an environmentalist. Those who are nomadic … do not care about the environment; they have no homeland.” Le Pen’s ally Hervé Juvin, a National Rally MEP, is seen as an influential figure on the European right in promoting what he calls “nationalistic green localism”. Simply ignoring or disparaging the science isn’t the effective political weapon it once was. “We are seeing very, very little climate denialism in conversations on the right now,” said Catherine Fieschi, a political analyst and founder of Counterpoint, who tracks trends in populist discourse. But in place of denial is a growing strain of environmental populism that has attempted to dovetail public alarm over the climate crisis with disdain for ruling elites, longing for a more traditional embrace of nature and kin and calls to banish immigrants behind strong borders. Millions of people are already being displaced from their homes, predominately in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and South Asia, due to disasters worsened by climate change such as flooding, storms and wildfires. In August, the United Nations said Madagascar was on the brink of the world’s first “climate change famine”. The number of people uprooted around the world will balloon further, to as many as 1.2 billion by 2050 by some estimates, and while most will move within their own countries, many millions are expected to seek refuge across borders. This mass upending of lives is set to cause internal and external conflicts that the Pentagon, among others, has warned will escalate into violence. The response to this trend on the right has led to what academics Joe Turner and Dan Bailey call “ecobordering”, where restrictions on immigration are seen as vital to protect the nativist stewardship of nature and where the ills of environmental destruction are laid upon those from developing countries, ignoring the far larger consumptive habits of wealthy nations. In an analysis of 22 far-right parties in Europe, the academics found this thinking is rife among rightwing parties and “portrays effects as causes and further normalizes racist border practices and colonial amnesia within Europe”. Turner, an expert in politics and migration at the University of York, said the link between climate and migration is “an easy logic” for politicians such as Johnson as it plays into longstanding tropes on the right that overpopulation in poorer countries is a leading cause of environmental harm. More broadly, it is an attempt by the right to seize the initiative on environmental issues that have for so long been the preserve of center-left parties and conservationists. “The far right in Europe has an anti-immigration platform, that’s their bread and butter, so you can see it as an electoral tactic to start talking about green politics,” Turner said, adding that migrants are being blamed in two ways – first, for moving to countries with higher emissions and then adding to those emissions, as rightwing figures in Arizona have claimed; and secondly for supposedly bringing destructive, polluting habits with them from their countries of origin. A mixture of this Malthusian and ethno-nationalist thinking is being distilled into political campaigning, as in a political pamphlet described in Turner and Bailey’s research paper from SVP, the largest party in Switzerland’s federal assembly, which shows a city crowded by people and cars belching out pollution, with a tagline that translates to “stop massive immigration”. A separate campaign ad by SVP claims that 1 million migrants will result in thousands of miles of new roads and that “anyone who wants to protect the environment in Switzerland must fight against mass immigration”. The far right depict migrants as being “essentially poor custodians of their own lands and then treating European nature badly as well”, Turner said. “So you get these headlines around asylum seekers eating swans, all these ridiculous scaremongering tactics. But they play into this idea that by stopping immigrants coming here, you are actually supporting a green project.” Experts are clear that the main instigators of the climate crisis are wealthy people in wealthy countries. The richest 1% of the world’s population were responsible for the emission of more than twice as much carbon dioxide as the poorer half of the world from 1990 to 2015, research has found, with people in the US causing the highest level of per capita emissions in the world. Adding new arrivals to high-emitting countries doesn’t radically ramp up these emissions at the same rate: a study by Utah State University found that immigrants are typically “using less energy, driving less, and generating less waste” than native-born Americans. ‘Protect our people’ Still, the idea of personal sacrifice is hard for many to swallow. While there is strengthening acceptance of climate science among the public, and a restlessness that governments have done so little to constrain global heating, support for climate polices plummets when it comes to measures that involve the taxing of gasoline or other impositions. According to a research paper co-authored by Fieschi, this has led to a situation where “detractors are taking up the language of freedom fighters”. “We are seeing the growth of accusations of climate hysteria as a way for elites to exploit ordinary people,” Fieschi said. “The solutions that are talked about involve spending more money on deserving Americans and deserving Germans and so on, and less on refugees. It’s ‘yes, we will need to protect people, but let’s protect our people.’” This backlash is visible in protest movements such as the gilets jaunes (yellow vests) in France, which became the longest-running protest movement in the country since the second world war by railing against, among other things, a carbon tax placed on fuel. Online, favored targets such as Greta Thunberg or Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez have been shown in memes as Nazis or devils intent on impoverishing western civilization through their supposedly radical ideas to combat climate change. Fieschi said the right’s interaction with climate is far more than just about borders – it is animating fears that personal freedoms are under attack from a cosseted, liberal elite. “You see these quite obviously populist arguments in the US and Europe that a corrupt elite, the media and government have no idea what ordinary people’s lives are like as they impose these stringent climate policies,” said Fieschi, whose research has analyzed the climate conversation on the right taking place on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and other social media platforms. This sort of online chatter has escalated since the Covid-19 pandemic started, Fieschi said, and is being fed along a line of influence that begins with small, conspiratorial rightwing groups spreading messages that are then picked up by what she calls “middle of the tail” figures with thousands of followers, and then in turn disseminated by large influencers and into mainstream center-right politics. “There are these conspiratorial accusations that Covid is a dry run for restrictions that governments want to impose with the climate emergency, that we need to fight for our freedoms on wearing masks and on all these climate rules,” Fieschi said. “There is a yearning for a pre-Covid life and a feeling climate policies will just cause more suffering. “What’s worrying,” Fieschi continued, “is that more reasonable parts of the right, mainstream conservatives and Republicans, are being drawn to this. They will say they don’t deny climate change but then tap into these ideas.” She said center-right French politicians have started disparaging climate activists as “miserabilists”, while Armin Laschet, the leader of the Christian Democratic Union who sought to succeed Angela Merkel, has said Germany should focus on its own industry and people in the face of cascading global crises. Green-cloaked nativism The interplay between environmentalism and racism has some of its deepest roots in the US, where some of the conservation movement’s totemic figures of the past embraced views widely regarded as abhorrent today. Wilderness was something viewed in the 19th century as bound in rugged, and exclusively white, masculinity, and manifest destiny demanded the expansion of a secure frontier. John Muir, known as the father of national parks in the US, described native Americans as “dirty” and said they “seemed to have no right place in the landscape”. Madison Grant, a leading figure in the protection of the American bison and the establishment of Glacier national park, was an avowed eugenicist who argued for “inferior” races to be placed into ghettoes and successfully lobbied for Ota Benga, a Congolese man, to be put on display alongside apes at the Bronx Zoo. This focus on racial hierarchies would come to be adopted into the ideology of the Nazis – themselves avowed conservationists. There has been something of a reckoning of this troubling past in recent years – a bronze statue of Theodore Roosevelt on horseback flanked by a native American man and an African man is to be removed from the front of the American Museum of Natural History in New York and at least one conservation group named after the slaveholder and anti-abolitionist John James Audubon is changing its name. But elsewhere, themes of harmful overpopulation have been picked up by a resurgent right from a liberal environmental movement that now largely demurs from the topic. Republicans, aware that many of their own younger voters are turned off by the relentless climate denial as they see their futures wreathed in wildfire smoke and flood water, have sensed an opportunity. “The right is reclaiming that older Malthusian population rhetoric and is using that as a cudgel in green terms rather than unpopular racist terms,” said Blair Taylor, program director at the Institute for Social Ecology, an educational and research body. “It’s weird that this has become a popular theme in the US west because the west is sparsely populated and that hasn’t slowed environmental destruction,” he added. “But this is about speaking to nativist fears, it isn’t about doing anything to solve the problem.” The spearhead for modern nativism in the US is, of course, Donald Trump who has, along with an often dismissive stance towards climate science itself, sought to portray migrants from Mexico and Central America as criminals and “animals” while vowing to restore clean air and water to deserving American citizens. If there is to be another iteration of a Trump presidency, or a successful campaign by one of his acolytes, the scientific denial may be dialed down somewhat while retaining the reflex nativism. The Republican lawsuit in Arizona may be a prelude to an ecological reframing of Trump’s fetish for border walls should the former president run again for office in 2024, with migrants again the target. “We will see weird theories that will spread blame in all the wrong directions,” Taylor said. “More walls, more borders, more exclusion – that’s most likely the way we are heading.” A recasting of environmentalism in this way has already branched out in different forms throughout the US right, spanning gun-toting preppers who view nature as a bastion to be defended from interlopers – “a ‘back to the land’ ideology where you are an earner and provider, not a not soft-handed soy boy,” as Taylor describes it – to the vaguely mystic “wellness” practitioners who have risen to prominence by spreading false claims over the effectiveness of Covid-19 vaccines. The latter group, Taylor said, includes those who have a fascination with organic farming, Viking culture, extreme conspiracy theories such as the QAnon fantasy and a rejection of science and reason in favour of discovering an “authentic self”. These disparate facets are all embodied, he said, in Jake Angeli, the so-called QAnon shaman who was among the rioters who stormed the US Capitol on 6 January. Angeli, who became famous for wearing horns and a bearskin headdress during the violent insurrection, was sentenced to 41 months in prison over his role in the riot. He gained media attention for refusing to eat the food served in jail because it was not organic. Angeli, who previously attended a climate march to promote his conspiracy-laden YouTube channel and said he is in favor of “cleansed ecosystems”, has been described as an eco-fascist, a term that has also been applied to Patrick Crusius, the Dallas man accused of killing 23 people in a mass shooting at a Walmart in El Paso, Texas, in 2019. In a document published online shortly before the shooting, Crusius wrote: “The environment is getting worse by the year … So the next logical step is to decrease the number of people in America using resources. If we can get rid of enough people, then our way of life can become more sustainable.” The shooting came just a few months after the terrorist massacre of 49 people in two mosques in Christchurch in New Zealand, with the perpetrator describing himself as an eco-fascist unhappy about the birthrate of immigrants. Such extreme, violent acts erupting from rightwing eco-populist beliefs are still rare but the “‘alt-right’ has been adept at taking concerns and making them mainstream”, said Taylor. “It has fostered the idea that nature is a place of savage survival that brings us back to original society, that nature itself is fascist because there is no equality in nature. That’s what they believe.” Advocates for those fleeing climate-induced disasters hope there will be a shift in the other direction, with some advocating for a new international refugee framework. The UN convention on refugees does not recognize climate change, and its effects, as a reason for countries to provide shelter to refugees. An escalation in forced displacement from drought, floods and other calamities will put further onus on the need for reform. But opening up the convention for a revamp could see it wound back as much as it could be expanded, given the growing ascendancy of populism and authoritarianism in many countries. “The big players aren’t invested in changing any of the definitions around refugees – in fact the US and UK are making it even more difficult to claim asylum,” said Turner. “I think what you’re going to see is internally displaced people increasing and the burden, as it already is, falling on neighbors in the global south.” Ultimately, the extent of the suffering caused by global heating, and the increasingly severe responses required to deal with that, will help determine the reactionary response. While greater numbers of people will call for climate action, any restrictions imposed by governments will provide a sense of vindication to rightwingers warning of overreaching elites. “My sense is that we won’t do enough to avoid others bearing the brunt of this,” Fieschi said. “Solidarity has its limits, after all. Sure, you want good things for the children of the world. But ultimately you will put your children first.” Research for this article was made possible with the support of the Heinrich Boell Foundation, Washington DC’s Transatlantic Media FellowshipLinda Greenhouse’s byline became synonymous with the supreme court during the 30 years she covered it for the New York Times. She excelled at unraveling complex legal riddles for the average reader. She also had tremendous common sense – an essential and depressingly rare quality among journalists. Both of these virtues are on display in her new book, which chronicles “12 months that transformed the supreme court” after the death of the liberal lion Ruth Bader Ginsburg and the obscenely rapid confirmation of her conservative successor, Amy Coney Barrett. As others have pointed out, Barrett’s ascension was the crowning achievement of a decades-long project of the American right, to pack the highest court with the kind of people who delight in telling graduating students things like the proper purpose of a legal career “is building the kingdom of God”. Barrett is also the sixth Catholic appointed to the court. Another, Neil Gorsuch, was raised Catholic but now attends the church of his wife, who was raised in the Church of England. Greenhouse describes the Federalist Society as the principal engine of this foul project. Founded in the second year of the Reagan administration to change the prevailing ideology of the leading law schools, its 70,000 members have become the de facto gatekeepers for every conservative lawyer hoping to serve in the executive branch or the judiciary. Most students of the judiciary know that all 226 judges appointed by Donald Trump were approved by the Federalists. But until I read Greenhouse’s book I never knew that every one of the 500-plus judges appointed by the two Bushes also earned the Federalist imprimatur. “Its plan from the beginning was to … nurture future generations of conservative law students” who years later would form the pool from which “conservative judges would be chosen”, Greenhouse writes. She also adds the telling detail that makes it clear that this situation is even worse than it appears. After Gorsuch thanked a Federalist banquet “from the bottom” of his heart, after his confirmation to the supreme court, the then White House counsel, Don McGahn, told the same gathering it was “completely false” that the Trump administration had “outsourced” judicial selection to the Federalists. “I’ve been a member of the Federalists since law school,” said McGahn. “So frankly, it seems like it’s been in-sourced.” Greenhouse’s main subject is the impact on the law of the replacement of a celebrated progressive, Ginsburg, with the anti-abortion and anti-contraception Barrett. A meticulous examination of the most important cases decided during Barrett’s first term demonstrates how the new justice contributed to Chief Justice John Roberts’ determination to “change how the constitution” understands race and religion. The centuries-old wall between church and state is being eroded and government efforts to promote integration – or prevent resegregation – are under steady attack. Roberts’s opposition to important sections of the 1965 Voting Rights Act goes all the way back to his service in Ronald Reagan’s justice department in the early 1980s. As chief justice he made his youthful scorn for the virtues of integration into the law of the land, writing a majority decision invalidating the plans of Seattle and Louisville to consider race to prevent resegregation of public schools. By a vote of 5-4 the court ruled the consideration of race violated the constitution’s guarantee of equal protection. Roberts’s opinion declared that the school systems’ “interest in avoiding resegregation was not sufficiently ‘compelling’ to justify a racially conscious remedy”. For most of the country’s history, the establishment clause of the constitution has prevented the government from “endorsing or coercing a religious practice or viewpoint”, Greenhouse writes, while “the free exercise clause requires the government to leave believers free to practice their faith”. But Roberts and his allies have thrown things upside down, turning the free exercise clause “from its historic role as a shield that protected believers from government interference into a sword that vaulted believers into a position of privilege”. Greenhouse is a woman of convictions. Even as a reporter, she was famous for taking part in a march supporting abortion rights. In a previous book she bragged of contributions to Planned Parenthood. But none of her critics could ever find any evidence that her stories in the Times were slanted by her personal beliefs. That objective stance was entirely appropriate when she was a daily reporter. But book writing is different. After doing such a good job of describing the decades-long rightwing campaign to produce a court whose views are increasingly at odds with the majority of voters, Greenhouse doesn’t endorse any ideas about how to remedy the situation. She shows no enthusiasm for the idea of expanding the number of seats on the court, which was championed by Pete Buttigieg and others during the 2020 election, and she doesn’t even support the idea that 83-year-old Stephen Breyer should feel any pressure to retire during the current Congress, to make sure Joe Biden can appoint, and a Democratic Senate confirm, a liberal successor. Similarly, Greenhouse never suggests Ginsburg was wrong to stay in office until her death, rather than retire during Barack Obama’s time in office so that she wouldn’t be replaced by someone like Barrett. Unwilling to regulate dark money’s vicious role in our politics, and happy to eviscerate the most basic protections of the Voting Rights Act, the court is increasingly tethered to religious rightwing orthodoxy. Greenhouse does a superb job of describing how we got here. What she lacks is the passionate imagination we need to re-balance an institution which poses an urgent threat to American democracy. Justice on the Brink is published in the US by Random HouseWhen Patricia Highsmith looked in the mirror, she saw both a lover and a killer. Early on, the reflected face had a fetching feline allure, but out of sight another facet of Highsmith seemed to belong, she said in 1942, in “a terrible other world of hell and the unknown”. As she aged, what she saw through the “evil distorting lens of my eye” changed: now a gravel-voiced, fire-breathing ogre stared back. Highsmith knew that there are always “two people in each person”, and in 1953 a nightmare confirmed this duality. She dreamed that she was incinerating a naked girl who shivered in a wooden bathtub; the funeral pyre was set with papers, presumably Highsmith’s manuscripts. Waking up, she admitted: “I had two identities: the victim and the murderer.” The characters in Highsmith’s novels accordingly come in pairs, doubles who are casualties of a fracture in what she called “the universal law of oneness”. Upright Guy and devious Bruno in Strangers on a Train begin as opposites but end as psychic twins after they exchange homicides. Tom in The Talented Mr Ripley kills the alluring Dickie, then assumes his identity. In the lesbian romance The Price of Salt, matronly Carol and girlish Therese merge, then are sundered by social disapproval: murders, which for Highsmith were “a kind of making love”, are here replaced by orgasms. Highsmith regarded writing, liquor and sex as her addictive vices, and like a true decadent she valued sickness as an aesthetic boon: she wrote The Price of Salt while ill with chickenpox, and believed that the fever woozily sweetened her prose. Her diaries, unearthed in linen closets after her death in 1995, record alcoholic binges and erotic misadventures, casually noting the suicide attempts of women she rejects or betrays; she often encrypts the entries in foreign languages, perhaps to distance and disown her conduct. In her notebooks, a more lucid Highsmith incisively analyses her own neuroses and ponders the physics and metaphysics of a world blown apart in the 1940s by nuclear fission. “God and the devil,” she suggests in one entry, “dance hand in hand around every atom.” Those positive and negative energies continue their dispute inside her self-divided individuals, who think of love as radioactivity released by an explosion: Carol in The Price of Salt believes that Therese has been “flung out of space” to land in her lap. The binary split that most tormented Highsmith was a matter of gender. As a primal practical joke, God or his diabolical double segregated us into male and female. Little Pat, however, protested by announcing at the age of 12 that she was a boy mistakenly assigned to a girl’s body. In 1948 Highsmith informs her diary that “I want to change my sex” and plaintively asks: “Is that possible?” At the time it wasn’t; instead, she placed her trust in the crude truisms of pop psychology and decided that she suffered from penis envy. Once at least she overcame her imagined deficiency: fantasising about her current girlfriend, she reports that “I had to go to the bathroom to relieve myself of a large erection”. In a meta-kinky episode she titillates the gay photographer Rolf Tietgens by posing as a male pin-up. “Yes, he fancies me a boy,” she smirks, “because my body is hard &amp; straight.” She did make valiant efforts to smooch with men, though it felt like kissing a flounder; she was even fitted with a diaphragm, which she describes as “the sign of the whore”. Bedding other women, Highsmith saddled up to assume masculine duties. “Kissed her masterfully,” she says with a roué’s swagger; on another occasion she regrets that her partner “couldn’t tell when I came”, then disposes of maidenly pretence by guessing that “she must have done it before!” At her most promiscuous she resembles a male libertine keeping numerical score of his successes. Mozart’s Don Giovanni has his encyclopaedic list, and Highsmith drew up a chart that graded her lovers. Flagging a little, she asks: “My God, how many women do I want?”; like a man whose hydraulics are overtaxed, she protests”: “I’m not a machine!” Such relentless tom-catting suggests that Highsmith’s motive might have been a will to power as much as amorous craving. “Having an automobile,” she declares at the age of 20, “is like having your own woman.” This was truer still in reverse, since the female bodies she manhandled were vehicles driven by her. Gratification intensified if her conquests defiled themselves verbally: “when she uses dirty words, she excites me!” she says after a pleasingly X-rated romp. In 1968, enraged by Jacqueline Kennedy’s venal marriage to Onassis, Highsmith snarls that “women will sleep with anything”. Yet her problem was less misogyny than misanthropy: like Ripley, the psychopathic aesthete in her five novels about him, she was disgusted by the human species. On a walk through Central Park in 1942, she reduces her fellow New Yorkers to “amorphous subaqueous organisms”. “I am not interested in people, knowing them,” she sniffs in another diary entry. That ought to be a disqualification for a novelist, but Highsmith’s stark existential parables overlook our complex affiliations with friends, family and society at large. She found people intolerable because they were her versions of herself, and blocked her view of them by designing a virtually windowless house in Switzerland, where she spent her last years among the gaunt mountains. Acquaintances, discouraged from visiting, likened her home to Hitler’s bunker. Anxious to outgrow lowly humankind, in the diaries Highsmith wishes that she could be a giant, and in a more grandiose reverie fancies becoming God. “One needs a wife,” she offhandedly remarks when settling into a new home, but for domestic company she preferred gastropods: she kept snails as pets, and smuggled them into England from France hidden in her bra, as if she were suckling them. Repellently slimy, they were fortified inside their shells like the increasingly crustacean Highsmith herself. Imagining a nuclear apocalypse, she permits snails to survive and to repopulate the irradiated earth. Many of her short stories are beast fables that rejig relations between humans and species we think of as inferior. In one, a boy butchers his mother after she cooks a tortoise he has befriended; in another, the owner of a German shepherd kills himself because he feels shamed by the dog’s noble demeanour; a third tracks the career of a snooty cockroach, proud of the luxurious addresses it has infested. Highsmith admired animals because they were incapable of murder: on a visit to Ascona she watches a slim snake elegantly engorge a live frog – a natural process, not one of Ripley’s gratuitous executions. She came closest to empathising with another creature when she dedicated a novel to her cat, Spider, only to quash sentimental tenderness by acknowledging in a poem that her yellow-eyed pet can’t read the tribute. The dualism that bedevilled Highsmith drives a wedge through this enormous volume. Her diaries, scribbled by a dissipated tomboy who aged into a cantankerous dragon, are ribald, chaotic, and – as her prejudices calcify – often nasty. The notebooks are clearer-headed, containing blissful love lyrics, airy surveys of European landscapes, and bold philosophical meditations. Highsmith, who wondered at the aplomb with which her snails slithered along the edges of razorblades, was intrigued by Kierkegaard’s account of the tightrope-treading anxiety with which we advance through life. However, she refused to follow the Danish theologian when he made his “leap of faith” into the unknown; instead, she challenged God by asking: “Have you the courage to show me hell?” Her chosen deities were savage and deathly, and one entry, luxuriating in sin, ends with a pagan invocation – “O Siva! O Pluto! O Saturn! O Hecate!” But she cautiously appeased the established religion, and while living in a village on the Hudson River she sang in the local Presbyterian church choir. Ripley collects paintings and plays the harpsichord. Highsmith both painted and sculpted – typically she did her best carving when angry, using her implements as weapons – and was also enraptured by music. In the notebooks she overhears a preview of the afterlife in Mozart’s Requiem, giddily rotates to Viennese waltzes, and rebukes the “sacrilege” of a young man who wants to have synchronised sex while listening to Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde. “Music,” she concludes in 1973, “establishes the fact that life is not real” – for me, the most striking sentence in these thousand pages. Elsewhere, she undercuts that romantic sublimation. A 1949 diary entry asserts that “there is no reality, only a system of expedient behaviour... by which people have come to live”. The contradictory formulations are voiced by the two people who were resident inside Highsmith. One side of her wishfully transcends the world, like Carol and Therese in their brief flight from conformity. The other, imitating the vengeful Ripley, condemns the world as a mausoleum and adds to its stock of corpses. It’s a pity that Highsmith’s daring, disturbing novels have been upstaged by a few admittedly excellent film adaptations – Hitchcock’s Strangers on a Train, Anthony Minghella’s The Talented Mr Ripley, Wim Wenders’s The American Friend (based on Ripley’s Game), and Todd Haynes’s Carol. Although some of her work first appeared in the grubby pages of Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine, her models, she always insisted, were Dostoevsky and Kafka, and the notebooks demonstrate that she belongs in their vicinity. But you should brace yourself before reading: Highsmith likens herself to “a steel needle”, and her insights puncture complacency as if piercing flesh. She is the murderer, and we are all the victims. • Diaries and Notebooks by Patricia Highsmith is published by Orion (£30). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe French war photographer Yan Morvan spent most of the 1970s photographing street gangs in the banlieues of Paris. When Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, he looked for an excuse to come to London, to get a look at how young people were responding to the new British government. He arrived in November of that year, just as the Jam’s Eton Rifles became the band’s first top 10 single. Morvan’s photographs from that month, collected in a new monograph, capture that moment when punk in Britain was giving its edge to mod revival culture. They might be subtitled with Paul Weller’s lyrics from Down in the Tube Station at Midnight and the youth-led reaction against National Front thugs “who smelled of pubs and Wormwood Scrubs and too many rightwing meetings”. The mod scooter girls in this picture capture all the creative confusion of that year: the girl on the left, in her dress sense at least, embraces the multicultural Two-Tone message of Rock Against Racism; her friend at the back of the group, meanwhile, wears Vivienne Westwood’s swastika “destroy” T-shirt of a couple of years earlier, the most controversial of her punk shock tactics. Looking back on that time in London, Morvan recalls that he received a mixed welcome from the kids he photographed. “The skinheads all tried to punch me in the face and steal my camera,” he says. “They didn’t like the French. But the punks were always friendly and funny. They liked being photographed.” His pictures – of the mosh pit at a Killing Joke gig or of rude boys chucking rocks at derelict factory buildings – capture a lot of the violent energy he encountered. “And always at the heart of it all,” he says, “was the incredible wild poetry of the bands and the music.” London Subculture 1979-1981 by Yan Morvan is published by Café Royal BooksWhenever the government faces criticism, one of the first questions commentators ask is whether the latest fiasco will have cut through in the “red wall”. While the red wall does indeed represent one substantial and important element in the Conservative coalition, this focus understates the problem the party faces, by suggesting there is just one restive set of seats they need to keep onside. In fact, the Tory coalition incorporates a number of different battlegrounds, with vastly different needs. This makes the government’s task far harder – pleasing the red wall often means provoking anger in other equally important areas. We can divide Conservative seats into groups based on their electoral context: is the seat marginal? How long has it been marginal? Does it lean towards leave or remain? Who is the local opponent? If we define the red wall seats as newly competitive constituencies with Labour as the local opponent in leave-voting areas, then there are about 70 of these spread across England and Wales. Traditional swing seats might get less attention but they are just as numerous and count the same towards the outcome. There are at least 50 seats in this category, market towns and “swingy” suburbs whose mixed demographics reflect the nation, and where party control has shifted over many cycles on the ebb and flow of national opinion. They will be as competitive as ever next time. The Brexit realignment that turned the red wall blue has also had implications elsewhere. There are now about two dozen Conservative seats in remain areas facing a credible Labour challenge, and another 30 also in largely remain areas where the Conservatives need to fend off resurgent Liberal Democrats. This “remain wall” includes many former safe seats where the Tory majority has been slashed since Brexit. Lost seats in the traditional swing areas are a certainty if the government’s popularity falls. But if these are combined with substantial losses on either of the new fronts, the Conservative majority is immediately at risk. The government therefore cannot afford to alienate either the red wall or the remain wall. But these seats are poles apart. The red wall is clustered in the Midlands and the north; the remain wall in the south. Red wall seats are working class and graduate light; remain wall seats are middle class and graduate heavy. Red wall seats have low house prices and more voters in council housing; remain wall seats have expensive housing and high home ownership rates. This divide in outlook and priorities stretches beyond the electoral battleground: many of the 200 or so (currently) safe Conservative seats resemble one of the new battlegrounds, and their MPs will often align with less secure colleagues. The two new fronts the Conservatives must defend are different worlds, at odds over the government’s domestic policy agenda. Ambitious levelling up investment is what red wall voters want to see; remain wall voters fear higher tax bills will follow. Masses of new, affordable homes are a dream for red wall renters, but a nightmare for remain wall homeowners, for whom the nimby instinct runs deep. Even the fate of Boris Johnson himself splits the battlegrounds: the prime minister’s distinctive appeal in the red wall would be hard to replace, but Tories in the remain wall would breathe easier with a more traditional figure in charge. It is no wonder the MPs in these two new battlegrounds object so regularly and loudly to their own government. Their job is to represent their constituents’ interests, and they are emboldened by the knowledge that their leader regularly reverses course under pressure. Johnson has no hope of pleasing MPs on both fronts, yet his constant caving to rebellions brings its own risks, intensifying the perception of a chaotic and rudderless government. Nor can the Conservatives avoid fights by sitting on their hands – the impatient red wall voters, promised “levelling up” and “unleashing Britain’s potential”, have low trust in politics, no inherent love for the Conservative party, and will not accept second best. Having raised hopes of radical domestic reform, the Conservatives now face a difficult choice: plough ahead and risk defeat on one front, or back off and risk a beating on another. Getting Brexit done, it turns out, was the easy part. Dr Robert Ford is professor of political science at the University of Manchester and co-author of The British General Election of 2019Gabby Petito’s disappearance captured national media headlines and kicked off a well-oiled and coordinated manhunt, with tips pouring in through social media, that nevertheless ended in tragedy. After her remains were found, Petito’s parents thanked law enforcement and the public for their assistance at a press conference. Joseph Petito also made a pointed statement. “This same type of heightened awareness should be continued for everyone,” he told the gathered media. “It’s on all of you, everyone that’s in this room, to do that. If you don’t do that for other people that are missing, that’s a shame, because it’s not just Gabby that deserves that.” “That’s coming from a grieving father,” says Soledad O’Brien to the Guardian. The former CNN anchor and executive producer of the four-part HBO documentary series Black and Missing is vividly recalling the press conference on the phone. “Imagine your own little girl goes missing and you have to chide the media to also look for people of color.” Joseph Petito didn’t mention race, but we all heard the implications in his statement. His daughter’s disappearance became a textbook example of “missing white woman syndrome” – the compulsion among law enforcement, the media and the public to rally around rescue efforts for young white women. Meanwhile, missing and murdered women and children who are Indigenous and Black are historically, continuously and systematically ignored by all of the above. An entire episode in Black and Missing is dedicated to “missing white woman syndrome” and media bias, which brings forensic attention to the systemic issues that lead to the disappearances of people of color and subsequently prevent them from being found. The docuseries – created by O’Brien and Geeta Gandbhir, and directed by Gandbhir, Samantha Knowles, Yoruba Richen and Nadia Hallgren – is thorough, insightful, devastating and galvanizing. The film-makers embed themselves with Derrica Wilson and Natalie Wilson, co-founders of the Black and Missing Foundation. The grassroots organization assists families and rallies communities in the search for their missing loved ones. We see them handing out pamphlets, booking media appearances and sticking it to police departments that are quick to dismiss the concerns of Bipoc families. The Wilsons, who are sisters-in-law, are uniquely equipped to confront such issues, which they commit to after their day jobs. Natalie works in public relations. Derrica is formerly law enforcement. They know how media pressure gets police to act faster, if at all. In the very first episode, a mother explains that her missing daughter was mislabeled a runaway, which takes the onus off the police department to search for her during the crucial early days when they have the best chance at finding her. The series is quick to point out that that’s not an isolated incident. And as the Wilsons help different families navigate horrifying scenarios involving missing children or seek resolution after experiencing heartbreaking loss, the film-makers take a step back to grasp the bigger picture. They thread the intimate stories dealing with domestic violence, abduction and trafficking with the macro issues that they illuminate: the criminalization of Black children, the systems that allow cycles of poverty and trauma to re-victimize Bipoc families and the media’s contribution to these problems. “Systemic racism is not independent of what’s happening in this story,” says O’Brien, who explains how familiar she is with the media’s role in these issues. O’Brien goes back to her time anchoring the CNN morning show Starting Point when South African athlete Oscar Pistorius was charged with murdering his wife, the model Reeva Steenkamp. O’Brien was taken aback by the extensive coverage, which prioritized a tragedy in South Africa over local news. It dawned on her that the coverage was an opportunity to wallpaper Steenkamp’s image all over the screen. “We [were] covering this story because there’s very ‘attractive’ people involved,” says O’Brien. “There are certain people who the media thinks are a good story. And then there are others who are not.” O’Brien says she knew the problem existed for years. But didn’t realize there were grassroots organizations pushing back against biased media coverage of missing people until 2017, when the Black and Missing Foundation was honored at Black Girls Rock!, an awards show airing on BET. A year later, O’Brien and Gandbhir started working on the docuseries, recruiting a largely female Bipoc team, including co-directors like Knowles, Richen and Hallgren, who would be sensitive to the culture and challenges facing the families they portrayed. “We really tried to humanize the victims in our series,” Knowles told the Guardian, on a phone call alongside Gandbhir. They describe the care taken to build trust with families, portraying them with thoughtful consideration. That representation is crucial in cases like these. There are reasons the Wilsons are so meticulous about how they position families when pitching them to local or national news and shows like The View. “Families would provide photos of their missing loved ones and the police would choose to use a mug shot,” says Knowles, describing common practices that insistently criminalize Bipoc people and set off a chain reaction in how they are seen. “That really affects how the media sees that missing person. If the media does end up covering them, it affects how the public sees that person. And it ultimately affects the results of the case.” Throughout Black and Missing, the Wilsons advocate for sustained media coverage pressuring police departments that generally don’t prioritize missing person cases. “Missing person units are notoriously underfunded”, Gandbhir explains, adding that the detectives are often slow to react because unless there’s evidence of violence or an abduction there is perceived to be no crime to act on. As Natalie explains early in the first episode, most police departments are graded according to the murders and robberies they solve. They are structurally set up to capture criminals that can be tried and sent to prison instead of aiding or rescuing potential victims and serving the community. It’s a model that favors punishment over prevention. “And then the prison industrial complex is there,” adds Gandbhir, spelling out the economics of the justice system. “It’s a cash cow for many, many folks, which is not a great model for justice.” The docuseries evokes the conversation about defunding the police that has been getting louder since George Floyd’s murder. The dedicated and considerate community work that the Black and Missing Foundation put in is a stark contrast to examples of police negligence, bias, violence and ineffectiveness. On multiple occasions, the series presents instances where victims, witnesses or community members would rather report to the Wilsons than police; the Black and Missing model offering a helpful alternative. An argument can be made to divert funding from one type of organization to the other, accordingly. “It’s a little harder to tease it out,” says O’Brien, explaining that I may be simplifying a complex problem. Systemic issues that are rooted in history and take four hour-long episodes can’t be solved with an e-transfer, after all. The film-makers agree that organizations like the Black and Missing Foundation can do a lot with more with proper funding. But they also point out that the Wilsons, while repeatedly frustrated with law enforcement, depend on police resources to find missing persons and seek resolution for certain families. “There’s such a long history of neglect between the police and people of color, especially Black people,” says Knowles. “[Natalie and Derricka Wilson] model what it looks like to bridge the gap, to be this kind of alternative to having to interact directly with police. But at the same time, they know that they need every single tool that’s at their disposal [including police] and they’re very honest about that. “They want to hold the police accountable.” Black and Missing starts on HBO on 23 November with a UK date to be announcedDisabled people are being subjected to stressful checks and months of frustrating bureaucracy after being identified as potential benefit fraudsters by an algorithm the government is refusing to disclose, according to a new legal challenge. A group in Manchester has launched the action after mounting testimony from disabled people in the area that they were being disproportionately targeted for benefit fraud investigations. Some said they were living in “fear of the brown envelope” showing their case was being investigated. Others said they had received a phone call, without explanation as to why they had been flagged. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) has previously conceded that it uses “cutting-edge artificial intelligence” to track possible fraud but has so far rebuffed attempts to explain how the algorithm behind the system was compiled. Campaigners say that once flagged, those being examined can face an invasive and humiliating investigation lasting up to a year. A legal letter has been sent to the DWP demanding details of the automated process that triggers the investigations. Greater Manchester Coalition of Disabled People (GMCDP), which sent the letter with the help of campaign group Foxglove, said a “huge percentage” of the group has been affected by the system. The group believes the government has a legal duty to be transparent about how the algorithm works. Concerns were raised by the charity Privacy International, which first found references in a DWP report to its use of “cutting-edge artificial intelligence to crack down on organised criminal gangs committing large-scale benefit fraud”. A 2019 UN report into the “digital welfare state” said algorithms were “highly likely” to repeat biases reflected in existing data and make them even worse. It added: “Inbuilt forms of discrimination can fatally undermine the right to social protection for key groups and individuals.” The government has until Friday to respond to the legal letter. “We’re tired of the fear of the brown envelope and tired of being repeatedly forced by DWP officials just to justify who we are,” said Rick Burgess of the GMCDP. “It’s time for the DWP to come clean about how this algorithm works and explain why so many disabled people are flagged for investigation. Disabled people need support – not being ground down by a brutal system that assumes we are fraudulent until proven innocent.” Foxglove said: “The DWP algorithm seems to send poor and disabled people to the call centre from hell. The DWP needs to explain exactly how its algorithm works and what is done to eliminate bias – or be taken to court.” Officials stressed that specialist staff were involved in any cases of suspected fraud and error and support was offered to those who needed it. A DWP spokesperson said: “The DWP will be responding to the letter written by the representatives of the GMCDP in due course.”In the long run, among the greatest electoral perils facing Boris Johnson may well be the anger of those in the north of England who mistook him for a serious politician. Because expecting to be let down doesn’t make the experience of being let down any less painful or the resentment any less severe. The anger stems from the fact people in the north fully understand that their regions do not find themselves left behind, as if by an act of nature, but have been actively left behind. One of the many places where that fact has for too long been visible is on the map of the nation’s railways. Travelling by rail between any two cities in England is usually quick and easy, but only if one of those cities is London. Manchester to London, a distance of 163 miles (262 km) as the crow flies, takes a little over two hours by train. Leeds to London (169 miles) can be done in about the same time. But Manchester to Leeds, a straight distance of just 36 miles, takes more than an hour and on some routes requires changing trains. London’s dominance is not simply reflected on our rail maps and timetables, it is reinforced by them. This in turn is a reflection of the form the nation’s private railways took when they first emerged in the 19th century, but also of generations of political and economic neglect. In the north, that neglect, when it comes to infrastructure and much else, has unsurprisingly incubated a justifiable sense of grievance and a deep mood of scepticism. When the government’s integrated rail plan was announced last week, with the East Midlands to Leeds HS2 line cancelled and the Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) project significantly scaled back, the overriding sentiment expressed by the people who appeared in vox pops from the streets of Leeds, Bradford, Hull and other northern towns was not betrayal but a total lack of surprise at having been betrayed. This stems not from some innate “grim up north” negativity or the supposed sense of victimhood that Johnson toxically accused the people of Liverpool of “wallowing in”. Rather, it is a clear-eyed and sober assessment of current circumstances and recent history. People in the north expect to be let down and “left behind” by Westminster because for so long they have been. While the neglect of the north has never been only about infrastructure, it is in the provision of roads and rail and the money to pay for them that the disparities and the unfairness are often at their most stark. In 2011, the Institute for Public Policy Research found that not only did Londoners receive more spending per head on transport than people in any other English region, but the disparity was so enormous that London received more spending than all the other regions put together. While spending for each Londoner stood at £2,731 per person, in the north-east, a region that HS2 and NPR never even sought to reach even before the latest cutbacks, spending per head was just £5. Although jumbled together in last week’s announcements, HS2 and NPR are two very different schemes with different histories. They also mean something quite different to people in northern England. In the north, as in the Midlands and the south, there was always a degree of HS2 scepticism. Some people were unhappy about its environmental impact. Others questioned the underlying principle; that access to London is the key to regional growth, as if the cities of the north are victims of some dreadful economic disease that the capital, like some medieval king, could cure merely by the laying on of hands. And two years into a pandemic that has inspired a revolution in home working, the predictions of ever-expanding commuter travel between north and south, which were used to justify HS2, also seem a bit retro. Northern Powerhouse Rail, by contrast, promised to do something that has more widespread support, bringing together the economies of several of the north’s major cities by making it easier for about 8 million people to travel and work across them all. Expanding opportunity and helping to forge an economic counterbalance to London. That last week’s announcements have scaled back such a vital infrastructure project is another indicator that “levelling up” was always an electoral gambit posing as a political policy. Hardly surprising from a government led by a prime minster who shows off to his Italian counterpart by trying (and failing) to name the seven hills of ancient Rome but who would struggle to name any of the seven hills upon which Sheffield is said to stand. Yet whatever its original intent, levelling up is a slogan that has taken on a life of its own. It has sparked a now unstoppable national debate about what it would really take to address regional inequalities in the UK. And by tapping into a deep, intergenerational and entirely justified sense of injustice, it encouraged some in the north to suspend their self-protective scepticism about Westminster. If levelling up were a grand political vision rather than a chimera, it would be accompanied by a commensurately colossal plan to pay for it, one that would not fall at the first hurdle, the victim of a tussle between Nos 10 and 11 Downing Street. Such a vision might look something like Germany’s solidarity tax, introduced in 1991 to fund the integration of East Germany after unification. If comparing the healing of the north-south divide to German reunification sounds far-fetched, we should remember that today there are parts of East Germany that, despite having spent four decades on the wrong side of the iron curtain, have higher per-capita incomes than parts of the English north and Wales and that Johnson himself has likened levelling up to German reunification. Germany’s historic act of political will was achieved through the imposition of serious policies and the making of tough and often unpopular decisions, not through slogans and gestures. After last week’s events, can anyone seriously imagine such commitments and serious-mindedness emanating from Downing Street? • David Olusoga is a historian and broadcasterAndrew Marr’s decision to leave the BBC was prompted by his desire to speak freely on environmental issues, as well as politics, and escape the daily online attacks he faces, it is believed. The high-profile journalist’s sudden move to LBC radio, announced on Friday, will allow him to drop BBC impartiality and so avoid some of the relentless criticism he receives across the political spectrum both on social media and from commentators. The former political editor of the BBC also plans to write newspaper pieces expressing his views. Those close to Marr, 62, say that quitting after 21 years’ service will be a welcome release, despite his continued regard for the corporation. He is looking forward, they say, to shaking off the “almost unconscious self-censorship” that holds back BBC news presenters. Marr’s health, however, is not thought to be a factor in his decision. He suffered a serious stroke in 2013 and Covid-19 struck him down recently, despite his double-vaccinated status. Writing about the climate crisis in the i newspaper this summer, Marr urged “timid politicians” to leave “vacuous generalities” behind. His words are a taste of what is to come. “Public support on ripping out and replacing domestic boilers, even at a high cost to millions of families, can be won, just as support for mask-wearing and social distancing was,” he argued, adding: “As a lifelong political hack, I now feel we should spend less time on the distracting national puppet show.” His departure leaves a hole in the BBC’s current affairs coverage, but one that is not likely to be filled swiftly. Marr is expected to carry on with the Sunday show he has presented for 16 years until Christmas or early in the new year, and insiders believe the name of his replacement has to be signed off by a new head of news, not yet appointed. The BBC’s current news director, Fran Unsworth, leaves her job in January, at a point when several significant news and current affairs roles are also in flux. Laura Kuenssberg is expected to step down as political editor and so become a favourite to take on Marr’s television show. Alternatively, Kuenssberg may be headed for the Today programme, Radio 4’s flagship morning news show. Jon Sopel, the North America editor, is also returning to Britain, while his old job goes to former Scotland editor Sarah Smith. “Kuenssberg’s position must be quite strong. The BBC will not want to lose her, and may have to shuffle everyone round,” said one former senior BBC news journalist. Speaking this weekend, John Humphrys, the veteran former Today presenter, agreed that remaining impartial at the BBC was “a constraint”. “When I freed myself after 51 years, the limit on what I could say, which is rightly there, lifted. At the BBC, I did have a newspaper column for five years, as a few of us did. But all that changed after the punch-up over the coverage of the Iraq war.” Humphrys, who presented Today for 32 years, now has a show on Classic FM, a station Marr is also to join. Marr’s show about politics and the environment will go out on LBC. The two stations are owned by Global. “I used to be shocked when I heard radio presenters expressing their opinions on LBC, but I have had a change of heart about that. It is a different role and is fine as long as it is clearly labelled,” said Humphrys. Presenting alongside Humphrys and Marr at Classic FM are former news anchors John Suchet and Moira Stuart. Eddie Mair, once a prominent BBC radio voice, also presents on LBC. Phil Harding, the former BBC news chief in charge of editorial policy, said this weekend he felt that Marr had been “straining at the leash”. The personal politics of his replacement will not matter though, Harding said. “I did not know what my colleagues’ politics were and often only found out later, if they went on to work with a parliamentary party. “Andy will be a very hard act to follow on that programme. It is about a lot more than politics. He has brought not only his considerable political acumen but a big cultural hinterland as well. He is today’s renaissance man. A hard act to follow.”In the 1920s, the discovery of ancient ruins in Sicily, now the largest archaeological site in the world, was celebrated with excitement in British newspapers. It was hailed with much the same level of enthusiasm as was given to Howard Carter and Arthur Evans’s excavations of the treasures of Tutankhamun and the palace of Knossos. Not a natural “showman” however, the name of the man who excavated the site, Alexander Hardcastle, then slowly faded. Now, as an contemporary sculpture exhibition on the site he made his life’s work, Sicily’s Valley of the Temples, marks the centenary of his efforts, there is a fresh push to ensure Hardcastle’s achievements are remembered. This is supported by the British author of a recent biography of the amateur archaeologist. “Unsung heroes are always a draw, but Hardcastle’s allure was his determined elusiveness,” said Alexandra Richardson, whose book, Passionate Patron, about this “quintessential Italophile” was published in 2009. Hardcastle’s first encounter with the ruins of Agrigento came while on holiday with his brother after the end of the first world war as he walked across the unexcavated valley on the south-west coast. An amateur archaeologist who had been in the Royal Engineers, he soon became obsessed and eventually moved away from his family to live close to the ruins. He then spent his large family fortune on the restoration of the site, dedicating 12 years to working in close collaboration with the Italian archaeologist Pirro Marconi. Their key renovations were to the eight columns of the temples of Heracles and Demeter, to the Greek temples of Akragas and to the original city walls. “Resurrecting all of the fallen columns of the Temple of Heracles is Hardcastle’s most-cited project,” said Richardson, “but I think the digging, the clearance and restoration of the walls surrounding the complex perhaps helped give the idea of the scale and importance of the settlement.” Dating from the 5th century BC, the Valley of the Temples is now a Unesco world heritage site and the world’s largest archaeological park. It covers 3,950 acres and includes the ruins of seven temples, city walls, an entry gate, an agora and Roman forum, along with necropoli and sanctuaries. The nearby city-state of Akragas, where Hardcastle also supported excavations, was founded in 582BC by Greeks from Gela, a colony 40 miles away. A centenary display of sculpture at the Valley of the Temples by the Italian contemporary artist Gianfranco Meggiato, an admirer of Hardcastle, will continue into the new year. Yet in Britain this great patron of the excavations remains almost unknown. “There are several reasons why he is far less known than the others,” said Richardson. “He came from the ranks of the military and had no archaeological credentials and, although he financed a number of discoveries, no single one had quite the headline-grabbing appeal of discoveries made in Egypt or Crete. He also had none of the showmanship of Evans or Carter. But thanks to deep pockets and formidable drive, he was able to fund and firmly push along the works he deemed most worthy.” Hardcastle was ruined by the Wall Street Crash in 1929 and sold all of his possessions, borrowing money from friends to continue the works. Finally bankrupt, he was forced to sell his Italian home and is thought to have suffered a mental breakdown. In 1933 he died in an asylum in Agrigento, aged 60. In recognition of his work Hardcastle was, however, granted the rank of Commander of the Order of the Crown of Italy. What is more, the square by the entrance to the Valley of the Temples bears his name, as does another Agrigento street. And recently a small group of academics and writers has set up the Alexander Hardcastle Foundation to perpetuate his memory and mark the anniversary of his death by his grave.For some, it was a gotcha moment. For others, an occasion to parade their own prejudices. Yet others celebrated the end of the “attempt to destroy English cricket”. On Tuesday, Azeem Rafiq gave devastating testimony to a parliamentary committee about the racism he had faced as a Yorkshire cricketer. On Thursday came revelations of antisemitic texts he had exchanged with a fellow cricketer a decade ago. Rafiq apologised immediately, an apology acknowledged by leading Jewish figures. Critics, however, saw in the affair only Rafiq’s “double standards” and the tawdriness of his original allegations. In fact, the exposure of Rafiq’s previous antisemitism, ironically, strengthened one of the core arguments in his story: the way people can be blind to bigotry in one context while alert to it in another. What stood out in Rafiq’s testimony was not just his account of racist bullying, harrowing though they were, but also his comments about the current England Test captain, Joe Root, a fellow Yorkshireman. Root, Rafiq confirmed, was a “good guy”, who “never engaged in racist language”. What “hurt”, though, was Root’s insistence, after the scandal broke, that he could not recall any racism at Yorkshire despite, according to Rafiq, being present when the abuse occurred. “It shows how normal it was that even a good man like him doesn’t see it for what it was,” Rafiq suggested. That could be said of Rafiq’s antisemitism, too. One reason Rafiq’s allegations feel so shocking is the degree to which Britain has changed. Had he spoken out 40 years ago, few would have cared. Then, “Paki-bashing” was a national sport and racism viscerally woven into the fabric of society. Today, racism remains embedded – witness everything from discrimination in employment to the Windrush scandal – but it is of a different character and threat from that of the 1970s and 80s. Most people today abhor what Rafiq had to endure. There is a long history of passing off racism as “banter”. That it should still be happening is particularly dispiriting given the broader decline of racism. If someone had abused Rafiq as a “Paki” on the streets, most of his teammates would probably have recognised it as racist and sprung to his defence. In the dressing room or in a social setting, however, what they may elsewhere have acknowledged as racism becomes invisible, transformed into banter. Dressing-room culture, designed to enhance team bonding, is necessarily insular and often forbidding to outsiders. In the past, such insularity frequently took a racist form. That it should still do so in many dressing rooms and that players and management – even the “good guys” – seemingly cannot distinguish between racist bullying and dressing-room joshing is troubling. The drive to root out racism has in recent years become as much managerial or administrative as moral or political. A determination to tick the right boxes, a desire to appear diverse, a resolve to undertake training – it’s an exercise in looking right more than in being right. And in this process, the moral imperative on individuals to challenge real racism where they see it has diminished. Many sports people, from Colin Kaepernick to Marcus Rashford, have taken a public stance against iniquities both inside and outside sport. But, too often, as the Rafiq case and others reveal, the voices that should restrain unacceptable behaviour are silent, even complicit. If the dismissal of racism as “banter” is one form of blindness, the refusal of many, including many anti-racists, to recognise antisemitism, even when it smacks them in the face, is another. The week before Rafiq gave his parliamentary evidence, London’s Royal Court theatre had to apologise for naming a money-grabbing billionaire, modelled allegedly on Elon Musk, in Al Smith’s play Rare Earth Mettle, “Hershel Fink”. The character was hastily renamed (to Henry Finn) and the theatre blamed the gaffe on “unconscious bias”. It is difficult to know how anyone could fail to see that “Hershel Fink” was an archly Jewish name or that giving such a name to an unscrupulous capitalist would be to play on deep-rooted racist stereotypes. Yet, as writer Jo Glanville pointed out, it is plausible in the sense that “the association of Jews with power and money is so deeply entrenched in our culture that it isn’t even questioned”. Antisemitism is not an issue simply on the left. It is a core ideology of the reactionary right. There has, however, emerged in recent decades a particular form of leftwing antisemitism. As racism has come to be seen as a problem of whiteness and of white privilege, and Jews viewed as both white and privileged, so not only is bigotry towards Jews frequently ignored, but Jews are often portrayed as the villains. Important, too, is antisemitism within Muslim communities, an issue many liberals feel reluctant to broach. “As a community, we do have a ‘Jewish problem’,” the journalist and activist Mehdi Hasan has observed. Polls bear this out, though we should not exaggerate the problem. A 2017 report by the Institute for Jewish Policy Research warned that “broad stigmatisation of all Muslims is neither accurate nor helpful” and that most Muslims are not antisemitic. Nevertheless, a significant proportion hold bigoted views about Jews and to a greater degree than does the general population. It behoves us not to be blind to this, any more than to anti-Asian racism or anti-Muslim bigotry. Such blindness is often aggravated by the politics of identity, by the tendency to see “good” and “bad” in terms of the group to which someone belongs and the privileges they are supposed to possess. It has led many to target Jews for being Jews and to hold all Jews responsible for the actions of the state of Israel. Judging an individual by the group to which they are imputed to belong is a trait of racism. The more tribal, identity-driven politics of today has made many blind to the growth of such traits on the left. It was inevitable that, as soon as Rafiq made his explosive allegations, his own past would be scrutinised. There is, though, something dysfunctional about a culture in which many seem more eager to dredge the past of someone who exposes wrongdoing to find material to publicly shame them than seek to put that wrong right. That, too, is a form of blindness. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistIt’s 6pm on a Thursday in November in the Trawden Arms in Lancashire and the pub is already so busy that the departure of the last bottle of pinot is announced from the bar. The reason for the crowd? It is the grand reopening of the village’s 126-year-old hostelry and this is a particularly meaningful moment for the residents of Trawden because they bought the pub. And it’s not just the local watering hole they acquired: the residents of Trawden have also communally bought, reopened and operated, one by one, the shop, the library and the community centre, making them the first village in Britain to do so. The triumphant reopening of the Trawden Arms this month after a long period of closure completed the set. “Any village wants a pub and a shop,” says Paul Verity, as he orders a meal for his wife, Emma, and their daughters, Ella, nine, and Alice, six. “The fact that they’ve been saved from doom for the community is fantastic.” To get here, the village of 2,000 people raised £520,000 to buy the Trawden Arms, completing the purchase a few weeks ago, and now it will be leased to the new tenants, Jo Stafford and Adam Young, who will run it on a commercial basis but also as a community focal point. “If we’d lost it, it would have been devastating,” adds Emma Verity, as the strains of DeBarge’s 1985 R&amp;B hit Rhythm of the Night fills the room. The pub had been put up for sale – which these days generally means being turned into holiday homes for absentee owners – but the villagers successfully applied to have it listed as an asset of community value, which prevented developers swooping just long enough for the locals to raise the cash themselves. It sits opposite the community centre and its neighbouring shop and library, all of which have also been bought by the villagers over the past seven years. They are staffed from a pool of 120 volunteers working two-hour shifts. In the library, white-haired ladies have been poring over faded photographs of the village taken during their youths; while, on the other side of the building customers buzz around the shop, where the shelves are stuffed with fresh local produce, tubs of vegan marshmallows and serve-yourself jars of everything from nuts to bleach. Molly Ralphson leans against a sign apologising for the lack of eccles cakes, due, apparently to the departure of an “artisan baker”, and promising resumption of this service as soon as another supplier is found. Ralphson grew up in the village and is communications officer for the trust that bought the Trawden Arms. “I felt awful when I heard the pub was closing,” she says. “A village loses its heart and soul without a pub. You go there because there’s always someone you know.” They were aided in their campaign to save it by the Plunkett Foundation, which helps breathe new life into affected areas by supporting community businesses. It’s an uphill struggle. According to a recent report from the British Beer and Pub Association, 2,000 pubs permanently closed during the first year of lockdown. Many were in rural locations, leaving small communities without a space to meet and socialise, leading to greater isolation. Chris Cowcher, head of policy at the Plunkett Foundation, says that with rural pubs and shops closing – along with other factors such as poor internet connectivity and lack of prospects for young people – there’s a danger that villages across the country could become “dormant communities”. But “the likes of Trawden show we can safeguard the sense of living in an active community” he adds. If there’s a father-figure in Trawden’s collective effort to keep the village alive, it’s Steven Wilcock, who kicked everything off in 2014 when he campaigned to buy the endangered community centre from the borough council, which was about to close it. The centre had been a lively place in his parents’ day with tea dances and whist games, he recalls. But “life just changed” and people stopped using it. And he worried its closure would be the first harbinger of the village dying out as a community – the last shop was near to shutting down, the village’s second pub had already been turned into housing and four of the village’s five churches and chapels had been sold. “We’d lost our community spirit. It was all just so sad,” Wilcock says. But he and the other residents refused to take the imminent loss lying down. And that’s when the fightback began. “Now we’ve turned everything around and that spirit is now back,” he says, looking up at the fairy lights installed for Christmas. “And it’s been a lifeline to people – a lot of the volunteers live on their own and used to spend each day staring at the same four walls. I remember one lady who said to me, ‘This place has saved my life’ because she had been so unhappy on her own. She’s a different person now. This has brought the community together and I’m so proud.”When Sepp Blatter, with that pained fixed grin, gingerly pulled the name Qatar out of the fateful envelope to anoint the host of the 2022 World Cup, widespread global bafflement accompanied the shockwaves propelled by the decision. The outcry that led ultimately to an earthquake at Fifa, followed by the fall of Blatter’s presidency and many other long-term chiefs, was prompted by astonishment and suspicion at the vote to send football’s greatest tournament to a tiny country so seemingly obscure. Now, with one year on Sunday to go before the tournament kicks off, football and the world are much more familiar with the name Qatar, which in itself can be seen as fulfilling a key aim of the bid. The 11 years since the November 2010 vote have been filled with rolling investigations into Fifa, leading to a governance overhaul and the 2016 election of Gianni Infantino as president, and a piercing focus on conditions for the migrant workers building Qatar’s stadiums in the heat of the Gulf. Through it all, and a blockade by their neighbouring countries, the Qataris have prevailed with hosting the tournament, insisting they did not “buy” the World Cup through corruption, and committing to reforms of workers’ rights, in partnership with the International Labour Organisation. The determined preparations, through the three-year blockade by Saudi Arabia and its allies the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, which was called off in January, have produced eight signature stadiums, constructed to broadcast around the world gorgeous TV images of the Qatari achievement. The statements of aspiration for the first World Cup in the Middle East, for a unifying experience and positive image for the wider Arab world, do not lack ambition. “Through infrastructure, education, football for development, support for regional innovation and a dedication to improving workers’ welfare, our efforts are forging a better future for Qatar, the Middle East, Asia and the world,” Qatar’s “supreme committee” says of the preparations. Nicholas McGeehan, co-director of the human rights advocacy organisation Fair Square, says of the labour reforms, in particular ending the kafala system that ties workers to one employer: “We recognise that this could transform labour relations in the Gulf, which would be phenomenal, but we are a very long way from effective implementation, and too many companies appear able to subvert the reforms.” Whether the vaulting ambitions are standard overheated boosterism for a mega-event or more lasting legacies will be achieved, Qatar’s hosting of the World Cup is already a spectacular illustration of the modern shift in global profile, influence, wealth and power for the oil- and gas-rich Gulf states. Across football and more widely, that influence has grown since 2010 – particularly felt by Britain, the former imperial power that now, after Brexit, is prospecting for a trade deal. Whatever the truth of allegations made in a 2020 US court indictment that three South American Fifa chiefs were paid, which the supreme committee denies, Blatter himself has always maintained that the crucial votes resulted from high political influence, not backroom machinations. Michel Platini, then Uefa president, and other key Europeans, voted for Qatar rather than the USA after the French football legend was invited to lunch with his country’s president, Nicolas Sarkozy, and Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, now the emir of Qatar, in the Élysée Palace nine days before the Fifa vote. Platini has said he had made his mind up before the lunch, but acknowledged that Sarkozy made clear he favoured a vote for Qatar. Sarkozy has said he did not have such influence, but the deals that flowed afterwards were much to the liking of France’s president: Qatar Airways bought 50 planes from Airbus and Qatar began mega-funding French football. The sovereign wealth fund Qatar Sports Investments (QSI) bought Paris Saint-Germain in 2011, with billions of investment fuelling PSG since into a super-club, stocked with prestige acquisitions. BeIN Sports, the Qatari broadcaster that was originally part of Al Jazeera, the country’s globally influential news channel, paid unprecedented sums for coverage of France’s Ligue 1. BeIN’s wealth and influence extends across football; it is a major buyer of Premier League TV rights, last year paying a reported $500m for 2022-25, and has a current $600m three-year deal with Uefa for Champions League coverage. Qatar Airways became the first commercial sponsor of Barcelona in 2013 and sponsors Bayern Munich, plus the governing bodies Uefa and Fifa, whose four-year deal is said to be worth up to $200m. This football journey for Qatar from obscure, outsider claimant of World Cup votes to wielder of huge power and insider influence is personified by Nasser al-Khelaifi, chairman of PSG, QSI and BeIN, who was in April elected chairman of the European Club Association and re-elected to the Uefa executive committee, two summits of European football decision-making. The Gulf state strategy of national image projection through sport alongside huge financial heft is replicated by Qatar’s regional rivals: Abu Dhabi through its ownership of Manchester City and the global City Football Group, Dubai through its Emirates Airline sponsorships of Arsenal, Real Madrid, Milan, the FA Cup, several more clubs and other sports, including the Tour de France-winning UAE Team Emirates. Saudi Arabia took longer to align itself with sports, and when its sovereign wealth Public Investment Fund bought Newcastle United, it was glaring that Boris Johnson and his government appeared to have encouraged it, rather than acknowledge the concerns of Amnesty and other human rights groups about “sportswashing” by a notorious regime. On the day the Premier League approved the Newcastle takeover, the UK announced a consultation for a planned trade deal with Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the UAE and the other countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council. It cited “lamb, biscuits and chocolate” exported by the UK to the Gulf, while expressing hope for massive investment from Gulf states into essential UK industries, including renewable energy, infrastructure, tech and life sciences. A month earlier the Abu Dhabi investment fund Mubadala agreed a £10bn investment from the UAE to Britain, and signing the agreement in Downing Street in front of Johnson and Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan, de facto ruler of Abu Dhabi, was Khaldoon al-Mubarak who, in another of his roles, is Manchester City chairman. Sanam Vakil, deputy director of the Middle East North Africa programme at the policy institute Chatham House, says Qatar’s World Cup bid was an element in its wider strategy of emerging from Saudi Arabia’s shadow to project its own, more outward-facing vision. “I see it as a quest for relevance, to be bigger in the world, which protects the security of the state of Qatar back home,” she says. “The World Cup signifies their ambition, to project power and the sense to their own citizens of being relevant on the world stage.” Hassan al-Thawadi, secretary-general of the supreme committee, has said Qatar’s spending on infrastructure since 2010, including the new metro system, is projected to be $200bn, and direct costs of the World Cup $6.5bn. Such is the commitment to the project that appeared so outlandish when Blatter pulled the name of Qatar out of the envelope, but is set a year from now to claim the world’s attention, for the tiny, super-rich state in the Gulf.This Friday, independent retailers across the country will shut down their websites, donate their profits to charity and plant trees as part of a renewed drive against the rabid consumerism encouraged by large online sellers offering deals for Black Friday. About 85% of independent retailers will not participate this year in Black Friday, the day sellers claim to offer bargains and slash prices in an attempt to shore up custom before Christmas. The number of retailers boycotting the event is the highest figure ever recorded by the British Independent Retailers Association (Bira) and comes as part of a growing movement against huge online shopping websites such as Amazon that has gained traction since the start of the pandemic. “I am donating 10% of Black Friday weekend sales to my local food bank,” said Zoe Roberts, founder of Out of the Box Gifts, an eco-friendly gift box shop based in Cheshire. “There is more than one reason that I dislike Black Friday – the main one is that I think it encourages us to purchase things that we don’t need and therefore increases waste.” She also wants to highlight how impossible it is for small businesses to compete with larger retailers on that day. “Small businesses tend to keep their prices fair all year round and therefore can’t afford to discount heavily just before the busiest time of the year.” Other independent retailers, such as Surrey-based Shutter Jewellery and secondhand children’s and maternity clothes retailer Build a Bundle in Cumbria, will plant trees on Friday as an antidote to the waste created by consumerism. “I try to do whatever I can to reduce waste. I’ll be planting 100 trees to give back to the planet rather than padding to the overconsumption by tempting people to buy more than they want or need,” said Sophie de Taranto, owner of Shutter Jewellery. The founders of Pantee, a sustainable underwear brand, plan to switch off their website. “The only people able to access our site will be engaged members of our community that have signed up to our mailing list and got a password… no sales, no impulse buying,” said co-founder Katie McCourt. “Our message this Black Friday is to stop and think before you buy. Is it something you love? Is it something you need?” Birmingham-based jeweller and goldsmith Ruth Mary Chipperfield will be releasing a video on Friday giving tips on how to repair jewellery on her website, ruthmary.com. “On anti-Black Friday, I’m encouraging people to look inside their jewellery box and instead of buying new, have treasured pieces repaired,” she said. “I’m saying: look at the great things you already have. You don’t need to buy anything new. Actually, a really nice Christmas present for some people might be a ring they thought was broken, but gets snuck out of their jewellery box by a loved one and is given to them on Christmas Day, completely restored.” As the anti-Black Friday movement grows in popularity, many shoppers are not only turning back to their local high streets and markets but are increasingly looking online for ways to shop locally. On Facebook, a group called Not on Amazon was started last November and now has more than 157,000 members. Founded by Jamie Rackham, who runs a small upcycling business making furniture in the Forest of Dean, it is a place where owners of independent creative and artisan businesses can freely advertise the products they have made to others in the group. “This time last year we were going to do some Christmas markets and they were all cancelled,” said Rackham. “At the same time, I heard about Amazon making a record amount of profits during lockdown. I thought: this is so wrong. They’re making all of this money and we’re being told we can’t operate our businesses. I’ve got to try and do something about this.” He has been so taken aback by the success of his Facebook group that last week he launched a crowdfunding campaign for a gallery he has set up. He hopes to create a space where members of Not on Amazon can display their work for sale and come and share information and ideas with each other. Last week also saw the launch of another website designed to showcase and generate sales for independent shops across the country. “It’s kind of sickening, what happened to our local high streets during the pandemic,” said Dr Jackie Mulligan, the founder of Shoplocalonline.org. “Small businesses weren’t allowed to trade, they were deemed non-essential in many categories. And then we saw a billionaire [Amazon founder Jeff Bezos] propelling himself into space. It just doesn’t make any sense.” She set up the website partly as a response to Black Friday. “Black Friday is decimating the high street – it’s the Grinch that has stolen Christmas from smaller retailers. Small retailers don’t want to pay 30% commission to an online giant, they don’t want their things coming out of a fulfilment warehouse. They just want to be able to serve their customers.” Any independent retailer can join the website for free until the end of January, and she promises no commission will ever be taken on their sales. More than 4,000 small independent retailers in at least 100 towns and cities have signed up so far. “All the businesses that are on Shoplocalonline.org are real places: market stalls, pop-up shops, actual bricks-and-mortar businesses. If you care about those places, this is a chance to spend with them.”The website follows in the footsteps of Bookshop.org, which launched a year ago to support independent bookshops. It has generated almost £1.8m for nearly 500 bookshops. Andrew Goodacre, head of Bira, said. “The pandemic has been very difficult for those retailers classed as non-essential. In the past 18 months they have suffered three lockdowns, weeks of restrictive regulations and are now just starting to build back their business. Christmas is going to be an incredibly important season for independent retailers. “We know shoppers have returned to shopping on the high street as they start to prepare for the festive period but we need stronger sales in November and December to help retailers take on the many challenges that await them in 2022.”Does French film-maker Céline Sciamma ever put a foot wrong? As a writer-director, her “accidental trilogy of youth” climaxed in the contemporary urban classic Girlhood (2014), after which she conquered the world of the 18th century in Portrait of a Lady on Fire (2019) – both near-perfect masterpieces. Now with Petite Maman she proves herself a maestro of the modern fable, conjuring a U-certificate treat that goes straight into my list of the greatest films ever made for children of all ages. “What would Miyazaki do?” was apparently Sciamma’s creative mantra, and you can feel the timeless energy of Studio Ghibli’s finest features haunting her creative decisions. Whether you are six or 60, this astonishingly insightful and heartbreakingly hopeful cinematic poem will pierce your heart, broaden your mind and gladden your soul, even as you wipe away tears. When her beloved grandmother dies, eight-year-old Nelly (Joséphine Sanz) worries that she didn’t say goodbye properly, not realising that the end was so near. At the ever-so-slightly mysterious house by the woods where Grandma lived, the task begins of clearing away the past. While her mum (Nina Meurisse) and dad (Stéphane Varupenne) pack up memories and face their own personal demons (“I get the feeling everyone is asking themselves questions”), Nelly ventures out among the autumn trees, whistling down the wind where her mother once roamed as a child. Here, she happens upon a young girl, Marion, played by Josephine’s real-life twin, Gabrielle Sanz. Marion shares Nelly’s mother’s name, and lives in a house that strangely mirrors that of her grandmother. Indeed, Marion’s life chimes so closely with tales Nelly has been told of her mother’s childhood that she reaches a bold conclusion, telling her new friend: “I come from the path behind you…” Like the sublime Sciamma-scripted stop-motion animation My Life as a Courgette (2016), Petite Maman is short and sweet, yet fearlessly profound. A mix of fairytale, ghost story and rites-of-passage journey, this is at heart a cinematic parable about healing intergenerational wounds, about breaching the barriers that inevitably grow between parents and children. It’s also a brilliantly cheeky “what if?” story, a lower-key riff on the crash-bang time-travelling pyrotechnics of Back to the Future. What’s astonishing is the way Sciamma uses her central conceit to allow characters to speak to each other across great divides – for children to see the dreams their parents once nurtured and to be reassured that “you didn’t invent my sadness”. Oh, to be able to have those conversations, in such wonderfully ordinary surroundings! What fantastical flight of fantasy could be more thrilling, more enriching, more healing? Who needs a DeLorean or a flux capacitor when you have this? Shot in intimately natural hues by cinematographer Claire Mathon, whose recent credits include the shimmering current release Spencer, Petite Maman has a tactile, earthy quality that at times reminded me of the Dardenne brothers’ underrated oddity The Silence of Lorna, another film that slips effortlessly between potentially Grimm realities. As with her early features Water Lilies and Tomboy, Sciamma has a keen eye for those moments where childhood and adulthood blur, with Nelly (who seems from the outset to be maternally protective of her mother) play-acting grown-up life with Marion while her mum is infantilised by returning to her childhood room, surrounded by her old books and shadowy nightmares of panthers at the end of the bed. There’s also the sheer joy of a scene in which Nelly and Marion make pancakes, which combines the youthful glee of The Florida Project with the bittersweet fantasy of the “perfect day” coda from Spielberg’s AI: Artificial Intelligence. I honestly can’t remember the last time I smiled so widely in a cinema, albeit from behind the protective covering of a mask. As with Portrait of a Lady on Fire, Sciamma once again makes sparse but pointed use of music, with an 1980s-tinged song co-written with regular collaborator Para One (AKA Jean-Baptiste de Laubier) accompanying a blissful interlude of surreal childhood adventure, perfectly encapsulating the dreams, aspirations and quietly rebellious spirit of this utterly spellbinding little gem.And Eddie said it wasn’t about revenge. You could have fooled me in the final hectic moments of this helter-skelter game, when all the Twickenham crowd was up on its feet and screaming, while the players down below set about each other, pushing and shoving in the rush of blood, everyone desperate to stake their claim on the game. There were two points in it then, and less than a minute left to play. And from the middle of all this chaos, out stepped Marcus Smith, to line up the match-winning kick. It was only 25 metres or so out, but these were, without doubt, the highest stakes he’s played for yet. Watching on from the sidelines, Jonny Hill turned to Courtney Lawes and said “imagine taking this kick”. Away behind Smith, Freddie Steward was muttering to himself “please don’t miss, please don’t miss.” Smith didn’t even seem to think twice. Of course, he made it. Even then, South Africa weren’t done fighting. Referee Andrew Brace had to bring in the TMO to rule on one last England penalty after the restart, after Eben Etzebeth clattered into Steward as he made a catch. And again everyone swarmed around Brace, fighting over his decision. Lawes, who had already been replaced, even came charging on to the pitch himself, and had to be pulled away again by Hill, who chased after him. Lawes said afterwards that he had got overexcited because he thought the game was over already. When Brace finally blew his whistle again, the South Africans charged Smith, who had to whip quickly around on his heels and boot the ball backwards into touch. I’m not sure Twickenham has ever sounded as loud as it did in those final moments. God, but it was a hell of a game, a reminder of everything you love about Test rugby. It was one of England’s best wins since Jones took charge in 2016, all the better because it looked, for so long, like they were bound to lose. Me, I thought they’d blown it when there were five minutes left, and they were trailing by two points. They won a penalty after Siya Kolisi took out Joe Marchant in the air. It was in goal-kicking distance, a metre or so inside South Africa’s half, but they decided to kick to touch instead. They had only just scored a brilliant try off a lineout, so you could understand why, but this time Etzebeth stole the ball, and the chance was gone. South Africa had dominated the second half. England had the edge in the scrums in the first 40 minutes, when their rookie front row won all four. They were awarded three penalties off them, and scored tries off the back of two. But South Africa readjusted at half time and the game had changed. They won three scrum penalties in a row, two against Kyle Sinckler, and another against Will Stuart, who were both penalised for standing up, buckling under the intolerable pressure. The second of them led to a lineout, which South Africa turned into a rolling maul that rumbled 10m, then 20m downfield into England’s 22. Desperate, they conceded another penalty for collapsing the maul. So, South Africa mauled again. And this time came right up to England’s try line. It became a game of inches, a pile of mad thrashing bodies in a heap, the ball lost somewhere in the thick of it, till it emerged, somehow, in the arms of Max Malins, flat on his back, and beaming a brilliant smile. Those are the moments, down there in the dirt, fighting to hold the line, that tell you so much about the character of a team. England didn’t win the match then, but they would have lost it if they’d given in. “The only reason we won that game is we were fighting for each other,” Lawes said afterwards. South Africa had to settle for a penalty. That made it a one-point game, 18-17. And then England scored that try. It was a brilliant one, against the run of play. They went short at a lineout in midfield, Raffi Quirke slipped the ball to Henry Slade, who snapped it on to Marchant while Smith ran a dummy loop around the back that wrongfooted the defenders lining up in front of them. Marchant beat Lukhanyo Am with a step, and set off downfield. Quirke, razor quick, was right there alongside him on his inside shoulder to take the final pass. It was a lethal bit of finishing. But it brought them only a minute’s grace. South Africa scored off what felt like the very next play, and it was back to being a one-point game again. Then South Africa kicked the penalty to go two points ahead, and set up those final minutes. Jones said there’s a lot left to work on. They conceded 18 penalties. In Test rugby, teams aim to keep their total in single figures but England’s indiscipline has been a running theme this year and unless they fix it, it is going to cost them sooner rather than later. But Jones, a relentless taskmaster, wouldn’t have it any other way. He wants them ready for 2023, and there are, undoubtedly, the makings of a very special team here.Kehinde Wiley has a love-hate relationship with western art history. “There’s something glorious about the portraits that you see of aristocrats and royal families. Something beautiful in those expansive imperialist landscapes.” But there’s a dead end. Such paintings, from the baroque, rococo, renaissance and Dutch golden age eras, are ultimately displays of European power, wealth, and beauty. “What I wanted to do was to take the good parts, the parts that I love, and fertilise them with things that I know to be beautiful – people who happen to look like me.” Wiley, 44, beloved by hip-hop superstars, signed to a Hollywood talent agency, and the first Black, gay artist to paint a US president’s official portrait, rose to art world fame in the 2000s for reimagining such classic European paintings with Black protagonists. His brightly coloured work is easy to identify: glowing brown skin, statuesque poses, richly patterned, often floral, backgrounds and a roster of unfamiliar but photogenic faces. His subversion of the conventions of the medium often involved creating pastiches that foreground Black youth and hip-hop culture and fashion; his works include remakes of Napoleon Crossing the Alps, by Jacques-Louis David, Jacob de Graeff by Gerard ter Borch and The Dead Christ in the Tomb by Hans Holbein the Younger. While he is famed for painting celebrities and cultural figures, from Spike Lee to LL Cool J, Questlove to Ice-T (his best known work is his 2018 portrait of Barack Obama, sitting relaxed on a wooden chair and surrounded by an abundance of leafy flowers), his work is just as likely to feature ordinary Black people he has found by scouring the local neighbourhoods. In a similar way to other African American artists such as Kerry James Marshall, Amy Sherald and Jordan Casteel, Wiley’s work inserts Black faces into historical white spaces and thus also into the canon of painting. “It’s an opportunity for people who traditionally have had very little relationship to museums and to what’s on their walls, to feel themselves included,” he says. Speaking over Zoom from New York, Wiley appears in a good mood. He’s at the SoHo Grand Hotel and has just finished his Observer photoshoot. There’s a sense of urgency in the air as he’s conducting several interviews back to back. “[I’m] busy but good,” he says, sounding exhausted but smiling widely. We are on the call to talk about Wiley’s move into landscape painting for his latest show, The Prelude, which opens at the National Gallery next month. Inspired by Romantic landscapes and seascapes in the gallery’s collection by painters including Claude Lorrain, Caspar David Friedrich, JMW Turner, and Claude-Joseph Vernet, six new works (five paintings and one film) will still feature the emblematic Black figures, but the style will mark a dramatic departure from his kaleidoscopic portraits, with their lively brocade backdrops and vibrant pigments. Set in the fjords of Norway, these new paintings are muted in tone and hue. Sombre, but still arrestingly grand. Christine Riding, head of the National Gallery’s curatorial department, believes the institution is the perfect forum for Wiley’s work. “I so admire how he draws out complex historical and contemporary issues – race, gender, identity, climate – with such power and poignancy,” she says, “while giving us the opportunity to look afresh at the gallery’s celebrated paintings.” Riding first encountered Wiley’s “exhilarating” work at the Brooklyn Museum in 2015. Determined to work with him, she led the acquisition of his Ship of Fools (2017) for the Royal Museums Greenwich, the first work by the painter to enter a UK public collection. Wiley’s interest in remaking historical European paintings has everything to do with searching for a sense of belonging in places that feel alien. “We know that museums and institutions, like art, have to respond to the world that they’re in, in order to stay current, in order to survive, in order to correspond to the society that surrounds them,” he says. “It’s an exciting opportunity to take a stodgy old language and breathe into it the vibrant now.” The models for the new paintings were cast on London streets. This way of working began when Wiley moved from Los Angeles to New York after finishing his studies in 2000, and began to approach strangers he met on the streets of Harlem, bringing them back into his studio and making preparatory images of them in poses they chose from an art history book. “Los Angeles is so mitigated by car culture,” he says. “In New York, everyone was in the streets. You can see how everyone is dressing and the peacocking that goes on every Saturday afternoon in Harlem. That was something I wanted to capture. It was magical to live in that new type of Black community. I thought it was really cool and translated really well to painting and portraiture specifically.” There’s much to admire in Wiley’s flâneur tendencies – they have led him to pick up many people in places not normally classed as hotspots for model-scouting, such as Ridley Road market in Dalston, where he spotted Melissa Thompson in 2019. He painted her sitting on a Regency-style chair against a backdrop of William Morris wallpaper in a work that has now been acquired by the V&amp;A. For the new show, he did an open call and street casting in south London. This time, instead of taking preparatory photographs of the models in his studio, he flew them to Norway and shot them in the fjords against snow-covered mountain backdrops. Why Norway? I ask. “Mountains have always been figured and imagined as being closer to God,” he says. There are also political currents running through these images, including climate change as well as colonialism. “When we look at landscapes, we’re also thinking about domination and annexation. In my opinion, while the work is critiquing that it’s also imagining a new way of looking at the landscape in the 21st century. We have to reconsider some of the questions surrounding sustainability. Do we want to hold nature at arm’s length? We have to perhaps think about it as something a lot more fragile, a lot more vulnerable.” * * * Wiley was born in South Central Los Angeles in 1977. He is one of six siblings, a twin, and was raised by an African American mother, Freddie Mae Wiley, who encouraged his artistic talent. He beams at the mention of his mother. “She was a constant inspiration for me from day one, principally by leading by example,” he explains. “Her interest in languages, in linguistics, allowed me to understand both language and art as a series of systems that can be understood and dismantled.” What seems certain is that without her sensing his talent early on, Wiley would not have had a career as an artist. “Essentially, I didn’t have a choice, I was sort of trapped into this,” he says laughing. His mother put him into Los Angeles County High School for the Arts, a public, tuition-free school, when he was 11. “I think so many kids just want to be able to be good at something, to be recognised and to be singled out as special. I was considered special for my drawings and I have held on to them, all these years later. My way of looking at the world, my way of painting was informed by the things that surrounded me.” Some of the things surrounding him were the objects in his mother’s thrift shop, known locally as Freddie’s Store. It sold secondhand art books, picture frames, figurines and knick-knacks and these offered Wiley his earliest encounter with creativity. “The decorative filigree on so many of the tchotchkes [trinkets] that my mom was selling when we were kids, that is a way of looking at the world that comes from someone who was part of a marginalised community,’’ he says. “The work that I ultimately made was informed by a type of empathy that comes from an outsider’s sensibility.” At the age of 12, Wiley was sent to Russia on a free art programme for 50 American schoolchildren in a forest outside St Petersburg. The experience was transformative. “It opened my eyes to a community of artists and young people outside of what I knew in South Central. It represented a break from seeing what was immediately around me, and made me see that there were so many different ways to live. So many traditions to see. And so, as someone who was interested in art, I started digging directly into other histories, and seeing the histories of others as being perhaps something that belongs to me as well. So it almost created a kind of global citizen out of me.” It also made him fervently aware of his good fortune in receiving a creative education. He saw that the arts could give young people, especially those from under-served communities, “not only a creative outlet, but also a sense of mastery in the world … a confidence and grace that come from being able to fast-form your ideas into objects, into words, statements, images. That shouldn’t be for the privileged, that should be for the people.” As a youngster, Wiley would visit the Huntington Library and Botanical Gardens collection in San Marino, California (the museum recently commissioned him to reimagine a 1770 painting by Gainsborough in their collection, Blue Boy). He recalls they had a great repository of British portraiture, but it was Kerry James Marshall’s De Style (1993), which depicts a scene at a barber shop, that really took hold of his imagination. “There was something absolutely heroic and fascinating about being able to feel a certain relationship to the institution,” he has said. “The fact that these people happen to look like me on some level.” Museums, says Wiley, need to appeal to all of society. “Their number one goal is to look at culture and society, and to say: this is our best. This is what we stand for. This is what we as a civilisation choose to put out there for eternity. And what happens when that responsibility is expanded to include people who come from different walks of life? It enriches us all.” For a brief moment, his pride jumps out. “So far I’ve been blessed because for every one of my shows, the number of people who attend that museum skyrockets.” * * * Wiley oscillates between institutional and commercial exhibitions. His first solo show was in Chicago in 2002, and since then, he’s had more than 20 shows across the US from New York to Seattle. His paintings have made a lot of money – in 2020, his Portrait of Mickalene Thomas (The Coyote), 2017, broke his previous auction record, selling for $378,000 – and he has had mainstream success through several high-profile commissions (including one from Michael Jackson, who is depicted in 2010’s Equestrian Portrait of King Philip II, which Wiley started just months before the singer died). Such is the demand for his art that he has a group of assistants in a Beijing studio to help with the creation of new works. When New York magazine asked him about having a team based in China, his answer was somewhat prickly: “I don’t want you to know every aspect of where my hand starts and ends, or how many layers go underneath the skin, or how I got that glow to happen.” It’s understandable that Wiley might prefer not to reveal the mechanics of what is essentially a profitable business. Though he isn’t the first artist to use assistants (he follows Michelangelo and Damien Hirst, to name just two), few artists want to be viewed as sales tycoons. As Anish Kapoor said: “If everything’s for sale, how is it possible to find anything that’s radical?” I ask Wiley how much an awareness of collectors and buyers seeps into his art-making. “The commercial success of the work allows the work to get that much larger and that much more exciting,” he says. “It allows me to have a bigger reach and an ability to say more complicated things in more complicated structural ways.” However, thinking too much about a work’s place in the world has its limits. “I think it’s important to strike a balance and to understand oftentimes it’s not necessary to use brute force in order to create an image that appeals.” Wiley seems committed to giving back financially and supporting other artists. In 2019, he founded Black Rock, a residency programme based in Dakar, Senegal. Inspired by his own early experience of an international programme, it aims to give others “the ability to go outside of your own country and personal experience, allowing you to grow as a thinker, as a creator”. Some of the artists who have visited include Amsterdam-based Nigerian artist Tyna Adebowale, who portrays queer bodies, and film producer Abbesi Akhamie, whose work focuses on African and diasporan cultures and experiences. “For many people, living and working in Africa is a complete mystery,” he explains. “To be able to work side by side with other creative people in an international context allows everyone to grow, not only African artists, but artists from all over the world” Why does he think there’s been such a surge in interest in art and culture from Africa? “Africa is hot right now,” he says. “But Africa has been hot for hundreds of years, because of our labour pool, our mineral resources and our habitable climate, and now we’re slowly starting to realise that there are people there. People with histories, and ways of looking at themselves and traditions of beauty. Unlike a fad or something that is simply a temporary shift, this is a thing that represents a whole new way of looking, not just at Africa but at the west.” Wiley was at Black Rock last year when the Black Lives Matters protests spread across America after the murder of George Floyd. The distance from the US gave him a new perspective on Black America’s impact. “I saw that what smoulders in the United States catches fire in the rest of the world as well,” he says. “You start to see the advent of social movements – End SARS [a protest against police brutality] in Nigeria, young South Indians deciding to talk about colour issues and class issues… It’s a sort of global reckoning with power imbalances, and specifically with racial imbalances.” Wiley tells me he’s working on sculpture next, for a major show in Italy. He’s made bronze busts in the past, but it’s thrilling to imagine someone with such an established “brand” and identity exploring a new medium. His debut film work, Narrenschiff (2017), reveals Wiley’s ability to tell stories as extravagant as his paintings. A three-channel digital film, it features a group of young Black men at sea struggling to reach land. It is a metaphor for migration and social dislocation and was inspired by the idea of the “ship of fools” –an allegory for the problems that arise when political governance is not supported by expert knowledge that was very popular in European culture from the late 15th century. The new National Gallery show builds upon these themes. “A show that opens in a British museum needs to be aware of the history of empire,” says Wiley. The models in the new landscapes are connected by African ancestry. “It was interesting to create a global narrative in this new work,” Wiley says, “so that it becomes [about] more than the motif of western European painting, but a question of what it feels like to be young and Black and alive in the 21st century.” Though race, Blackness, and identity are clear themes in Wiley’s works, his paintings aren’t overtly political. In the past, he’s even described them as “atheists”: the last thing he wants to do is preach, he wants to give us something to celebrate. His portraits feel something like posters for Black excellence, his subjects in positions of power, idealised and commanding respect. There’s another side to the coin, though. The attempt to challenge stereotypes through fantastical aspirational imagery can sometimes feel hollow. Must Black people assimilate into white-constructed displays of regalness, wealth, authority and class in order to be seen as valuable? Can’t we be ordinary, exist in ordinary conditions, and still matter? That’s not a question Wiley is trying to answer. “I hope my work doesn’t do harm,” he once said, “but I don’t necessarily design it to do good.” That the work has a social impact is “a good thing”, Wiley says. “But sometimes to do that so consciously doesn’t make the best work. To make the best work you have to make it intensely personal. You have to have faith in the fact that everything that you do as an artist can be seen through a political rubric.” In the past, Wiley himself has made some not-so-subtle works that have caused controversy, most notably Judith Beheading Holofernes, a 2012 painting which depicts a tall Black woman in a long blue dress. In one hand, she holds a knife. In the other, she swings the severed head (which was the head of one of Wiley’s assistants) of a white woman. Conservative media outlets, not knowing it was a play on Caravaggio’s painting of the same name, based on the Bible story, blasted it as racist. So what advice does he have for young Black artists, who might feel a pressure to make “timely” work that fits a cultural landscape which has a fetish for a singular (often traumatic) Black narrative? “The best way to do it is to get really small and look at the details of your life, and to zoom in and find the beauty in the mundane,” says Wiley. “The beauty in that person who was just walking by you, who the world is ignoring. That is ultimately the most personal thing you can do and one of the most political things you can do.” • Kehinde Wiley: The Prelude runs 10 Dec-18 Apr at the National Gallery, London‘I found my dad… and a roommate’: Larecia Buford, 36, security officer I used to go by Larecia Whitehead, I changed my second name to Buford – my real father’s name – when a DNA test led us to each other after decades apart. For most of my childhood, Mum told me another guy was my father, a man I never knew and who left us when I could barely walk or talk. I was never convinced. Then, at 15, a girl in school recognised my then surname and introduced me to the man my mother always said was my dad. We looked nothing alike. He didn’t think I was his daughter either. Fastforward to me being 31, and I needed certainty. Once again I tracked down the man my mum said was my dad and asked him to do a DNA test. The results came back: there was a 0% chance we were related. I’d been right all along. A year later I turned to online DNA tests, unsurprisingly not matching with the Whitehead family. There were random third and fourth cousins, but I was at a loss. Thankfully, a friend connected me with a search angel – volunteers who help people like me find their lost relatives. It wasn’t an easy task – turns out my dad was one of 12 siblings. But 21 days later, my search angel had found my father. I showed him a picture of my mum and he recognised her instantly. The DNA tests matched. It’s strange; to this day my mum is adamant they’ve never met. Dad says they were only together three times. I reckon Mum is just in denial. Now she accepts him; we do things as a family. Still, she has no memory of him at all. And here’s the craziest bit: there had always been question marks over whether my dad had been a father. Not to me, but to a boy. He’d raised a son, when in fact he was the child of another man. Dad needed me as much as I needed him. Being his only child, meanwhile, worked out perfectly for me; after 35 years apart, selfishly, I didn’t want to share him. We live together now. He’s more than just a father, he’s a best friend. In a matter of months he went from total stranger to being one of the most important people in my life; the same for my children. I’m going to write a book, not just to tell this story but to try to reach teenagers who also have missing parents. If I’d found him sooner, I could have had so many more years of loving – and being loved by – my father. I want to encourage others to not waste any time. ‘I discovered I’m Afghan’: Jordyn Myers, 21, aerospace engineering student My mum had me when she was 17, super young. I lived with her for a few years as a baby, but I ended up being raised by my grandma. I never knew who my father was, and my mum didn’t either; let’s say back then she was living young, wild and free in Las Vegas. It’s a city where plenty of men come and go. Right after I was born, we took a bunch of paternity tests. None of the potential candidates that Mum identified matched my genetics. Well into high school, I just accepted it would never be figured out. And then in 2016, out of the blue, my grandma bought us both DNA tests online. Our intention was to learn about my ethnic makeup, that was all. Mum had mentioned previously she’d been dating – among others – a Puerto Rican guy at the time of my conception. I have a different complexion to the rest of our family. I didn’t intend to find my father, but my roots. Opening the results was one the most shocking moments of my life – apparently I’m exactly half Afghan. Lower down the page was a long list of cousins: once you spit in the tube and send it in, you receive a list of relatives who have also signed up. Some of them – from names alone – I just knew would have to be related to my dad. For the first time, my father felt real. I called Mum and suddenly a memory of a man was triggered. Maybe there was this one Middle Eastern guy, she said, but they’d only met once. She’d never considered him a possibility. I messaged one of these newfound cousins and explained my situation. All I knew is that this man would have been in town nine months before I was born. Our exchanges were sporadic. Finally, last November, they sent me a list of names. I asked my mum: he could, she recalled, be an Alex? The final name on the list. Alex lived in Afghanistan with his wife and kids, but his mother – my prospective grandmother – lived a short drive from me. Our DNA matched. A few weeks ago, I had my first video call with my dad. He wasn’t a visitor, but local. Lots of his family are still here in Vegas; with open arms they’ve welcomed me. I still face an identity crisis, only a different type. Does this new information change me? I want to embrace my heritage, but I wasn’t raised with it; would that make me an impostor? With their support, I’m soaking up Afghan culture. At parties, they all speak Farsi – I want to learn the familial language. I know next to nothing about their customs, food or reference points. I’m excited to embrace it all, and to one day meet my father. Because being Afghan, it turns out, is a huge part of who I am. ‘My father was switched at birth’: Alice Collins Plebuch, 73, retired I was always interested in genealogy and when I did a DNA test in 2012 I didn’t think much of it. I knew, or so I thought, all about my family history – I was doing it for fun. My parents were Irish American Catholics; all my ancestors were originally from the British Isles. Instead, the results showed I was only half Irish, Scottish or English. The rest of me was European Jewish. Of course, one can be Jewish and British, but DNA testing identifies people of Jewish heritage as a distinct group. It made no sense. At first I thought it was a mistake; maybe one side of our family had hidden their background. My sister and I went into detective mode and asked two cousins to take DNA tests: one on Mum’s side, and one on my father’s. That way, I hoped, we’d decipher where the Jewish genes were from and work from there. The results took an age, but finally came back: both were Irish; none of our cousins shared our Jewish heritage. Even stranger was the fact that while my sister and I matched as relatives with my mother’s side of the family, genetically speaking my cousin on Dad’s side was a total stranger. My father’s sister was not his sister. Somehow, my father had Jewish genes, but his parents – my grandparents – had not. It was a mystery. Dad was the son of Irish immigrants. We had his birth certificate, showing he’d been born on 23 September 1913. We knew he was raised in a New York orphanage. At this point, we questioned whether something had gone wrong in the system and two children in the home had been confused for each other. But the sole picture I had of my father as a young child matched the man I knew. Within two weeks of receiving our cousin’s DNA results, we settled on a new theory: that our father was switched with an Irish baby while the two were newborns in the hospital. It was the only scenario that made sense. It was the only way Dad could somehow have not been related to his own parents. We then spent two and a half years searching for a close Jewish relative who had taken a DNA test to confirm what we thought. I periodically checked my Irish “cousin’s” DNA results online to see if he had acquired any unexpected relatives. Amazingly, he was contacted by a new cousin, a generation below me, who’d expected to be genetically Jewish, but discovered she was Irish instead. And yes, this woman’s grandfather was also born on 23 September 1913. The babies had been sent home with the wrong parents: an Irish boy had been sent home with a Jewish family. My Jewish father – Jim Collins – had been raised Irish instead. We tracked down the other family – the news to them was also shocking. As soon as we looked at pictures of Jim – it all clicked into place. The strangest part is all the coincidences we later discovered: how my dad, Jim, was a gambler just like his biological father; how he loved gefilte fish and didn’t eat pork, despite never knowing he was Jewish. Whoever his parents were, my dad was still my dad. ‘A message from the sister I never knew’: Curtis Green, 49, mechanic When I was two years old, one of my two younger brothers passed away. I grew older and started my own family, and I too lost a child of my own. Two and half months ago, I saw a message when I logged into Facebook from a stranger: I’m pretty sure we are brother and sister, it said. I’d done a DNA test a few years earlier, but got nothing. Suddenly, here was this sister out the blue. She’d been searching for us for 35 years. We’ve basically been neighbours our whole lives – she’s only 10 miles down the road; I’ve known her husband for 25 years, and we have an unbelievable number of mutual friends. My parents are both dead; after my first younger brother died, my father struggled with alcoholism. He was running around doing whatever, clearly getting someone pregnant in between the births of me and my living brother. As far as I know, he never knew, and neither did we. I ordered a special test which can identify siblings, and drove to her house. As soon as she answered the door taking a further test seemed pointless. The woman standing in front of me was the spitting image of my dad. When the results came back, lo and behold, she’d been right. The next day, our families met. We all went for dinner, then returned to my place. It was only when I sat down in my house that I realised: my sister was six years younger than me; my father had died exactly six years ago to the day. Today she’s a huge part of my life. We talk every day, she’s a missing piece of my life’s puzzle. I’m so happy about it all: after losing a kid, family becomes even more precious. And here I am, with a new sister, niece and nephew. They’re a blessing… and who knows how many more of us there are still to find? ‘At times I still feel guilty for finding Dad’: Karen Riley, 56, business owner Mum was only 18 when she got pregnant. The father? They weren’t together and let’s just say he wasn’t around. Her family were devout Catholics. Back then, lots of young, single expectant mothers were sent to these awful institutions, where they’d give birth and have their babies given away. Six weeks before I was born, Mum was sent to Brettargh Holt in Kendal – a convent staffed by Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and Mary. After giving birth, Mum upped and left with me in tow. She never spoke to her parents again. Life was tough, and she did it all on her own. Unsurprisingly, she wasn’t keen on talking about everything that had happened. Growing up, I had no idea who my father was. During the summer, my skin naturally tanned quicker than most of the other kids, which saw me get bullied. When I was six or seven, Mum sat me down and explained why. My dad, she told me, was Italian. That was the only piece of information she ever wanted to share. And so there was always a sense of guilt attached to me trying to find him. On and off since my 20s, I tried to track him down. Many years later, my estranged maternal grandma sent me a letter. His name was Antonio, she told us; this is the street where he was lodging at the time. I knocked on every single door and found his old landlady. She remembered the young Italian lad’s name. I found him on Facebook, and sent him a message. Right away, he knew who I was. Soon he had a DNA kit in his hands. He was on a Zanzibar beach when – in his 80s – Dad discovered he was a father, grandfather and great-grandfather for the very first time. Today we have a great relationship; he calls me his little miracle. We’ve still not talked much about all that happened between Mum and him; why for so long he wasn’t a present parent. He’s an elderly man now. One day, maybe I will. Mum died in 2003. I’m not sure how she’d have felt about me and him connecting. At times I feel guilty, but he’s a wonderful man, a special addition to my life. We may have missed out on memories, but there’s still time for us to make plenty more. ‘I grew up watching my sister on TV’: Christine Veltri, 42, nanny My sister and I are close. We were both adopted by my parents, but the two of us are not biologically related. When my mum gave birth to our younger brother a few years after we arrived, it was a real surprise for all. Mum and Dad were always open about our adoption; they’d read us a book called The Chosen Baby. I’ve also always had admiration for the woman who gave me up. It must have been so hard to do. I’ve always been super-curious about my genetics. I’ve been married five years, but don’t have children. That means I’ve never met anyone – my age, older or younger – who shares my DNA. Still, I was cautious about digging around; not wanting to upset my parents; aware that appearing in other people’s lives can, of course, cause upset and drama. So little was known about my biological parents – the name my birth mother gave on the adoption papers was a decoy – that I decided I simply needed to know more. It was Christmas 2018 when I finally took a DNA test. I got the results on St Patrick’s day. I remember because it said I have some Irish blood. Through the site, I connected with a half-uncle – my first ever blood relation. He knew a little about my mother, Barbara: a bit of a troublemaker, in and out of prison. When she was pregnant with me, she stole her brother’s car and drove across the country to secretly give birth. She’d been married at that point; I was the child of her extramarital affair. And, he informed me I had a half-sister – an actor in Hollywood. I reached out to her; DNA tests confirmed we shared a birth mother. I was overwhelmed. As a child, I’d watched her play the sassy middle sister on television in a popular television sitcom I loved. To find out we were related was heartwarming. I’d spent a lifetime thinking I’d never know any blood relatives, when she’d been there all along. She and I still haven’t talked talked; we’re yet to meet in person. She was kind when we wrote to each other, but overwhelmed and unsure how to feel. I understand; we all feel different emotions about the past and where we’re from. And I’m so lucky to have an amazing family who I love more than anything in the world. In time, I hope she and I will connect properly. For now, I’m just comforted by knowing she was, and is, part of my world.Aren’t things a bit… weird right now? Aren’t they? A bit odd? Everywhere I look Britain seems to be glitching slightly, news melting under the gentlest light, people fixed in 10-minute yawns. Last week I was walking through central London on a frosty evening when, upon turning a corner, I found myself suddenly in the crush of a crowd, young people dressed in glitter and lipstick and screaming with a kind of desperate joy. I panicked a little. This was the most people I’d been in contact with for two years, each one a stranger, two in pink furs, and I got that feeling again, the same feeling I’d had when I looked out of the window at falling leaves only to realise a moment later that they were in fact discarded face masks. The feeling that nobody, nothing, is yet quite right. I’d stumbled, it turned out, into a crowd of Lady Gaga fans outside the House of Gucci premiere – on my way home later that night teenagers in full Gucci looks sat on the pavement in Leicester Square eating McNuggets through lace gloves. It was a Tuesday, and not far away Richard Ratcliffe was entering his third week camping outside the Foreign Office, writing of his young daughter, “She knows that Daddy is on hunger strike to get Boris Johnson to bring Mummy home.” The whole country seems poised, confused. Johnson, unmasked in a hospital, is at its centre, misdirecting traffic. For the cost of the Covid-testing contract awarded to the private healthcare company Owen Paterson lobbied for, Britain could have paid its debts to Iran, which would have meant both Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and her husband might be home in their own bed. This disconnect adds to the sense that the government is playing with money like an uncle at lunch, pulling coins from behind our ears then making them disappear again. The more we hear about MPs and their cash – like Sir Geoffrey Cox, who earned nearly £1m last year from legal work, most of it done from the British Virgin Islands, or Iain Duncan Smith, who has a £25,000-a-year second job advising a company that now provides the NHS with 92% of its non-alcohol sanitiser, or Sajid Javid, who took a £150,000 a year second job with JP Morgan before returning to the Cabinet because, “It’s good to have experience that is not all about politics,’ (a claim that might have held more weight had any of these politicians “experiences” been, for eg, as a cleaner or lorry driver) – the more warped our current world appears. The FT quoted an anonymous backbencher as saying: “There’s no way I could be an MP without my outside interests. My wife works full-time, I’ve got kids and need the money for childcare.” Which makes you sort of hum contemplatively for a minute, running over the recent history in your mind. Recent history that includes his party voting to take £20 a week from the poorest people in the country, increasing the child poverty rate to one in every three children. If he’s having trouble budgeting on a salary of £82,000 (plus expenses), the first thought is, perhaps it wasn’t the most sensible idea for him to take a job deciding how to spend taxpayers’ money. And then, hey, how about campaigning for legislation that makes living here less upsettingly expensive? For me, someone who dips only their littlest toe into politics, this government’s belief that cash is one thing for us and another for them, that there is more than one reality available at any one time, occasionally brings me out in a sort of dissociative state. Is this a particularly weird time or has this always been the way? I follow a number of “No context” accounts on social media, snapshots of something – a TV show, a writer, Britain itself – out of the context in which they first appeared. A typical example might show the dystopian horror of our daily life with a quote from Stath Lets Flats, or a single screenshotted headline, “Fury after Morrisons wouldn’t sell couple meat pies before 9am.” And right now, the country seems similarly unmoored. The feeling is on a continuum with the unease I experience walking back out into the post-lockdown world with a voice in each ear, one whispering, “Everything’s fine,” the other laughing manically. It’s not just the politics, though those definitely contribute – I’m thinking now of Lord Wolfson of Tredegar recently debating a proposed amendment to the Voyeurism Act with the demented example of a man who, photographing his wife on a beach “for his own sexual gratification”, happened to catch a breastfeeding woman in the background. No, it’s the anxiety, the vagueness about what is ordinary and what is remarkable. Being suddenly aware of the privilege of small freedoms, walking through Robert Dyas touching each toaster with reverence. The dread with every ping that signals a new message from school. Is this current sense of weirdness a temporary hangover after a very strange year, or is this what they meant by the new normal? If so, I’m going to need a minute. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanThe Flower Yard by Arthur Parkinson Written by the “plantfluencer” and rosy-cheeked protégé of Sarah Raven, this book is a playful invitation to garden on a truly small scale. “It is a calling out against what is small-garden dysmorphia, where gardens with lawns, sheds and even greenhouses are indeed called small,” states Parkinson in his introduction. HisParkinson’s own Nottinghamshire town garden is more accurately described as a brick path of “flamboyant and defiant” pots. On these pages, Parkinson shares his flair for cramming them with colour year-round, creating a garden of galvanised and terracotta pots brimming with bronze, toffee, chocolate and beetroot purple blooms. Hachette, £22 Gardening for Bumblebees by Dave Goulson “My professional interest in bees sprang from idly watching bumblebees visit comfrey flowers nearly 30 years ago,” explains Professor Dave Goulson. In this follow-up to his bestselling natural science book, A Sting in the Tale, Goulson distills three decades of academic research into an anecdote-laden book on pollinator diversity, the causes of pollinator decline and his favourite pastime: bee-watching. The book encourages gardeners to create a refuge for all garden pollinators, identifying the best trees, shrubs and flowers to plant and suggesting how to create the perfect breeding sites for these lovable insects. Square Peg, £16.99 Grow and Gather: A Gardener’s Guide to a Year of Cut Flowers by Grace Alexander Grace Alexander is a trained consultant clinical psychologist and a cut flower seed merchant. For Alexander, gardening is a means of escapism, and that is precisely what her gentle, atmospheric first book, Grow and Gather, offers the reader. From sowing in spring round to seed-collecting in autumn, the author encourages you to nurture your own patch of beauty, guiding you through the seasons with manageable job lists and practical advice. Lyrical journal entries and rich photography of Alexander’s former sheep field emphasise her loose, forgiving approach to gardening and eye for colour, texture and shape. Hardie Grant, £20 The Naturally Beautiful Garden by Kathryn Bradley-Hole For a book centred on ecologically friendly garden design principles (conserving water, reducing chemicals, supporting wildlife), The Naturally Beautiful Garden manages to keep it light with sumptuous photography from over 30 gardens across the world. Each project – be it a cactus garden on an ancient estate in Sicily, or the sepia grasses of Norfolk’s Bressingham in winter – demonstrates how their makers have managed to work with, rather than against, nature. The book is organised into six chapters to show how each garden has adapted not only to their specific environment, but to serve diverse needs – from public sanctuaries to sprawling country estates, to inner city courtyards. Rizzoli, £45 Bedside Companion for Gardeners by Jane McMorland Hunter Described as “an anthology of garden writing for every night of the year”, this makes perfect under-the-duvet reading for weary gardeners. It is a free-form mix of fact, fiction, dreams and hard-won experience that combines poetry, prose and advice from (ghosts of) gardeners past and present. Compare Mrs Earle and Ethel Case’s advice on building a bird table, from their 1912 book, Gardening for the Ignorant (“A long fir pole is the principal thing needed…”) with the extract from Gertrude Jekyll’s 1899 classic and influential book, Wood and Garden (“There is always in February one day, at least, when one smells the yet distant, but surely coming, summer…”) and you get an idea of this pleasing piece of horticultural literature. Pavilion Books, £20.Concern is growing over plans to host a UN climate conference in Sharm el-Sheikh next year, in what will be a crucial summit if the world is to limit global heating to 1.5C. Several green experts and human rights activists have told the Observer they fear the ability of civil society groups to protest at the summit will be curtailed by Egypt’s authoritarian regime, reducing the pressure that can be brought to bear on leaders and ministers from the nearly 200 countries expected to take part. The Cop26 summit in Glasgow produced substantial progress on cutting greenhouse gas emissions, but the national carbon targets laid out there fell far short of the near-halving of emissions required to stay within 1.5C of pre-industrial levels. Recognising that, nations agreed to review their targets before the next annual climate “conference of the parties”, scheduled for next November. Egypt will host Cop27, in keeping with the expectation that the next location of the Cop should be in Africa. But the choice of Egypt has caused concern. Since coming to power in a military coup in 2013, Egyptian president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi has overseen the broadest and deepest crackdown on civil rights in Egypt’s modern history. Dissent has been outlawed: the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information estimates that 65,000 political prisoners are currently inside the country’s detention system, which has grown to at least 78 major detention centres in the past decade. Critics, from politicians to people posting comments on social media or even small groups protesting against a price rise on the Cairo metro, have been detained and imprisoned on terrorism charges. “I think that both Egypt’s political environment and its specific record of hosting conferences suggest that there’s a lot to be concerned about,” said Timothy Kaldas of the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy, a Washington thinktank. “Protests have been de facto outlawed while many people have been imprisoned for protesting without government permission, which is almost never granted.” Kaldas pointed to the intimidation, surveillance and in some cases physical harassment directed towards activists when they attended the 64th session held by the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights in Sharm el-Sheikh two years ago. “While hosting the Cop in the global south is vitally important, there are many better suited hosts, and the reality is that civil society from the global south who don’t have the protections that come with a passport are all the more vulnerable to harassment and intimidation than their western peers,” he said. An Egyptian environmental activist, who asked not to be named, said that Egypt hosting the next Cop removed the necessary pressure created by activists operating outside the conference’s “blue zone”, or sanctioned area. “That tension between civil society and governments has led to concessions and some progress,” they said. “Egypt hosting the Cop severely compromises that tension.” The activist said that the result of Egypt’s almost decade-long ban on street protests and suppression of political organising is that civil society actors and prospective protesters visiting Egypt for the Cop will be unable to liaise with local organisations, as it would risk endangering Egyptian activists. “It’s too dangerous for that to happen unless they are directly or indirectly sanctioned by the Egyptian government,” they said. But some international observers believe the location should give added impetus to the calls from vulnerable countries to major emerging economies, such as China, India and Russia, to toughen their emissions-cutting goals. Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Institute at the London School of Economics, said: “Egypt will be a particularly appropriate host for Cop27, which should be the African Cop. The issues of climate finance, adaptation, and loss and damage should all be high on the list of priorities, and all are of particular importance to Africa, which is home to many of the most vulnerable people to the impacts of climate change.” Bernice Lee, research director for futures at the Chatham House thinktank, also called for more emphasis on developing country concerns: “We must focus on the fact that this is a global event taking place not only in Egypt but in Africa, and we must see it as a golden opportunity to engage different African stakeholders on climate, as many of the promises made in Glasgow will be played out in developing country regions like Africa.” However, Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House climate adviser now with the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington, questioned whether Egypt would bring enough pressure to bear on countries reluctant to raise their ambition on emissions cuts: “It remains to be seen whether Egypt will be willing to finesse greater climate ambitions from historic allies such as Russia and newer funders like China.”Winston Churchill offered this advice about how the Conservative party should treat its leader. “The loyalties which centre upon number one are enormous. If he trips, he must be sustained. If he makes mistakes, they must be covered. If he sleeps, he must not be wantonly disturbed. If he is no good, he must be pole-axed.” Which brings us to Boris Johnson. Tory MPs are tremendously angry with him. They are not quite so furious that they will pole-axe their number one this week, but they are sufficiently incensed to decline to sustain him and refuse to cover for him. Large numbers of them “withdrew their love” in a dramatically public fashion by disdaining to turn up to support him at the most recent prime minister’s questions. They missed an especially unedifying session during which the Speaker had to issue four reprimands to the Tory leader for disorderly behaviour. Where normally the chamber is rammed for PMQs, the vacant green leather behind Mr Johnson bore silent witness to how severely he has aggravated his parliamentary party. Attendees at a later, private meeting of the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers described the atmosphere as sullen. It was not much improved by the prime minister’s belated confession that he had “crashed the car into a ditch”. The consensus among Conservative MPs is that their leader’s stock with his parliamentary party is plumbing depths not previously seen, not even during the bleakest stretches of the pandemic. The catalyst is the grotesque mishandling of the Owen Paterson affair and the fierce blowback from it, but there are many other underlying sources of discontent. The result is that the prime minister has managed to alienate every Tory faction of any significance. The most obviously ominous development for him is the fury among the “red wallers”, the large number of Tory MPs who entered the Commons just under two years ago and sit for formerly Labour constituencies mainly concentrated in the Midlands and the north. Previously counted as uber-loyalists, on the grounds that he won them their seats, they are angry that they have been plunged into a sleaze crisis made in Number 10, angry that the prime minister ducked below the parapet while they were exposed to the outrage of voters and further aggrieved that their party suffered so much reputational damage before its leader finally acknowledged that he had blundered. The betrayal of key promises to provide high-speed rail to the north of England has worsened the mood among those representing areas that have lost out. To add to the lengthening list of grievances, the government now wants to fiddle with the cap on social care costs in a way that will leave less affluent pensioners, many of whom live in red wall constituencies, paying tens of thousands of pounds more. “Boris has still got a bit of capital in the bank, but a lot of it has gone,” says a Conservative MP representing a Yorkshire seat. The “red wallers” are sometimes depicted as being in generational conflict with the “red corduroys”, a reference to the weekend trouser wear sometimes favoured by older Conservative MPs sitting for wealthier, more traditionally Tory areas. Yet the corduroy brigade is also extremely disgruntled. Many in this group engage in the financially rewarding extracurricular activities that are threatened by a tightening of the rules on MPs’ outside jobs. Either ex-ministers or never-will-be ministers, they are already very unbiddable by government business managers. “The whips know not to bother me,” says one. This group will be even more ungovernable and even less forgiving if the prime minister’s shabby bungling costs them money. These two tribes have featured most prominently in the recriminations that have racked the Tory party over the past three weeks, but they are not the only factions that are discontented with Mr Johnson. There is rumbling from the self-styled “Spartans”, the Brexit fundamentalists who played such an instrumental role in collapsing the premiership of Theresa May and paving the path to Number 10 for Mr Johnson. He’s given them the rock-hard Brexit that they wanted, but he is not delivering the domestic programme that they imagined would follow. For an important proportion of them, the point of getting out of the EU was to allow Britain to become a low-tax, light-regulation, small-state country. They are aghast to see a Conservative government raising taxes to their highest share of the economy since the early 1950s. This dissatisfied group overlaps with the Thatcherites who have long been suspicious that the Tory leader is not a genuine disciple of the Iron Lady, but a Plasticine Boy. “Boris doesn’t have a conviction in his body,” complains one veteran Thatcherite. “There’s a lot of us worrying: is this a Conservative government?” They tend not to blame the recent tax-hiking budget on Rishi Sunak, who most believe to be one of them at heart, but the spendthrift, haphazard headline-chasing of his next door neighbour. Just because the right of the Tory party is unhappy doesn’t mean its remaining centrists are satisfied. Liberal, internationalist Tories, the type who tried to stop the government’s savage cuts to the aid budget, don’t feel this is their kind of government either. They are angsty that moderate voters are repelled by sleaze, mendacity, incompetence and the crude bombast of the prime minister. “Many of us assumed that Boris was the One Nation Tory who ran London,” says a centrist Conservative MP who backed him for the leadership in 2019. “Unfortunately, we’ve learnt that this was just a persona to win London. We’ve learnt that this was not the genuine Boris.” Then there is the chunky segment of Tory MPs who never trusted him, always thought he would be a bad prime minister and tried to stop him becoming leader. Residual Cameroons and Mayites can be found in this group, nursing their resentment about the large role he played in the destruction of his two predecessors. Now I come to the Johnsonites, the loyal band of Tory MPs whom he can expect to sustain him when he trips, cover for him when he makes mistakes and defend him against all enemies. Except I can’t, because there really isn’t such a thing as a Johnsonite. He is a highly unusual prime minister in not having a strong body of committed supporters who will back him through thick and thin. It is a struggle to think of more than a handful of Tory MPs who might fight for him to the bitter end. He doesn’t have colleagues who are dedicated to his philosophy, because he is an opportunist of no fixed ideological abode. He doesn’t have MPs who are devoted to him because they admire the calibre and consistency of his character because you can’t esteem what doesn’t exist. He hasn’t got loyalists, only lackeys. He inspires no true believers, he simply attracts hangers-on. They will let go of his coat-tails the moment they conclude that his premiership is on an irreversibly downward trajectory. He became leader not because Tory MPs thought he would make a decent prime minister, but because they reckoned him their best bet for winning the last election. His prospects of remaining number one are crucially dependent on Tory MPs continuing to regard him as a winner. The biggest threat to Mr Johnson is not the recent droop in the Conservative party’s poll rating, but the larger drop in his personal ratings. Are voters who once shrugged at his character failings because they liked his shtick tiring of the act? Has the joke stopped being funny? That’s what Sir Keir Starmer is hoping and some Tory MPs report anecdotal evidence that this is beginning to happen among their constituents. “I notice they don’t call him Boris anymore,” says one. “They call him Johnson.” Our most recent Opinium poll recorded approval for his performance as prime minister at a record low. A lot of things could be at work here. Not just sleaze, but also huge waiting lists for NHS treatment, looming tax rises and the waning of vaccine euphoria. What most matters to Tory MPs of all factions is whether the leader is an asset who boosts the chances of their party retaining power or a drag who endangers it. One shrewd former cabinet minister notes: “If you look back in history, Tory leaders get done in when their ratings track below the party.” Tories have a record of ruthlessness when they decide a leader has reached his or her expiry date. Even winning three elections in a row couldn’t save Mrs Thatcher when MPs concluded that she had become a liability. Boris Johnson is not yet in the pole-axe zone, but he is stumbling into its vicinity. •Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverProposals to impose vaccine passports and other restrictions on the movements of unvaccinated people in the UK should be treated with caution, scientists warned last week. Such plans would not lead to rapid reductions in Covid-19 case numbers and could trigger hostility to future vaccine campaigns, they said. These warnings were made after several European countries – including Belgium, Germany and Norway – revealed last week that they were preparing to beef up measures to tackle low uptake of Covid-19 vaccines as case rates continue to rocket across the continent. On Friday, Austria announced it would become the first country in Europe to make coronavirus jabs mandatory. All citizens will be required to have one from 1 February next year. Slovakia is also banning unvaccinated people from all non-essential stores and shopping malls, while in Greece new restrictions will prevent visits to bars, restaurants, cinemas, museums and gyms. The crackdown led to widespread protests across Europe. Tens of thousands of people – carrying signs saying “no to vaccination” – gathered in Vienna’s Heroes’ Square, and Dutch police shot and wounded at least two people after rioting erupted in Rotterdam over new Covid-19 measures in Holland. Opinion polls also suggest vaccine passports enjoy substantial support in most countries. “They are a way of encouraging people to have jabs and to bring down Covid-19 transmission rates,” said Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University. “However, it takes time to vaccinate millions of people, and a further two weeks before a person becomes fully protected. So if the priority is to bring down transmission rates as quickly as possible, I wouldn’t reach first for vaccine passports. I would reach first for things like negative-test passports.” This point was backed by Raghib Ali of Cambridge University. “I don’t think mandatory vaccines are a good idea,” he told the Observer. “The key thing with vaccination is to maintain the trust of people. If you remove consent from people to take a medication or a vaccine, that would be lost.” A crucial factor is that the UK is not in danger of following Europe, he added. “Europe is following us in terms of case numbers because of the later arrival of the Delta wave on the continent and because their immunity is waning later than here due to their vaccine programmes starting later.” Simon Williams of Swansea University pointed to Scotland’s certification scheme, which required those attending nightclubs and large sporting events to reveal their vaccination status: “The evidence is, at best, the scheme produced only a slight increase in vaccination rates.” Williams added that if vaccine passports were introduced, they would be unlikely to cause a backlash amid those who were merely hesitant about having a jab. “But for those who are strongly resistant to the vaccine, there is a real risk of a counter effect, which could have unwelcome consequences when you come round to introducing new vaccine programmes for Covid, or flu or other illnesses.” This point was backed by UK vaccine expert Peter English. “The ‘problem’ with mandatory vaccination is it doesn’t necessarily tackle the issue of vaccine uptake, particularly when it’s already quite high. It is hard to enforce. How do you vaccinate somebody who refuses consent? Does it actually increase the proportion of the population who take up the vaccine? Does it increase distrust in vaccination, increase dissent and protest, and thus actually drive down vaccination uptake?” Professor David Matthews of Bristol University said it was critical to keep talking to adults who had decided not to have the vaccine here in the UK. “We need to engage with them and hopefully they will think again about their reasons for not getting vaccinated in the light of the information we have from around the world that the vaccines are safe and they work. Vaccination is easily the most effective way out of the pandemic and the best way avoid more lockdowns.” However, Professor Lawrence Young of Warwick University was emphatic that vaccine passports should be considered an important weapon in the battle against Covid-19. “If current levels of infection and hospitalisations in England continue or rise even further, we will have no option but to limit virus transmission by introducing some form of vaccine passport, alongside re-introducing compulsory facemasks in crowded, poorly ventilated indoors spaces. These are minor inconveniences that could really help us through the winter months alongside the continued rollout of booster vaccinations.”The government has launched an investigation into one of the NHS’s main suppliers of personal protective equipment over its alleged use of forced labour. Officials at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) are investigating Supermax, which won a £316m contract for 88.5m rubber gloves as the Covid pandemic began to unfold. Last month the US forbade the Malaysian company from selling its products there after an inquiry found “ample evidence” that it had used forced labour in the manufacture of its rubber gloves. Customs officers were told to seize any disposable gloves made by Supermax as part of a government order banning the import into the US of any goods made by forced labour. The UK government has instigated its own inquiry after Jeremy Purvis, a Liberal Democrat peer, demanded scrutiny of Supermax and action to ensure that products made using modern slavery are not used in Britain. Rubber glove manufacturers in Malaysia have been accused of forcing employees to work long hours, confiscating staff’s passports, paying them derisory sums and ignoring Covid safety protocols in cramped manufacturing sites. Last year Supermax workers claimed they had to work 30 days in a row without a break and had paid high fees in their home countries to get the jobs. The company denied the allegations. Speaking in the House of Lords on 21 October, a day after US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) adopted its tough stance, Lord Purvis asked the BEIS minister Gerry Grimstone: “Will the minister instruct an urgent inquiry to ensure that we are not using these products, which are a result of modern slavery in Malaysia?” Lord Grimstone replied: “I will ensure that that particular company is looked at by my officials.” Asked by the Guardian for details of the inquiry, a government spokesperson said: “We take allegations of this nature very seriously and we are investigating the claims made against Supermax. We have made strong commitments to eradicate modern slavery from all contracts in the government supply chain.” The government made clear that the investigation could lead to Supermax being banned from supplying the NHS. “A proper due diligence process is carried out for all government contracts and our suppliers are required to follow the highest legal and ethical standards. If they fail to do so we will remove them from current and future contracts,” the spokesperson said. CBP issued a “withhold release” order against three wholly owned Supermax subsidiaries preventing them from selling rubber gloves in the US, after an inquiry found evidence of Supermax and its subsidiaries’ “use of forced labour in manufacturing operations”. The inquiry identified 10 of the International Labour Organization’s 11 indicators of forced labour. These guidelines are designed to help “criminal law enforcement officials, labour inspectors, trade union officers, NGO workers and others to identify persons who are possibly trapped in a forced labour situation, and who may require urgent assistance.” Purvis said: “I am pleased that after my request in parliament an investigation is now under way. Given this company has signed contracts of over £300m from the British taxpayer, we deserve full facts and reassurance that people have not been systematically abused in order to fulfil them.” He said BEIS’s inquiry should look at the evidence on which the US authorities based their ban. “I hope full reassurances are provided by the company as we also need to stand ready to ban the imports of goods made by forced labour.” Supermax did not respond to requests to respond.Hundreds of premature babies could be saved by using new technology trialled during the pandemic that will allow doctors to treat them remotely, leading doctors say. Telemedicine “robots” that enable consultants to make bedside video calls have been used at Liverpool Women’s and Alder Hey children’s hospitals to treat sick babies. Now the head of the hospitals’ neonatal unit is putting together plans to use the Teladoc devices, so that specialists can use their expertise to help teams at smaller hospitals treat children, even in emergencies. Dr Chris Dewhurst, the clinical director of the Liverpool Neonatal Partnership, said: “This definitely has the potential to save the lives of extremely preterm infants who were born outside of specialist centres, and improve their outcomes. “What we’ve demonstrated is that it’s easy to use, it improves the quality of care for babies and their families, improves the speed of review, and it is very close to being there in person.” The device, which sits on a mobile frame, has cameras, a screen and even a stethoscope, and can also link to MRI scanners and thermal-imaging cameras. It allows a consultant watching from elsewhere to view a patients’ medical records on the spot. Dewhurst and his team began using two of the devices in March 2020. “We lost seven of our 14 consultants due to shielding or isolation – 40% of the time available for clinicians to be in hospital. It [the robot] kept us going.” On some occasions, using the robots was better than being there in person, because the device has a camera on a boom that can be placed above the baby to show what’s happening, he said. “If I was there in person, I wouldn’t be able to see that because there were people around the baby.” About 90,000 babies a year in England need some sort of specialist care after they are born. There are 54 Neonatal Intensive Care Units (NICUs) such as the one in Liverpool that treat the most serious cases of premature babies and those with serious conditions. Another 83 hospitals have Local Neonatal Units (LNUs) that offer short-term intensive care. And there are 44 Special Care Baby Units for monitoring the least serious cases. Doctors try to identify which foetuses might require help after birth, but that is not always possible, and 9,523 babies needed to be transferred between hospitals at least once in 2015, according to figures from the National Neonatal Audit Programme compiled by Bliss, the charity for babies born sick or prematurely. “For babies who are extremely preterm, and have not been able to move into an NICU, then they’re not going to be looked after by people with the specialist skills. And we know that those babies have worse outcomes,” Dewhurst said. He is bidding for funding for the devices in hospitals with SCBUs so that clinical teams can call on specialist advice quickly. “We now need to find the funding so that babies who were born in other hospitals who need immediate intervention can have an neonatologist there immediately, within minutes, rather than them not being there at all, because they’re 40 to 50 miles away.” A similar system has been run by the Mayo clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, where neonatologists support teams at 19 regional hospitals. Dr Jennifer Fang, medical director for the Mayo Clinic’s teleneonatology programme, said that only babies in a critical condition needed to be transferred, and fewer parents had to go through the stress of being separated from their babies. “What we’ve observed is that the odds of a baby needing a transfer to a higher level of care or transfer to a hospital with an NICU are reduced by anywhere from 30 to 50%,” she said. With difficult births or injuries to babies during birth, the Mayo specialists have a target to be on hand for remote consultations within five minutes. Before the programme, the clinic was involved in birth-injury lawsuits about every eight to nine months, Fang said. “Now that our programme’s in place, we haven’t had a single birth-injury case for the last eight years.” A study by the clinic showed that having neonatologists involved remotely meant that clinical teams in smaller hospitals were less likely to be overwhelmed by the complexity of dealing with a sick baby. Babies were more likely to have checks on temperature, breathing and glucose levels. Jonathan Patrick of Consultant Connect, which supplied the robots, said the devices could be used in other circumstances. “It allows you to have access to clinicians, for example, who have retired but still want to be part of the workforce, yet can’t go to hospital every day.” A trial is underway at University Hospitals Leicester NHS Trust where consultants doing elective surgery are often split across two sites. Dr Steve Jackson, who is running the trial, said that consultants on different sites could dial in to a consultation and discuss the case on the spot rather than doing separate ward rounds.A headline on the BBC’s website has my hackles rising before I get to the first sentence, which of course means I’m primed to particularly enjoy it; who wants to read something they don’t expect to infuriate them in the age of antagonism? “How pandemic burnout sparked the revival of a granny hobby,” it declares, before explaining how even millennials – imagine! – have succumbed to the lure of knitting to engage their hands and soothe their minds during the recent and ongoing emergency. Celebrity case in point: diver Tom Daley, who never seems to be without a cable stitch holder and a bodkin. Even better, I was enraged on someone else’s behalf, for my beloved sister-in-law is a genius with the needles, a Divine Ya-Ya of yarn, a wizard with the wool. No baby in her sights risks venturing out in an unmatching jacket, hat and bootee, no shoulder goes unshawled, no teapot uncosied. Indeed, my own teapot sits under a perfectly rendered woollen representation of the Irish president, Michael D Higgins. This is no pandemic fad, but a lifetime of gorgeous making: so gifted is she that her family and friends regularly beg her to go into business and make us all a fortune. She insists it’s a matter of pure pleasure. I’ll give you “granny hobby”, BBC! Reluctantly, I will concede a point: avid for distraction in a lock-up lull last year, I asked her for a ball of wool and a pair of needles and started a bit of garter stitch. A year on, I’m still absolutely rubbish at it. Unless you happen to want a very plain scarf; scarves I can do. All this seemed pertinent in the light of a piece of research from the Pew Research Center, the American non-profit organisation that seeks to find out what makes us tick. It surveyed what it styles “advanced economies”, among them Taiwan, Belgium, South Korea and the UK, and asked respondents a wide-ranging series of questions about what makes their lives meaningful. The results are interesting rather than view-shifting: unsurprisingly, people across countries and cultures generally cited their relationship with their family as a vital factor in their contentment; having somewhere decent to live, a way to earn money and access to essential services make for a happier life and those who don’t have them focus more on the challenges life throws up. Americans are more likely to talk about religion than other nationalities and among them, Republicans will cite the primacy of freedom and independence more frequently than Democrats, although it’s the Netherlands where that’s an especially hot topic. In Taiwan, citizens were keen to talk about society as a cornerstone of happiness, mentioning safety, the medical and public health insurance systems and their freedoms as compared to those in China and Hong Kong. Spain emerged as the only country to put health first as a specific condition of a meaningful life; in South Korea, material wellbeing topped that set of answers. New Zealand is winning at caring about its pets, with the UK, Australia and the US just behind. But where the UK comes out top is in its devotion to hobbies, which it ranks in third place, after family and friends. Admittedly, the definition appears quite wide; one respondent mentioned having access to the internet, which, as hobbies go, is fairly low-effort, although maybe they spend their downtime watching instructional videos about decoupage and jam-making. Is Britain a nation of hobbyists and, if so, what does that suggest? Certainly, the great banana bread symposium of 2020 confirms the idea, as does the national devotion to The Great British Bake Off (#teamJürgen4eva), The Great British Sewing Bee, Portrait Artist of the Year and so forth. That Bake Off finallist Chigs, he of the slightly odd but nonetheless impressive purple apples, only took up baking in lockdown, presumably because his skydiving hobby had been temporarily paused, is a guaranteed audience-pleaser. From beans on toast to bavarois and Breton tart in just a few short months; what a guy. Meanwhile, we can only be a whiff of woodsmoke away from a plethora of TV shows and newspaper articles painstakingly guiding us through the art of homemade tree baubles, an annual rite of passage that only sharpens the nostalgic longing for proper, old-fashioned Christmasses, when you gathered up as much cheap and gaudy decoration as you could in Woolworths, bought a cake from M&amp;S and waited with your highlighter pen for the double-issue Radio Times. Stir-up Sunday, which only ever seemed to exist on The Archers, is now an article of faith. Pew’s survey was not specifically about post-pandemic life but, having been conducted in the first few months of 2021, it can only reflect its realities. Naturally, we would rather think of the wonky knitting, stencilled side-tables and tooth-shattering sourdoughs than of being deprived of our loved ones and being subject to physical, financial and emotional precarity. And so I suppose there is a piety to poking at the image of family, hearth and home that these articles and research studies present. Perhaps it’s because my hobby is reading long, gloomy novels about feelings that means I always want to look for a darker side. It’s simply that these things that are so precious to so many feel out of reach for others; that the idea of a stable home, in which you might pickle your homegrown vegetables and ruffle your kids’ hair is such a luxury, and that if you don’t have access to it, it must feel almost like an impossible mirage, a fantastical place you’ll never get to. If it transpires that these are the things that, somehow, we have decided confer meaning, what do other lives mean? Just the sort of melancholy thought that Philip Larkin might have written a poem about and probably a sign that I should start another hobby to take my mind off it. • Alex Cark writes for the Observer and the GuardianWhen flood waters swept away the highways in and out of Tricia Thorpe’s small town in the Canadian province of British Columbia, there was no way in or out for days. For a while, it seemed the road out of her property would be destroyed too. “My eldest daughter thought I was going to flip out when there was no road access out,” said Thorpe, who lives in the small community of Lytton in Canada’s mountainous west, nearly 185 miles (300km) north-east of Vancouver by road. “But we’ve been through so much now that sometimes you’re sort of numb as to what’s going to happen next.” She had good reason to be emotional – the devastating floods arrived just four months after much of her town burned to the ground during one of the worst wildfire seasons in the province’s history. Her own home and farm were completely destroyed in the July blaze. Thorpe spent weeks in a shelter and came back to find that the remains of some of the animals that had burnt to death in the fire were still on the property. Thorpe is just one of hundreds of thousands of people in western Canada who are becoming used to catastrophic natural disasters both in summer and winter seasons, as the effects of climate change lead to “once-in-a-hundred-year” events striking much more often. Three of British Columbia’s worst wildfire years have taken place in the last four years, and the widespread floods and mudslides last week took place after roughly a month’s worth of rain fell in a matter of days, leading to slides that tore apart highways and homes. At least four people have died and about 18,000 people were stranded after all the major highways connecting Vancouver to the rest of the country were blocked by destroyed bridges and dangerous slides at points. After all the destruction in recent years, Thorpe was prepared to take care of herself. She had extra food, water and gas to hunker down for days, and considered herself lucky that her new home wasn’t one of many that were damaged or completely destroyed in the floods. “We were cut off from the rest of the world,” said Thorpe. Others in the region’s mountain towns were even less fortunate. Roughly 30 miles to the east, the town of Merritt faced severe flooding when the river that runs through the community overflowed and swept through entire streets and homes. City councillor Mike Bhangu said the river appeared to have carved a new path through town, creating an isolated island where some homes and farmland used to be. He said the force of the water was severe enough that there was some talk of simply letting the new course of the river continue and to build around the change. The city of 7,000 people remains under an evacuation order after the floods caused its water treatment systems to fail, and the local government has warned residents not to drink tap water even if they boil it first. While Merritt didn’t experience flames during the summer fires, Bhangu said his residents suffered from the thick smoke that covered the skies, and extreme heat that reached 44.5C at the height of a summer heatwave. There were tense times when the town was put on evacuation alert, and people were worried they could lose their homes to the fires. The floods came when many in the city were still struggling with the emotional aftermath of the summer’s blazes. “I don’t think we’ve had an opportunity to process the fire season,” said Bhangu, who himself has now evacuated to a nearby city after flood water swept through his town. “It takes some time after an event to grasp what you just went through and people didn’t have an opportunity to do that. It’s emotional, it’s stressful.” The impact of the torrential rain has been widespread. Vancouver, which sits in a valley that funnels into mountainous terrain, has effectively been cut off from the rest of Canada, with road access only possible by a detour through the United States. Local media has reported panic buying that has left produce aisles empty, and the provincial government is limiting sales of petrol in regions near the slides after a gas pipeline was damaged in the storm. Nienke Klaver and Edward Staples, who live near the town of Princeton in British Columbia, were also cut off when the town flooded and highways were blocked by landslides. Their home escaped the flood water because it is on higher ground, but they’re bracing themselves for weeks helping their friends who were less lucky. After a summer of staying indoors to shield his lungs from thick smoke, Staples said he’s sad to see the loss in his community so soon after the fires. “It’s heartbreaking, I get choked up thinking about it,” said Staples. “These are real people who have lost everything and it’ll take months or years to get their lives in order.” Staples and others voiced a sense of determination to build the community back in a way that better protects themselves from more frequent natural disasters. Back in Lytton, Thorpe said the sense of community is what made her want to stay in the town, despite the terrible events over the past year. Volunteers in the community had come together to clean her property and build a new house in the aftermath of this summer’s fires, and she said the community will get through these floods together too. “The people have been so resilient. This is where we belong, they’re family,” said Thorpe.Every week, a group of epidemiologists across the north-east of the United States joins a Zoom call entirely devoted to discussing the latest hints of new Covid-19 variants being reported around the world. “It’s like the weather report,” says William Hanage, an epidemiologist at the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health. “It used to be, ‘We have a little bit of Gamma there, we’ve got Alpha coming up here.’ But now it’s just Delta.” Since it was first detected in India in December 2020, the Delta variant of Sars-CoV-2 has become so ubiquitous that it would be easy to assume that the once-rapid evolution of the virus has been replaced by a state of quiescence. According to the World Health Organization, 99.5% of all Covid-19 genomic sequences reported to public databases are now Delta. While new strains have continued to emerge, such as the recent AY. 4.2 or the Delta Plus variant in the UK, which scientists estimate to be 10-15% more transmissible, although there is no exact data for this yet, they are almost identical to the Delta variant, apart from the odd minor mutation here and there. Hanage has taken to referring to them as Delta’s grandchildren. “There’s been quite a few Delta Pluses,” he says. “I did a recent radio interview where I said that Delta Plus is code for whatever people are getting their knickers in a twist about at the moment. It’s not gigantically more transmissible.” But the reason Hanage and colleagues still scan databases such as Pangolin and Nextstrain each week, and the purpose of their regular Zoom calls, is to try and predict what might come next. Is Delta really Covid-19’s endgame or is something more ominous looming in the future? It is a question to which no one is entirely sure of the answer. One possibility is that after the initial dramatic jumps in its genetic sequence, which gave rise to first Alpha, then Delta, Sars-CoV-2 will now mutate slowly and steadily, eventually moving beyond reach of the current vaccines, but only over the course of many years. While scientists are at pains to point out that their predictions are mostly informed speculation, some perceive this as the most likely outcome. “I anticipate that the kind of evolution we will see is more what we call antigenic drift, where the virus gradually evolves to escape the immune system,” says Francois Balloux, director of the UCL Genetics Institute. “For influenza and other coronaviruses we know quite well, it takes about 10 years for the virus to accumulate enough changes not to be recognised by antibodies in the blood.” But the alternative is the sudden appearance of a completely new strain, with game-changing transmissibility, virulence or immune-evasive properties. Ravi Gupta, professor of clinical microbiology at the University of Cambridge, refers to these strains as “super variants” and says he is 80% sure that another one will emerge. The question is when. “We’ve got a Delta pandemic at the moment,” says Gupta. “This new Delta Plus variant is relatively wimpy compared to the kind of thing I’m talking about. It has two mutations from the Delta strain, I don’t think they are that worrisome and it hasn’t taken off in a big way in other countries. But it’s inevitable that there will be another significant variant in the next two years and it will compete with Delta and it may out-compete Delta.” There are a number of ways in which this might arise. Will we see a super variant? During the latter half of 2020, epidemiologists began to observe signs of a concerning phenomenon known as viral recombination, in which different versions of Sars-CoV-2 exchanged mutations and combined to form a totally new strain. Thankfully, Gupta says recombination does not appear to be that common, but it remains one feasible source of a new super variant, particularly in parts of the world where sizable proportions of the population remain unvaccinated and viral strains can circulate freely. “Now that Delta is overwhelmingly the key virus, this has become less likely,” he says. “But there are large swaths of the planet that we’re not sampling and we don’t know what’s going on. So it is a very real possibility.” The second is a series of major mutations, either resulting in a greatly enhanced version of Delta or something very different. It is thought there remains significant scope for this to happen. “While recent variants are versions of Delta, the virus has huge potential to evolve in the future,” says Gideon Schreiber, professor of biomolecular sciences at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel. “More complex mutations can evolve, with simultaneous mutations at more than one position, which may be more problematic.” In recent weeks, concerns have emerged that the use of new antiviral pills, in particular Merck’s molnupiravir, could contribute to this by actively encouraging Sars-CoV-2 to evolve. Molnupiravir works by interfering with the virus’s ability to replicate, littering its genome with mutations until it can no longer reproduce. Some virologists have argued that if any of these viral mutants survive and spread to others, it could theoretically spur the rise of new variants. Others acknowledge that while this is worth monitoring, it is not enough of a concern to deny severely ill patients a potentially lifesaving drug. Gupta says that a greater problem, and one more likely to lead to a super variant, is the persistently high infection rate in countries such as the UK, due to the ability of Delta to transmit between vaccinated individuals. “The more infections there are per day, the more chance that there is someone out there, a patient X, who gets infected and their T-cells are not strong enough to clear the infection because they’re immune-suppressed,” he says. “So they end up having the infection over a number of days; they’ve got some antibodies knocking around because they’ve had a partial vaccine response and the virus learns to evade them and then that spills out.” Earlier this year, Gupta published a paper that showed that this process could occur in severely ill patients who had been administered convalescent plasma laden with virus-killing antibodies. Because their immune system still couldn’t clear the virus, it learned to mutate around those antibodies. It has been speculated that the widespread use of convalescent plasma early in the pandemic was responsible for driving the emergence of variants. “We don’t know for sure, but a lot of plasma was used and it was potentially one of the drivers for the variants,” he says. “It was used very widely in Brazil, India, the UK and the US, all of whom developed their own sets of variants.” The vaccine-variant arms race Epidemiologists are now trying to model what a new super variant might look like. So far, the major transformations in the virus have helped to increase its transmissibility. Hanage explains that one of the reasons why the Delta variant had such an impact is because it grows extremely rapidly within human cells, before the immune system kicks into gear. As a result, people infected with Delta carry approximately 1,200 times more viral particles in their noses compared with the original Sars-CoV-2 strain and develop symptoms two to three days sooner. This is a result of natural selection. Different copies of the virus are being created all the time, but the ones that have survived and become more dominant are ones that are more capable of infecting new people. However, in countries such the UK, where the unvaccinated proportion of the population is diminishing, this could start to change. Strains that can sidestep antibodies are likely to become more dominant, making the next super variant far more likely to be able to evade at least some parts of the immune response. “The strains of the virus that end up surviving and becoming dominant vary, depending on which stage of the pandemic you’re in,” says Hanage. “So far, it’s been much more important for the virus to be transmitting effectively into the remaining pool of unprotected people. But that is expected to change around about now.” While this might sound a little terrifying, it’s not all bad news. Because the Covid-19 vaccines are designed with viral evolution in mind, epidemiologists do not expect any new super variant to render them completely useless and so it would be extremely unlikely to lead to large serious outbreaks, such as those of the past two years. In addition, there is a second generation of Covid-19 vaccines that have been developed. Vaccine developer Novavax is hoping to obtain regulatory approval for its jabs in the next couple of months, while many more vaccines are expected to come on the market between now and 2023. These platforms are all taking their own steps to combat potential future variants. According to Karin Jooss, executive vice-president and head of R&amp;D at US pharmaceutical company Gritstone, which has a second-generation Covid-19 vaccine in phase I clinical trials, companies are sequencing all existing strains of Sars-CoV-2 and aiming to generate neutralising antibody responses against areas of the virus that are conserved between all those strains. But epidemiologists also believe that relying on vaccines alone is not enough. Gupta says that even as we attempt to find a way to live with Covid-19 in the UK, there should still be some restrictions in place to limit the spread of the virus and reduce the number of opportunities it gets to mutate. “The case numbers are so high at the moment that it’s much better to prevent new infections,” says Gupta. “In other words, we shouldn’t be wandering around in crowded places, in buildings without masks on, even though it’s hard to do. If you look at the variants we’ve had, they have all emerged in countries with very high, uncontrolled transmission – India, the UK, Brazil. There’s a reason why we haven’t heard of a Singaporean or South Korean variant.” It is a philosophy many of his colleagues agree with. “You want to limit the number of opportunities that the virus gets to roll the dice,” says Hanage. “With natural selection, you’re basically talking about the most creative force that we know of when it comes to solving problems. It’s amazing. And so this is why you’d never bet against it. We expect the virus to keep evolving.”Look closely enough at the data and the winner of I’m a Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here! in any series is the most accurate temperature check on the whims and loves of the British populace at that time. The early years were dominated by whoever was the most famous: Tony Blackburn beat Tara Palmer-Tomkinson on nostalgia alone; Phil Tufnell barrel-rolled fresh from a sporting career into a broadcasting one; at just 23, Kerry came to the end of her first redemption arc after leaving Atomic Kitten three years before. In 2005, the sitting Labour government should have paid more attention to Carol Thatcher winning the thing; in 2006, Matt Willis proved the British public love nothing more than to learn a boybander they’d dismissed as vapid was actually all right. We love when a once-beloved-but-now-out-of-fashion performer bravely gives up meals for their campmates (Christopher Biggins; Joe Pasquale); we love when a familiar face from soap proves to have an interior life and charisma all of their own (Joe Swash); we love Gino D’Acampo (Gino D’Acampo). In recent years, young mums have fared well (Jacqueline Jossa, Giovanna Fletcher), as have glamorous reality stars who abandon all appearances to eat something revolting (Vicky Pattison, Georgia Toffolo). Crucially, we like to be surprised, to have our assumptions about fame inverted by watching someone prove that, when stripped of makeup and clothes and assistants, they still have the mettle to eat rice for three days straight then dunk themselves into a coffin filled with snakes. It’s not as if we delight in the suffering; it’s that we delight in the reaction to the suffering. There are two ways to be remembered in the I’m a Celebrity jungle (or castle): you scream in terror (Dean Gaffney), or you focus on the task at hand and calmly win stars for your camp (literally anyone else). Prove yourself unafraid and the British public will anoint you worthy of a Saturday night quizshow on BBC One. To this year, then. The thing about I’m a Celebrity (which starts on ITV on Sunday) is that you don’t have to watch (or even especially like) it to respect it: of all the reality formats that emerged in the early 00s, this is the one that has endured – where are you, The X Factor? Where are you, Celebrity Big Brother? – and, as last year proved, it still has the power to be a celebrity kingmaker. Why? Partly it is down to Ant and Dec, so likable that not even those Santander adverts can reduce their shine. But partly, too, it is the rigid formula of the thing. There is always an actor on a break from their soap, a foreign star more famous in this country than their own, an Olympian or some high-level former sportsperson, a comedian who proves themselves to be way grumpier than you expected. There’s always a fight about the dunny, a camp mum or dad, and someone who turns out to be a coward. There is someone who only lasts about a day. There is a young celebrity with vibrant, playful energy and a wizened old sage one panto offer away from packing it all in. You know where you are with I’m a Celeb: there are no changes. In other shows, this would lead to staleness. Here, the constant is soothing like a bath. If you have never committed to a full series of I’m a Celebrity, I urge you to change that this year: truly, nothing smooths the transition from the dark nights of autumn to the festive early days of December like watching a morning TV host swallow a testicle in honour of some ramshackle camaraderie they’ve formed with a former footballer. There’s a curious quirk about I’m a Celebrity, too: if you miss the first episode – the awkward glamorous-clothes meet-and-greet before the celebrities bungee out of a helicopter – you can never really catch up to the energy of the thing. Going through the whole series bonds you to these celebrities the same way a mild trauma might. But if you do watch, pay attention to who is crowned king or queen of the castle. The year 2022 promises a lot, and all of it is reflected in who we decide, in the dying days of 2021, has proved themselves worthy of the crown. Will this be a Frankie Bridge kind of year? Or more like Matty Lee? Pray, for all our sakes, it isn’t Richard Madeley.It seems lifetimes ago that Plant and Krauss released their six-Grammy-winning album of duets, Raising Sand (2007). That year, the first iPhone came out and Led Zeppelin reunited for two hours. This long-awaited second instalment of enthralling covers is a dose of musical reassurance that, despite the turmoil in which we find ourselves, some things remain constant. Roots music and rhythm and blues have always played a long game in matters of the human condition. What worked a treat then continues to work now: Plant dialled down to a sultry croon or, on Bobby Moore and the Rhythm Aces’ Searching for My Love, to a yearning kind of blue-eyed soul, Krauss’s country tones alternately limpid, frisky or timeworn, T Bone Burnett producing deftly. A superlative band creates nuanced tension or percolates away discreetly as required. What’s new is an uptick in British folk, with versions of Bert Jansch’s It Don’t Bother Me (rolling, resonant) and Anne Briggs’s Go Your Way (fleshed out, electric). Krauss brought in Lucinda Williams’s Can’t Let Go and the whole collection of burnished, lesser-known gems kicks off with a contemporary tune, Calexico’s Quattro (World Drifts In).When planning her outfit for an upcoming awards ceremony, Lily Murphy was wary of two things – how much she spent on clothes and the impact on the environment. The solution was to rent a dress from someone who had the style and fit she wanted. “I have become really aware of my over-consumption of fashion over the years,” says the 26-year-old PR manager. “I have also become aware of how much money I have spent on clothes, and how frequently I wear a new outfit and then lose interest in ever wearing it again. I think this is typical of young women, especially when you buy something with one event in mind.” Using an app called Hurr, Murphy rented a dress by London-based designers Rixo to attend her black tie event, paying just under £65 to borrow it for four days. Renting fashion online is not a new thing – Marks &amp; Spencer last week made a range of womenswear available for rent – but her outfit came from the wardrobe of another woman. As a younger generation of consumers takes a more sustainable approach to what it wears and also demands to have fresh looks for its social media posts, networks that link buyers and sellers have emerged. By Rotation, a London-based company, was started in 2019 by Eshita Kabra, who was concerned about the high levels of textile waste she saw during her honeymoon in her native India. Kabra says most of her users are millennials and from “generation Z” – that is, the under-40s. Users can borrow or lend designer dresses and bags by the day, with the option of the item either being posted or collected. Loans are usually for between three and four days – to take into account the time needed to post the item back. Each side pays a 15% fee and there is an optional fee for cleaning set by the lender. In one example, a designer dress is listed for rental at £10 a day – £30 for three days – with a £10 cleaning fee, plus the 15% fee for the company which comes to £6, bringing the bill to £46. Dresses can be rented for one day, but the company recommends lenders set three as the minimum, with the dress received on the first day, and returned on the third. Hurr, which Murphy used, operates in a similar way. Pieces have to be less than two years old and in “excellent condition” according to the company. An algorithm calculates the suggested rental fee, based on the retail price of the piece, and the fees are 15% for both sides. Murphy’s bill for four days’ rental was broken down into £34.30 for the clothes, a service fee of £5.15, a dry-cleaning charge of £10, shipping of £10 and a damage protection fee of £5, which is optional. Bought new, the dress would have cost £270, and Murphy says she may not have worn it more than once. If something is damaged, owners can bill the borrower on By Rotation. If they refuse to pay, the borrower’s details can be handed over to the lender for them to pursue the matter in the small claims court, although this has not happened yet, Kabra says. Hurr founder Victoria Prew says borrowers are asked to pay the market value if an item is damaged beyond repair. As well as wanting to reduce their carbon footprint, young consumers often want to wear something new to an event – and to update their social media feed . “They don’t just think about the days they are wearing the clothes – they think about the Instagram photo and the moment that will last forever,” says one industry figure who works in venture capital. “She wants the photo in that dress that will stay on her Instagram, and will forever stay in her feed. People are investing for that.” What you won’t find on the new generation of lending apps are high-street brands such as Zara and H&amp;M, where shoppers can buy pieces for the same amount they would pay to rent a high-end piece. They are, however, to be found on an app called Nuw. Aisling Byrne set it up to try and tackle the problem of vast amounts of waste in the fashion industry, which often end up in the developing world. In what is described as an “online swap shop”, users can upload pictures of their clothes – designer or high street – and earn coins, which can then be exchanged for items that other users put up. The coins are received when the item is uploaded to the site, with a high street brand earning a silver coin and a designer piece getting a gold coin, which can then be traded. The person receiving the piece pays a 99p fee and postage. Although there are designer clothes on the site, all of the top 10 sources of items are high street stores, says Byrne. Renting would not work for casual, cheaper clothes, she says, nor would selling them secondhand as they are already so cheap in the shops. But by taking away the choice of having to put a price on the clothes, there is now a far more efficient way to circulate them to avoid landfill. “These clothes are still valuable, they are in perfectly good condition and people want them, but they won’t buy them secondhand at the same price as they are sold firsthand,” she says. Some 22,000 items have been exchanged over the last year.“I never stay long in one place,” writes Teju Cole in Black Paper. “I have known half a dozen cities as home.” Cole’s writing, too, often deals with ideas of transience, restlessness and not belonging. Open City, his debut novel from 2011, tracks the meandering thoughts of a young Nigerian immigrant, Julius, who walks the streets of Manhattan as if in a waking dream. It was followed by Every Day Is for the Thief, in which a young man returns to his native Nigeria and finds himself adrift in a country that is all too familiar, but whose shortcomings have been amplified by his absence. In each story, constant movement, whether aimless or purposeful, generates a spiral of associative thoughts that evoke the restlessness and the constant self-reflection synonymous with exile. Black Paper, Cole’s second book of essays, finds him travelling freely across a range of locations, subjects and styles – art criticism, aphorisms, homage and reportage – all of which, to different degrees, carry a political undertow in keeping with the book’s subtitle: Writing in a Dark Time. It opens deceptively with Cole following the footsteps of Caravaggio across Italy and on to the island of Sicily. What appears to focus on “the quintessential uncontrollable artist” soon becomes something else entirely: a series of fleeting personal encounters that evoke the fugitive lives of the migrants who have survived the perilous journey by boat from Africa and beyond. “The places of Caravaggio’s exile had all become significant flashpoints in the immigration crisis,” elaborates Cole, before visiting the port cities in which the artist sought refuge but also found a kind of safety among the transient and the exiled. The essay interweaves Cole’s often vivid descriptions of Caravaggio’s great biblical paintings with telling vignettes from his encounters with contemporary migrants who have survived the hazardous passage from north Africa to Europe. In the port of Augusta in Sicily, it is not the migrants themselves, but the vessels that carried them that bring home to him the horror of their experience. While wandering alone, he comes across eight boats recently dragged from the sea, all of them “festooned with huge quantities of dirty life jackets, but also with plastic water bottles, shoes, shirts and all the filth of many days of human habitation at close quarters”. As he moves among them, he is momentarily overwhelmed by the lingering smell of their human cargo. “I buried my head in my hands, ambushed and astonished by grief.” While there is nothing else here that quite matches the stylistic brilliance and visceral thrust of that opening essay, Cole’s writing throughout hums with a quiet intensity and sometimes a palpable anger at the inhumanity he witnesses on his travels. A wonderful poetic elegy for the late academic, activist and literary critic Edward Said shifts locations from New York to Ramallah and on to Beirut and Berlin. In the process, it evokes the mystical depth of a Beethoven string quartet and decries “the regime of permits and walls and checkpoints and prisons” that control the lives of ordinary Palestinians, for whom Said was the most prominent advocate. Elsewhere, though, Cole seems less sure-footed. Said, alongside John Berger, who is also movingly remembered here, is one of his literary touchstones. In a chapter that explores the nature of the Joycean epiphany, he mentions several others, including Joyce, Virginia Woolf, James Salter and, inevitably, WG Sebald. The essay ends, by way of acknowledging Cole’s primary influences, with a long passage from his own novel, Open City. Even in the context of a piece that addresses ideas of influence and creative appropriation, this does seem slightly self-referential. I was also unsure about the inclusion of a selection of Cole’s critical writings on photography which, while trenchant, have a markedly different register to the more personal, and politically engaged, writing. Another brilliant example of the latter is an essay entitled Ethics, which begins by interrogating the loaded language of migration: “flow”, “influx”, “wave”, “flood”, which makes “our fellow human beings a cause for alarm, not on their behalf, but on ours”. How we think of migrants, Cole reminds us, is shaped, above all, by the often dehumanising language that is used to describe them by politicians and journalists. The distance between how they are portrayed and what they experience is brought into sharp focus by his account of a visit to the US-Mexico border, where, in a morgue in Tucson, he is shown the unclaimed, often disfigured bodies of those who have died in their attempt to cross it. “I saw many things that altered my sense of belonging in the United States,” he writes. “Not only my sense of belonging, but also my sense of responsibility.” The most powerful essays in this book are born out of dissonantly transformative moments like this one. In articulating them, Cole asks hard questions of himself and of everyone who reads his work: questions about the nature of our shared sense of responsibility, and about how we live in defiance of this ever darkening time. How, to paraphrase one of his essay titles, we resist and refuse. • Black Paper: Writing in a Dark Time by Teju Cole is published by University of Chicago Press (£18). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen I first started watching dance there were two worlds – ballet and contemporary dance - and the two were on separate paths. The contemporary course was set by Martha Graham and her disciples, one of the most distinguished of whom was the choreographer Robert Cohan. When this charismatic American became the founding artistic director of London Contemporary Dance Theatre in 1969, it appeared as if the future was charted. But things didn’t quite turn out like that. Other techniques challenged Graham’s deep-breathing, fiercely grounded vision of contemporary dance; other influences affected its development. LCDT closed in 1994 and has never been replaced as an umbrella company for contemporary choreographers. And now we have reached the point where Cohan’s work is presented at the Royal Opera House, performed by a mixture of contemporary and ballet dancers, as his legacy is curated by the admirable Yorke Dance Project. Cohan, who died at the age of 95 in January this year, worked closely with YDP and its admirable founder, Yolande Yorke-Edgell, for the last eight years of his life, and their love and affection for him imbues these two programmes of tribute. So does an extraordinary sense of vitality. The final work he created (in the studio and then on Zoom), Afternoon Conversation With Dancers, a series of eight solos, is a breathtakingly beautiful reminder of just how fertile his imagination was right until the end. The solos are presented in the two programmes, on stage and on film. All astound, from Edd Mitton’s breezy sequence of walks and jumps, arms at straight angles as if carving the air, to Freya Jeffs’s sumptuously controlled unfolding where half cartwheels fall into a pose in which she looks backwards over her shoulder, as if studying something lost. Then there are Pierre Tappon’s frenetic leaps and dives as he dashes across the stage as if his life depended on it, or (on film) Lloyd Knight (of Martha Graham Dance Company) shuddering and shaking, as if his body might dissolve. The concluding solo, on stage in one programme and on film amid the gilt of the empty opera house on the other, was performed by Royal Ballet soloist Romany Pajdak, in pointe shoes, stretching and reaching in expressive, pensive tension. Set to music by Nils Frahm and Ólafur Arnalds, these solos are a reminder of Cohan’s remarkable ability to make you look hard at movement and through very small inflections to let the personalities of the dancers emerge. The same thing happens in Communion, a company work for YDP, full of slow walks, frozen poses and deep pliés in second. The overarching sense of dance as sacred and inspirational is leavened by individual moments of effort and grace, as if the dancers’ essence is being released from within. The dancers are, as in every piece, superb. Revivals of Canciones del Alma (another mystical solo performed by Yorke-Edgell) and Nymphéas (a speedy duet full of dramatic lifts and off-balance embraces beautifully performed by Pajdak and Matthew Ball, and set to Debussy’s Clair de Lune), revealed Cohan’s deep musicality and ongoing belief in movement as revelatory. Certainly he made it so. Both programmes opened with Yorke-Edgell’s recreation of Martha Graham’s Lamentation, a mainly seated solo, where the extension of an arm or a leg inside a stretchy tube of costume turns into a gesture of universal mourning. There was also a revival of Kenneth MacMillan’s abstract, expressionistic Sea of Troubles, an inventive and emotional exploration of Hamlet, full of tangled limbs and striking images. The whole endeavour was rich and fascinating, a journey into dance’s history that felt fresh minted and contemporary.We stopped having chocolate Advent calendars for a few years – chocolate behind perforated cardboard was no match for young children. We switched to Lego calendars for a while, but now we’re back to chocolate. Heads up, I haven’t tried all the chocolate in all the calendars (because, come on!) but they are all from chocolatiers I have previously tasted and love. A fabulous idea is the UK Chocolate Makers dairy-free calendar, £46, with chocolates from all my favourites craft chocolate makers: Solkiki, Dormouse, Duffy’s, Bullion, Tosier, Neary Nogs plus others. It’s also super eco and will appeal to the minimalists. Éponine has a fantastic vegan truffle offering, £35, with beautiful centres, such as mince pie and gingerbread. Now we come to my two favourites. The first is Melt’s very limited-edition Notting Hill calendar, £69, which is super pretty, like a doll’s house that you open up and inside you have more small houses – one for each day – tied with string which have pralines, caramels and pâte de fruit – . You could even re-use it next year, with small treats of your choice. There’s also a cheaper Reindeer one, £19.99, filled with all sorts of yummies. And my favourite no 2 is Zotter’s Handscooped Advent Calendar, £39.95, which, every day, has a mini version of Zotter’s truly wonderful filled bars. You are going to love it. But if you prefer solid bars the Zotter Labooko calendar, £27.95, is a contender: every day you get to try a tiny bar of a different cocoa content/origin. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBIn hospital, Covid-19 has largely become a disease of the unvaccinated. The man in his 20s who had always watched what he ate, worked out in the gym, was too healthy to ever catch Covid badly. The 48-year-old who never got round to making the appointment. The person in their 50s whose friend had side-effects. The woman who wanted to wait for more evidence. The young pregnant lady worried about the effect on her baby. The 60-year-old, brought to hospital with oxygen saturations of 70% by the ambulance that he initially called for his partner, who had died by the time it arrived; both believed that the drug companies bribed the government to get the vaccine approved. All severely ill with Covid. All unvaccinated and previously healthy. All completely avoidable. Of course, there are people who have their vaccinations but still get sick. These people may be elderly or frail, or have underlying health problems. Those with illnesses affecting the immune system, particularly patients who have had chemotherapy for blood cancers, are especially vulnerable. Some unlucky healthy people will also end up on our general wards with Covid after being vaccinated, usually needing a modest amount of oxygen for a few days. But the story is different on our intensive care unit. Here, the patient population consists of a few vulnerable people with severe underlying health problems and a majority of fit, healthy, younger people unvaccinated by choice. Watching the mix of patients coming in with Covid, it feels to me like hardly anybody has been vaccinated nowadays; of course, this is because the people that have been vaccinated are getting on with their lives at home. If everyone got vaccinated, hospitals would be under much less pressure; this is beyond debate. Your wait for your clinic appointment/operation/diagnostic test/A&amp;E department would be shorter. Your ambulance would arrive sooner. Reports of the pressure on the NHS are not exaggerated, I promise you. Furthermore, we have recently rolled out a new medication for patients without antibodies against Covid. It costs about £2,000 a treatment and is subject to a rigorous and time-consuming approval process for every case we treat. Guess which patients don’t have these antibodies (spoiler: it’s not the ones who have been vaccinated). Most of the resources that we are devoting to Covid in hospital are now being spent on the unvaccinated. Yes, vaccinations are unpleasant. They cause side-effects. They hurt. You may even still catch Covid afterwards. I have many colleagues who have felt awful after vaccination and a few who had to take a day or two off work. However, I have not heard of any who have been hospitalised with Covid afterwards or who have had severe side-effects. The approvals process was incredibly stringent and we now have an unbelievable amount of real-world data that these vaccines work. The science that has been applied here is nothing short of awe-inspiring to me. However, I realise that none of these rational arguments would change the mind of someone who is resolved against having it, although I suppose it may push someone who remains undecided. As a respiratory doctor, I have spent my whole career treating people whose lung diseases have been caused by smoking, including long after they knew the risks. I have spent countless hours with people who blame themselves for ruining their health; I have thought a lot about our personal responsibility for our health and to what degree we should be held accountable for our choices. I personally – unlike some of my colleagues – have never felt any ambivalence about treating smokers without judgment in exactly the same way as people with diseases that are not seen as self-inflicted. Enshrined in the way we protect patients’ autonomy is the recognition that others may reasonably make decisions we may see as irrational or wrong. We are all products of our upbringing, education and opportunities, and I have been hugely fortunate that in my case these have led me to make decisions I value. Who is to say I wouldn’t have made different choices in someone else’s shoes. Translating this to the choice not to take the vaccine, however, I find my patience wearing thin. I think this is for a number of reasons. Even if you are not worried about your own risk from Covid, you cannot know the risk of the people into whose faces you may cough; there is a dangerous and selfish element to this that I find hard to stomach. Some of my frustration is directed upwards, at the flagrant misinformation flourishing in certain places and the utterly woeful example that our leaders continue to set. I have never heard a reason not to take the vaccine that I have agreed with. Most of all, however, I am now beaten back, exhausted, worn down by the continuous stream of people that we battle to treat when they have consciously passed up the opportunity to save themselves. It does make me angry. Despite this, I find the idea of NHS and care staff being forced to be vaccinated very difficult. I know that it is the right outcome, but I dislike the means of bringing it about. It is incredible to me that there is so much anxiety and falsehood around that this could possibly be necessary after the year we have all witnessed. How strong is the hold that this information has on people that it outweighs rational thought? Maybe it’s just that others have not seen what I have recently, or do not believe it, but even now we have nurses on our Covid ward who have not been vaccinated. I just hope that we don’t end up losing yet more staff. Fundamentally though, for me, it comes down to this. I can’t think of a single case offhand of a person who was previously fit and healthy who has ended up needing intensive care after being fully vaccinated. It may not stop you from catching Covid. But it can save your life when you do. The writer is an NHS respiratory consultant who works across a number of hospitalsNearly two decades ago, the last Ford Fiesta rolled off the production line in Dagenham, east London, marking the end of more than 70 years of car production. It was a blow for a skilled workforce that helped produce 11m cars but the town is now centre-stage of another booming production line: Tinseltown UK. A record £5.9bn was spent on film and big-budget television productions in the UK this year, according to figures published by the British Film Institute – almost double the amount spent five years ago. Film industry experts say there is an “insatiable” demand for content from online media giants such as Netflix and Amazon – and the industrial hinterland of Dagenham is among the places reaping the benefits. On a former factory site covering 22 acres in the town’s Yew Tree Avenue, a £300m complex called Eastbrook Studios is under construction, which will be London’s biggest film and TV production campus. Two nearby warehouses at The Wharf in Barking are also being converted into studios. Black Widow, the Marvel Studios blockbuster starring Scarlett Johansson, was partly made in Dagenham. Film bosses are phoning the council to earmark studios for future production. “We’ve had Disney, Netflix and Amazon asking for space,” said Darren Rodwell, leader of Barking and Dagenham council, which has promoted the town as a global centre of film production. “It’s a fantastic opportunity for young people in the borough. Once we were known for making Fords and now we are known for making films.” It is not just Dagenham that is benefiting from the production boom. New studios are opening or being expanded around the country. It was announced last week that Netflix is to double the size of its base at Shepperton Studios, owned by the Pinewood Group. Bray Film Studios in Berkshire has also been given the go-ahead for an expansion with nine new stages. The studios were previously the base of the Hammer horror films and the location for the Christopher Lee Dracula movies and The Curse of Frankenstein. The owner of Hollywood’s Sunset Studios, producers of La La Land and Zoolander, is backing a £700m studio complex in Broxbourne in Hertfordshire. It will form part of the home counties film belt which includes Warner Bros Studios at Leavesden in Hertfordshire, Sky Studios Elstree and Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire. The north of England and other regions are also benefiting. Two studios were opened last month in Liverpool, which has already provided a backdrop for filming for the Netflix series The Irregulars, set in Victorian times, and Doctor Who. Harriet Finney, deputy chief executive of the British Film Institute, said: “We are a nation of innovators and storytellers, and people like making films here. We have the infrastructure, rich skills and fantastic locations.” She said the additional investment was “fantastic”, but created additional demands on the supply of skilled workers. The BFI is undertaking a skills review on behalf of the government and is also examining the economic pressures on the independent sector to ensure the UK properly benefits from the billions of pounds of film and television revenues. Britain is now one of the most sought after locations in the world for film and TV productions. The industry has rapidly recovered from Covid shutdowns, thanks in part to a government-backed £500m scheme for UK productions struggling to get insurance for Covid-related costs. Titles shooting in the UK this year include a new Indiana Jones film at Pinewood Studios; the Disney series Willow in Wales; and Mission: Impossible 7 at Warner Bros studios at Leavesden, and on location in Derbyshire and Yorkshire. Amazon announced in the summer it is moving its Lord of the Rings prequel series from New Zealand to the UK. It is set thousands of years before the events in JRR Tolkien’s classic. Adrian Wootton, chief executive of Film London and the British Film Commission, said that Britain’s locations from “medieval castles to skyscrapers” were hard to beat. “It’s another golden age for UK film and TV,” he said. “The benefits are being felt right across our UK nations and regions, with existing production hubs growing to accommodate the demand, and new stage space developing in all four nations and regions.” The film and television boom does have its downsides, according to film veteran Victor Glynn, co-producer of the BBC comedy Staged starring David Tennant and Michael Sheen. “Crews are demanding – and getting from the major companies – salaries far in excess of the norm,” he said. “For the genuine independent companies, it is a nightmare as crews are literally abandoning jobs they have committed to to take the bigger wages. “The net effect has been a rapid increase in the cost of independent film production.” One of the key factors driving film and television investment into the UK are the generous tax reliefs under which film and big-budget television productions can claim a payable cash rebate of up to 25% on UK qualifying expenditure. The tax relief was worth nearly £1bn to the industry in the year to 31 March 2021. The bulk of the profits from the blockbusters and hit television shows are banked overseas. George Turner, director of the investigative thinktank TaxWatch, which has investigated the tax reliefs claimed by the film industry, said there now needed to be a review of the taxpayer handouts to major film companies. “The film tax credit system is designed so that the more you spend, the more subsidy you get, with no limit,” he said. “It is highly questionable whether paying out vast amounts of subsidy to large multinational film studios is the best way of providing support to the UK film industry.” Council bosses will, however, be keen for the film and television investments to continue. Barking and Dagenham’s Rodwell said: “Ford dominated the way we did business for 70 or 80 years. We are now finding the partners and institutions for future decades.”Before I had a child, I liked to tell myself I’d be one of those cool dads who took his son to fancy foreign movies and difficult, urgent theatre. So far, this has not come to pass. If anything, I’ve stood by as he has endured some of the worst entertainments ever create, while myself becoming addicted to some of the best – like Hey Duggee and Bluey – to which he has introduced me. I didn’t get to take my son to his very first cinema trip, which was to see Paw Patrol: The Movie a few months ago. I was either on a big deadline, or else had pitched something so that its deadline would mean I didn’t have to sit through Paw Patrol: The Movie, but either way my wife got to see the joy on his face at discovering that they put Ronan Keating and Kim Kardashian together in a film about libertarian dogs. Well, this week I had my turn, and decided I would take him to see Raya and The Last Dragon, a charming Disney animation that was, admittedly, slightly above his age rating. It was either that or watch the Paw Patrol movie again. It reminded me of my own first cinema trip. I was five when my older brothers Dara and Shane were tasked with bringing me to see The Rescuers Down Under, a film about heroic mice who, for reasons best forgotten, travel to Australia to perform moderately thrilling aerial rescues. Since my brothers were 15 and 13, respectively, they decided I should instead be brought to watch Suburban Commando, a desultory action-adventure in which their wrestling hero, Hulk Hogan, played an intergalactic bounty hunter who shot people with massive guns and, for some reason I can’t quite remember, rode a skateboard. In all the years since, I have never seen Rescuers Down Under. I am willing to believe it is a better film than Suburban Commando. To be fair, I’ve been on Zoom calls that were a better film than Suburban Commando. But I’ve never forgotten that moment of pure elation, surprise and delight I got from that first trip to the movies, of watching people projected very large, in a dark room. Of feeling that the events unfolding in front of me were among the most important things that had ever happened, and that Hulk Hogan was very likely one of our finest living actors. If my son had any feelings that specific about Raya while we watched on Saturday, I’m not sure. I just know that he sat, open-mouth smiling and captivated for two full hours, without once expressing a desire to leave. ‘That film was GREAT,’ he said at the end. I beamed with delight that he’d fallen for the big screen in front of me, and we had a moment to share for ever more. ‘And Daddy, when we get home,’ he asked, as we sat on the bus. ‘Yes,’ I replied, already preparing a double bill of approved classics in my head. ‘Can we watch Paw Patrol?’ Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsCrime (BritBox) Dopesick (Disney+) Tiger King 2 (Netflix) Bridget Riley: Painting the Line (BBC Two) | iPlayer There’s a telling moment in Irvine Welsh’s new BritBox detective series, Crime, co-written with Dean Cavanagh, when the chief superintendent, played by Ken Stott, chides Dougray Scott’s character, DI Ray Lennox: “You’re not a god, you’re a law enforcement officer, get a grip.” Even by the standards of TV detectives (a sphere where mental stability is an optional extra), Lennox has a saviour complex that make Jesus Christ seem like a bit of a slacker. A recovering addict (drugs, alcohol, overwork), soon he’s recovering no more as he handles a child-murder investigation he believes is the work of a serial killer called the Confectioner. A detective with a punishingly high moral code, he staggers through the six episodes (all now available to stream) like a modern-day Bible story. Though Lennox has a chance of happiness with his girlfriend (Angela Griffin), secrets from his past swarm like bluebottles. Directed by James Strong (Broadchurch) and David Blair (The Street), set in Welsh’s signature Trainspotting terrain of Edinburgh, Crime is based, though not faithfully, on the 2008 novel of the same name, and is the first of Welsh’s books to be adapted for television. Scott (Enigma; Mission Impossible 2), who also co-executive produces, is teamed with Joanna Vanderham (What Maisie Knew; Warrior), a detective sergeant with the nervy candour of a young DCI Jane Tennison. The plot evolves into an unapologetically sticky stew, involving paedophilia, corrupt politicians and #MeToo, all garnished with the fermented slurry that passes for the human condition. Crime’s finale is confused, and I question the taste levels of showing a (poetically posed) child corpse, though similar objections could be raised about the dead fictional women who routinely litter our screens. While it is occasionally overblown – at times it was difficult to tell whether characters were happy, sad or had burst an appendix – this pithy, spry Scottish production makes a bracing change from English thrillers, which too often comprise identikit middle-class characters politely sighing next to posh mixer taps in fabulous kitchens. Amid a strong cast (watch out for John Simm refusing to play nice), Scott delivers a triple espresso shot of characterisation as a maverick who’s almost bored with being a maverick. Dopesick, the new eight-part, fact-based drama from Disney+, relates the sprawling, sickening story of the US opioid crisis and how Purdue Pharma pushed supposedly “non-addictive” OxyContin on to the public like painkilling sweeties. Directed by Barry Levinson (Rain Man) and others and based on the book by Beth Macy, this is a (cue capital letters) SERIOUS drama, with a scrupulously journalistic tone that occasionally verges on documentary. A prestigious cast includes executive producer Michael Keaton as a doctor who unwittingly pitches his small Appalachian mining community into addiction, Peter Sarsgaard and Rosario Dawson as investigators, and Michael Stuhlbarg as messianic pharma giant Richard Sackler, who wants to “cure the world of its pain”. Stuhlbarg is a fine actor, but at times he overplays Sackler to Montgomery Burns levels. Nonetheless, three episodes in, with events zigzagging across a decades-spanning timeline, Dopesick is worth the effort: starkly contrasting the ruined mining community with the moneyed stealth of the OxyContin drivers, demonstrating how big pharma sleights of hand (misleading labels; dubious concepts such as “breakthrough pain”) lulled people into addiction. Kaitlyn Dever (Booksmart; Unbelievable) is poignant as a young lesbian miner who becomes addicted after being injured in the pit. Another young addict, played by Alayna Hester, is viewed snarling through a car window: “Fifty for a blowjob, 100 if you want to fuck me.” Ew. I feel unclean after watching the five-part series Tiger King 2 on Netflix. Just writing about it now makes me want to disinfect my keyboard. During the 2020 lockdown, the first series, Tiger King: Murder, Mayhem and Madness, was a global phenomenon watched by millions. It introduced audiences to the US big cat world and the colourful characters who inhabited it: Joe Exotic, the openly gay owner of an animal park, and Carole Baskin, boss of a big cat sanctuary, whom Exotic accused of being involved with the disappearance of her husband, Don Lewis (she denies ever even being a person of interest in the case), and many more dead-eyed supposed “characters” holding tiger cubs in one hand and rifles in the other. Now Baskin, who has appeared on Dancing With the Stars, is suing Netflix for continuing to use her footage, and Exotic is serving 22 years in jail for hiring someone to murder Baskin (he appears here, over the phone from jail, fuming about his innocence). Whatever appeal the first documentary, also directed by Eric Goode and Rebecca Chaiklin, had for the lockdown masses (rubbernecking on the rednecks?), it’s gone now. The focus is on feuding between animal park owners, the disappearance of Lewis, efforts to get President Trump to pardon Exotic (astonishingly, Trump declined) and the merciful intervention of authorities and animal charities. Be warned that the animal abuse on display is nauseating: it will Taser your soul to see so many mangy, sad-eyed lions, cheetahs and tigers. Towards the end, some beasts are released into a sanctuary where they have space to roam. It’s a relief, but too little, too late. For Sophie Deveson’s BBC Two documentary Bridget Riley: Painting the Line, cameras filmed the esteemed nonagenarian artist for more than two years, in her studios, in the blustery Cornwall of her wartime childhood and as she installed a giant mural at the National Gallery in 2018. Riley’s influence as an innovative cultural figure, female trailblazer (though she disliked being viewed as the “poster girl for the 60s”) and “titan of abstract art” was duly celebrated, not least by fellow artist Tracey Emin, who declared her “revolutionary”. These days, certain of Riley’s pieces, with their dots, checks and triangles, could be thought to possess a magic-eye quality, but that would be denying how they live and breathe, pulsing and transforming as you look at them. It’s a treat to observe the artist in this warm, respectful documentary, either chatting with Kirsty Wark or in old 60s footage, where – a total minx in black – she’s giving Emma Peel a run for her money. What else I’m watching The Lakes With Simon Reeve (BBC Two) Did intrepid documentarian Simon Reeve mistake Cumbria for Colombia? In this three-part series he visits the Lake District, talking to people who are fighting to conserve wildlife and habitats, and joining teenagers on their first trip to Windermere. Empire State of Mind (Channel 4) Journalist and author Sathnam Sanghera (The Boy With the Topknot) endured racist trolling after publishing his latest book, Empireland. His two-part docuseries explores how the British empire still shapes the national mindset, fostering lingering delusions of superiority. The Great British Bake Off (Channel 4) Jurgen’s matcha gelatin showstopper got him thrown off. Next week’s finalists are all worthy winners, so viewers can focus on the real issue: why does judge Paul Hollywood stand as though he’s guarding a sacred tomb? • This article was amended on 29 November 2021 because an earlier version, referring to Dopestick, misattributed a line to a character played by Kaitlyn Dever. whereas the line was uttered by the character played by Alayna Hester.Born in Cheshire, Stephen Hough is one of the world’s top pianists. He is also a composer, a published writer and a painter, with a passion for jazz, ballet, hats, perfume and puddings. His recording of Chopin’s Nocturnes is just out. On 1 December he will be the soloist in Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No 3 with the London Philharmonic Orchestra at the Royal Festival Hall, and his String Quartet No 1 for the Takács Quartet will receive its European premiere at Wigmore Hall in January. He is 60 tomorrow. You made news in June 2020 when you played to an empty Wigmore Hall, the first live concert in the UK since lockdown. It must have been nerve-racking? I always feel nervous, especially with a filmed live relay. But that day, above all, I felt vulnerable. Walking through London was strange and empty. There were still no vaccines, no obvious end to the situation. Everyone was guessing. To an extent we still are… Once I got on stage I let the music – opening with the Bach-Busoni Chaconne – do what it always does: put its arms, very safely, around everyone listening. It was a reminder of how important a cog music is in life. Don’t take it for granted. Tell our political leaders it’s not just entertainment. Not just icing on the cake. It’s the cake itself. It’s human life. As we speak, you’re in New York working. Does if feel in any way normal? New York’s much the same as ever, but perhaps a little subdued. I’m staying in the business part of town on the East Side. A lot of the sandwich bars that used to have queues outside at lunchtime have shut down – so many people are still working from home. But New York is New York, and at last I’ve managed to meet my two brilliant Juilliard students in person after a year of Zooms. As a musician who travels non-stop, how was lockdown? I had very mixed feelings – aware of so much suffering, yet with the sudden gift of time, which I haven’t had for 35 years of a playing career. I finished three compositions, which would have been impossible otherwise, and I made several recordings. From the start I knew I couldn’t treat it like a holiday. I walked to my piano studio every morning at 10am and came home at 6.30. My partner was working too, and we’d order in food – neither of us cooks – and watch box sets. We got through 24, Damages, Spooks… In addition to the piano you do many other things to a high level. I’m guessing you’re extremely disciplined? I sleep a lot! I need eight hours. But once I’m up and about I can focus. I only spend 10 minutes on lunch. If I’m writing a big piece of music, I may have been thinking about it for a long time – like the new one for the Takács Quartet. And I’ve been filling a notebook with a memoir for years, off and on, so I hope that’ll be out soon. Painting? That’s something I do at the end of the day like gardening: hard work but fun. I’ve been using house paint. It flies around the room and some of it lands on the canvas. Your novel, The Final Retreat, is about sex and the Roman Catholic priesthood. How does that fit into your life? I’ve known many priests. For a time I considered becoming one, though my mother was of strong Liverpool Orange Protestant stock. I’ve been to mass thousands of times. There was a time when I went every day. I lived a celibate life. The novel is about what happens when the person you turn to for comfort can themselves find no comfort – the wounded healer. It’s about a priest who is gay, in his 50s, a sex addict, uncertain about his faith. I am a gay Catholic but it’s not autobiographical. There were inevitably many questions I asked long ago when I met my partner. I was lucky to be advised by wise priests who said love is precious, a gift of God, don’t throw it away. What was home life like, growing up as an only child? There were no classical records. I liked playing on my aunt’s piano. My father noted in his diary that I’d learned 70 nursery rhymes by the age of two – not that I remember! Eventually my parents bought me a piano. My mother looked in Yellow Pages and found a teacher, just as you would a plumber. My parents were very supportive, but when, aged eight, I did well in a competition and got invited to go on Opportunity Knocks, they said no, you’re going to school tomorrow. And on reflection that was wise. In terms of working abroad, so hard for so many musicians, what’s your take on Brexit? I’ll just give two examples. I went to play in Vienna and walked straight in, did the concerts, came home again. I went, similarly, to Spain. I had to spend an entire morning at a consulate office giving fingerprints, details of a year’s tax and a whole raft of other very detailed questions. This was just about manageable for me but would be totally impossible for an orchestra, or a freelance musician offered work at short notice. It seems it’s not really Brussels that has to sort things out but individual countries. But perhaps there could be a blanket ruling with visas lasting, say, five or 10 years. You’re a dedicated and witty tweeter. Why does that particular form of social media appeal? I like the fact that with Twitter you are in control, it’s concise, perhaps even amusing. I’ve had fascinating exchanges with people I’ve never met but admire, like Richard Sennett and Philip Pullman. You love hats, perfume, puddings. What’s on your mind right now? Puddings. The puddings I like are heavy, sticky, chewy, syrupy – the kind we excel at in these islands. Not creamy Italian or refined Japanese. Rich fruitcake! Christmas pudding! I could eat them for breakfast. A great rhubarb crumble is hard to beat. I think it’s about the only thing my mother could cook really well. She preferred being underneath the car. She was a great mechanic, always wore trousers, could fix anything. How are you feeling about turning 60? I must admit it feels pretty horrible – or maybe it’s the anticipation. But then they say that people are at their most creative in their 60s and 70s. So here we go. Bring it on! Stephen Hough’s Chopin: Nocturnes (Hyperion) is out now. He will perform at the Royal Festival Hall, London, on 1 DecemberThe music photographer Mick Rock, who died last week, aged 72, once said that he was “in the business of evoking the aura” of his subjects. It was his great good fortune to be working at a time when the aura emanating from the rock star likes of David Bowie, Lou Reed and Iggy Pop, all of whom he caught in now celebrated images, was both compelling and unsettling in its androgynous otherness. With Rock’s death, the truly transgressive nature of the cultural moment his photographs captured seems ever more distant. One image of his, in particular, captures the sexual audacity of Bowie’s performances and, almost 50 years on, still carries a trace of its initial illicit charge. Shot from the side of the stage, it shows the singer simulating fellatio on Mick Ronson’s guitar during a show at Oxford town hall in 1972. Back then, the act seemed brave to the point of foolhardy in its provocation – it was only five years after homosexuality had been decriminalised in England and Wales, but that was entirely the point. As became clear in the years that followed, Bowie’s pop-cultural antennae were highly attuned and almost preternaturally prescient. Soon after the photograph appeared in the music press, his Ziggy Stardust tour was attracting younger fans in their thousands, with glitter and eyeliner replacing the drab uniformity of utilitarian denim in both his male and female devotees. With the emergence of glam rock, which, in hindsight, seems the most extravagantly unBritish pop genre ever, Bowie’s time had come, his ascendancy propelled by what Rock later called “the titillating publicity” of that arresting image. In the photograph, Rock’s proximity to the performers on stage is indicative of the kind of access both photographers and journalists had to rock stars in those days. Indeed, his friendship with Bowie was such that he may even have been primed to capture the moment. Intriguingly, Rock had only met Bowie a month before the Oxford gig, having travelled up to Birmingham to photograph the singer for the first time. A few days afterwards, he visited Bowie at home and they bonded in part over their mutual love for the wayward Syd Barrett, erstwhile guitarist of Pink Floyd, who had become a reclusive figure following a protracted, LSD-fuelled mental breakdown. In the late 1960s, while a student at Cambridge studying modern languages, Rock had befriended and photographed Barrett not long after buying a secondhand camera on a whim from a friend. Like the pre-glam Bowie, Barrett was a hippy with a dandyish streak and, even as his sanity unravelled, had a seductively dishevelled Romantic aura about him, what Rock later described as “a beautifully burnt-out look”. In the autumn of 1969, Rock shot Barrett reclining on the bonnet of a vintage Pontiac outside his Earl’s Court flat and lounging on the floor inside, his naked girlfriend visible in the background. One of the portaits was used on the cover of the singer’s solo album, The Madcap Laughs, Rock’s first famous picture. When the session took place, Barrett was only 23 and Rock was just 19, both of them immersed to different degrees in the heady and dissolute hippy culture of the time. “This period produced a lot of innovation, a lot of characters who were highly creative,” Rock told the Guardian in 2015, “and I’m sure the LSD had something to do with it. I certainly wouldn’t have been a photographer if I hadn’t taken LSD. I was in the middle of an acid trip the first time I picked up a camera. It turned out there wasn’t any film in it, but it was an amazing experience, and it inspired me to start taking pictures.” From the moment he picked up a camera on a whim, Rock was very much the right person in the right place at exactly the right time. From across the decades, the access he had to the performers he helped immortalise seems remarkable in an age when ruthlessly timed, PR-controlled interviews are the norm. His friendship with Bowie was such that he accompanied the singer backstage to meet Lou Reed at the King’s Cross Cinema in London (later to become the Scala) on 14 July 1972. He later described Reed’s performance that night as “like a Jungian journey into some primal hinterland”. The starkly atmospheric, slightly blurry, monochrome portrait of a vacant-looking Reed that graces the singer’s Bowie-produced solo album, Transformer, was actually a live shot taken at that London show. The following night, Rock returned to the cinema to witness the only London show of Iggy and the Stooges, who were in town to record their third album, Raw Power, with Bowie in the role of executive producer. Another evocative live shot by Rock – Iggy, bare-chested and heavily made-up, leaning on the microphone stand and gazing out into the crowd – features on the cover of an album that, though all but ignored at the time of its release, would soon become a touchstone for the punk generation. The powerful images that Rock produced in a single year resonate though the decades as emblems of a time when rock music possessed a cultural import that has long since faded. They speak of creative risk-taking, gender flamboyance and fearlessness, but also of the camaraderie of a small confederacy of outsiders and mavericks, whether performers or their image-makers. That journey produced some truly remarkable music and portraits, the one feeding off, but also articulating, the other. “They were, by any standard, eccentric and they were threatening,” Mick Rock once said of Lou Reed and Iggy Pop. He evoked their dissonant, confrontatonal energy in images that resonate still and, in doing so, cannot help but highlight the absence of the same in present-day music. Sean O’Hagan is an Observer writerLast week, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) reported encouraging research on booster doses. That analysis estimated that, compared with the preceding waned protection, the booster reduced the risks of symptomatic Covid-19 disease in people over 50 by around 85%. Compared with not being vaccinated at all, a booster gave similar protection to that obtained soon after two Pfizer/BioNTech doses. Encouragingly, this reduction occurred regardless of the initial vaccine, implying Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccinees have more protection after the booster dose than ever. Two types of study produce estimates about the effectiveness of boosters. First, the Office for National Statistics Covid infection survey of around 90,000 people a week showed the chance of testing positive after a booster was similar to after a recent second Pfizer/BioNTech jab. In contrast, the UKHSA used a “test negative case-control” design, comparing vaccination histories of 106,000 people who tested positive and 165,000 who tested negative. That design, often used in influenza vaccine studies, neatly controls for any differing tendencies to get tested between vaccinated and unvaccinated people. An earlier UKHSA study estimated two Pfizer/BioNTech doses gave around 99.7% (97.6% to near-100%) protection against Delta-infected hospitalisation, but after 20 weeks that effectiveness waned to 92.7% (90.3% to 94.6%). This estimated decline for people over 16 may not sound much, but if we look at it in terms of “lack of protection”, their estimated vulnerability relative to being unvaccinated went from 0.3% to 7.3%. That is a major, although uncertain, increase in risk. Such “negative framing” can change impressions: “90% fat-free” sounds rather different than “10% fat”. But this framing might better reflect the importance of waning immunity, showing the power of third doses to lower hospital admissions, who have mainly had two doses. All these risks are relative and the impact depends on the absolute risks of Covid-19. These viral risks are communicable and variable: between people and even from day to day in the same person, adding up over a year. Like seatbelts, vaccines make small risks lower, but also help others. These early analyses indicate booster doses are very effective. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical SocietyMark Cavendish has just been out on his bike. He went out on his bike this morning, he’ll be back out on his bike tomorrow morning, he went out on his bike this afternoon, and when training was over and he needed to get back to his hotel in order to do this interview, there was really only one method of transport that fitted the bill. The point – and admittedly, it’s not a particularly earth-shattering one – is that he loves riding his bike. Anytime, anywhere, anyhow. It’s his sanctuary, his freedom, his reason for being. And so, while most of us conceive of professional cycling in terms of suffering – lung-busting sprints, brutal training rides, the tortuous mountain ascents of the Tour de France – Cavendish sees things differently. For all the sweat and pain he endures in the saddle, he knows from bitter experience that the real agony is not being able to ride at all. Cavendish burst into our collective consciousness more than a decade ago, as the poster boy of British cycling’s golden era. Whereas the likes of Sir Chris Hoy and Victoria Pendleton sought glory on the track, embracing a world of marginal gains, body-fat callipers and ultra-sensitive stopwatches, Cavendish opted for the romance of the road, winning classic races, such as Milan-San Remo in 2009 and the world championships in 2011. But his most cherished triumphs came in the Tour de France, the world’s most prestigious cycling race, where he won an astonishing 30 stages between 2008 and 2016. “In the past, I felt like I could choose to win,” he says now from his hotel room in Belgium, with just a hint of wistful yearning. “We were that dominant.” All of this on its own was enough to anoint him as one of the greatest sprinters of all time, and certainly one of Britain’s greatest cyclists ever. And as his career went into sharp decline from 2017 onwards, it felt as though the story of Mark Cavendish had already been written, the journey complete. But Cavendish had other ideas. This summer, at the age of 36, he returned to the Tour in the unlikeliest of circumstances, winning four more stages to draw him level with the record of 34 set by the legendary Belgian cyclist Eddy Merckx. The bare facts of this are impressive enough. But set against the context of a debilitating illness, a crippling bout of clinical depression, a public that had written him off and a sport that had largely forsaken him, it should probably go down as one of the most remarkable sporting comebacks of our time. The first time I met Cavendish was in Copenhagen in 2011, on the eve of the men’s world championship road race. Back then, the boy racer had the world at his feet. Sponsors were forming an orderly line at his door. He was destined to be one of the stars of the impending London Olympics. And yet the man at the centre of this maelstrom was still essentially a boy from the Isle of Man: honed and hot-housed in British Cycling’s centre of excellence in Manchester, unaccustomed to fame, bewildered by all the attention he seemed to be attracting. Around that time it was common to hear the sentiment – from people who barely knew him – that Cavendish was a supreme bike rider, but not necessarily the sort of guy you wanted to spend too much time with. “Imagine me as a 20-year-old,” he points out. “No media training, institutionalised, just thrust into the spotlight. But as a person, I’ve definitely grown up. I’ve got kids, I’ve got a wife, that just changes you. And I’ve seen the opposite side of the life spectrum. It makes you appreciate what you have.” Some things haven’t changed: the devilish smile, the deeply analytical mind, the sincere attempt to give an honest question an honest answer, an extremely low tolerance for bullshit. But in the way that time and tide soften us all, so it has been with Cavendish’s occasionally spiky public persona. He’s a family man now, married to the model and author Peta Todd, with four children and a strong sense of responsibility not just to his loved ones but to the sport to which he has dedicated his life. His success this year was greeted not with a grudging respect, but with an outpouring of genuine affection from cycling aficionados and casual fans alike: the crowning triumph of an athlete who has walked through hell and come out the other side. You get the sense that even at his advanced years, Cavendish still feels vaguely bemused by all this. “It’s hard, because I wasn’t expecting anything,” he said of the reaction to his Tour success. “So when it came, it was beautiful. It feels so much more personable. My whole career, people have said ‘well done’. But now people say ‘thank you’. Thank you for what? Fucking hell. I’m proper touched by that.” Part of the reason Cavendish’s tale strikes a chord with so many people is that he has had to battle through the same demons many of us face: ill health, self-doubt, the nagging sensation that on some level, the good times have gone. “The process of coming back, from not being able to walk to the bathroom, not being able to climb stairs, to going back to the Tour de France: everything leading up to this year makes a mountain stage piss easy, I tell you,” he says with a chuckle. “You learn what actual suffering is.” But we should probably start at the beginning. And for Cavendish the beginning of this particular story comes in early 2017, when he started feeling an uncharacteristic fatigue while training. He was diagnosed with Epstein-Barr virus, one of the causes of glandular fever, which left him bedridden for weeks on end. “Some people never get better,” he says matter of factly. “I’d say it was two or three years before I didn’t think about it any more. It’s a coward illness. It comes when you’re stressed or run down.” And Cavendish was both. The pressure of staying at the top after years of frictionless dominance was beginning to take its toll. To make matters worse, his condition was misdiagnosed for months. “I was told I was medically all right to train again,” he says. “And I wasn’t. I still had Epstein-Barr in my system and the only thing that’s proven to help is rest, pure rest. And I was doing the opposite, because I was told by medical professionals that I was fine. And then I stopped eating because then you have to get lighter, and it starts to mess with you. I developed clinical depression.” And so began the next challenge. As a young cyclist, Cavendish had always scoffed at sportspeople who cited mental health concerns as an excuse for underperformance. Now, barricaded in his Essex home, the walls began closing in. “Before I had depression, I was one of those people who didn’t take mental health seriously,” he says. “I really thought it was an excuse. Snap out of it, what’s wrong with you? That’s why I feel passionately about talking about it now. It was karma that I got it. That mindset of thinking it’s an excuse is massively damaging. It doesn’t just not help people get better. It makes people worse.” Every sufferer of mental health issues experiences them in a different way. For some it’s an intense, overpowering sadness, or a sort of chronic lethargy. For others it’s a form of paralysis, of constant external judgment. For Cavendish, depression expressed itself as a kind of photographic negative. “It’s nuts how fragile you get, how illogical,” he remembers. “You don’t think logically. You’re not in control. It’s not like you don’t care. You don’t care enough to think you don’t care. There’s nothing. It’s empty. I cannot put it into a visual image, because it’s the opposite of any visual image you can get. My family life suffered, my career suffered. I was struggling to get a contract. The kids were too young to understand, but it was hard for Peta, to be sure.” While Cavendish’s life off the bike was falling apart, his career on it was taking a similar turn. In the 2019 season, for the first time in 16 years, he didn’t win a single race. He didn’t even make it to the start line for that year’s Tour de France, left out from his Dimension Data team after a bitter disagreement with manager Doug Ryder. For a rider widely considered one of the legends of the sport, it was a cruel lesson in the brutality of professional cycling, an unsentimental game in which you are only as valuable as your next prize cheque. “Yeah, it’s horrible,” he says. “It broke my heart how many despicable people are in this sport. And just the world in general.” By the end of 2020, it looked like Cavendish had finally run out of road. His new team Bahrain-McLaren decided not to renew his contract. Once again, he ended the year without a win. Even his most ardent supporters had given up hope and were now quietly urging him to walk away and leave his legacy intact. The phone stopped ringing. “People still wished me well, but they became fewer and fewer,” he says. “That was the hardest thing.” With time running out to secure a contract for the 2021 season, his old team Deceunick Quick-Step threw him a lifeline, although it came with a few catches. He would be on a minimum-wage salary of about €40,000. He had to find his own sponsor. And, most crucially of all, the team already had a core of accomplished sprinters, led by the talented Irishman Sam Bennett. Cavendish would have to make do on a diet of smaller races in far-flung places, travelling on low-cost airlines and staying in budget hotels: no red carpet, no star billing, certainly no Tour de France. Cavendish didn’t mind. After all, he was just happy to be back on his bike. “No matter what position I’ve been in, I was always the rider who they could call up and I would race,” he says. Gradually, he began to show some flickers of his old form. He won a few stages at the Tour of Turkey, his first wins in three years, and rode well at the Tour of Belgium. Still, it was only Turkey and Belgium. He still hadn’t beaten anyone of note. And even when a knee injury to Bennett allowed Cavendish an unexpected shot at the Tour de France, nobody seriously expected him to do very much. Well, almost nobody. “I knew I was back,” he says. “I felt like the old me. I knew I could be top again.” When you’re a sprinter, there are maybe six or seven days of the Tour when the course is flat enough for you to realistically win the stage. The rest of the time you’re simply surviving, hauling yourself up seemingly endless mountain climbs in the Alps and Pyrenees, trying to stay within the strict time limit. (Finish too far behind the race winner and you’re out of the race, as Cavendish himself discovered in 2018.) “It’s just suffering,” he says. “It’s horrible. There’s no reward except the chance to do it again the next day.” Those passages are perhaps the most harrowing parts of Cavendish’s new book, Tour de Force, which chronicles his comeback Tour in unstinting, granular detail. The most interesting are when he takes us into the middle of the professional peloton, its rivalries and tactics, the stress and the shoves and the ever-present threat of a disastrous crash. Cavendish has a freakish memory for detail bordering on the photographic. He still remembers every kink in the road, every bottleneck, the ideal line to take around every French roundabout. Most of all, he remembers the wins. That first win, a bunch sprint into the Breton town of Fougères on day four, reduces him to tears. “It was like a weight had gone and I couldn’t stop crying,” he writes. “Everything that had happened in the last few years seemed to lift off me.” Three more wins follow, drawing him level with Merckx’s record, although he misses the chance to break it on the last day in Paris when he is narrowly beaten on the Champs-Elysées. If there was a breathtaking efficiency to Cavendish’s early career, the ruthless raw speed of a man simply too good for the field, then there was a certain fairytale quality to his comeback: one of the feelgood stories in an otherwise grim year for humanity. Luck played its part; it always does. But equally, he points out: “I knew how sick I’d been. I knew where I had to come back from. I signed for minimum wage, found a sponsor for the team. That’s not the stars aligning. That’s me moving the stars into the right position.” For the first time in a while Cavendish found himself not simply admired but loved, not that it really mattered to him either way. “To be liked or disliked is irrelevant,” he says. “In sport you have a character, a style, but it doesn’t translate to what you do as a person. You can fake it, and a lot of riders do. They play super-nice but they’re actually assholes. I’d rather be the other way round. I’d rather be proud of the guy I see in the mirror than the guy I see on TV.” Cavendish thought about retiring at the end of the season, but he’s decided to push on for now, while the body still feels good, while there are still races out there to be won. Does beating Merckx’s record mean anything to him? “Nah,” he scoffs, and you believe him. Records, the cold accumulation of numbers and statistics, have never really moved him. Grievance – whether real or imagined – no longer acts as a source of fuel. “I’ve lost the desire to prove people wrong,” he says. His historical legacy, which always used to motivate him, has pretty much been secured: “in terms of what I can physically do on a bike, there’s nothing more I can do.” So why does he keep doing it? Well, it all comes back to the bike. The thrill of pure speed. The promise of the open road and the wind against his face. “It’s the freedom,” he explains. “You’re not confined by an arena. You don’t have to go to a training venue. There’s no tee-time. You can leave your front door at what time you want and go for as long as you want, the speed you want, the distance you want. You can go out with someone or go out on your own. The world’s your oyster. That feeling is why I started it. And I still get that feeling.” Tour de Force: My history-making Tour de France by Mark Cavendish is published on 25 November by Ebury Spotlight at £20Evocative drawings that Rudyard Kipling created for The Jungle Book but never used are to be published for the first time. Mowgli, the Indian boy raised by wolves, and his mentor Bagheera, the black panther, are among sketches created by the author in helping him to shape the jungle characters that were to enchant generations of readers. They have been preserved at the British Library, part of a collection that was bequeathed to the nation in 1940 by Kipling’s widow, Caroline. Now the British Library has collaborated with SP Books, an independent publishing house, on a major project in which Kipling’s original handwritten manuscript is reproduced in book form for the first time. Dating from between 1892 and 1895, the manuscript contains the stories of both The Jungle Book and The Second Jungle Book, although these are not arranged in the same order as the published editions. Some 173 sheets bearing Kipling’s elegant handwriting, and about a dozen drawings in black ink, offer insights into his creative process. The drawings were not published because they are unfinished, essentially works in progress. Laura Walker, the British Library’s lead curator of modern archives and manuscripts, told the Observer: “He was formulating the characters in his mind. The drawings aided his visual image.” She said: “There’s an unfinished sketch of Mowgli and Bagheera, sideways on one page. They’re all on the backs of the pages of the manuscript. So it looks like he was working on them as he was working on the text – part of his creative process in defining the characters. There’s one with Shere Khan [the Bengal tiger and Mowgli’s enemy], with a herd of buffalos going towards him.” She added: “Some look like he’s drawing to get ideas of what different characters or places look like. Just above Bagheera, there could be the outline of Baloo [the bear]. Mowgli is closer to how we view him from illustrations and different adaptations over time – a long-haired young boy. It’s a basic line drawing. It gives you that essence of the character.” The manuscript has subtle differences from the final printed version, including some of the titles: “Her Majesty’s Servants” was originally “The Servants of the Queen”, while “Red Dog” was “The Little People of the Rocks”. Crossed-out words, annotations and notes to himself reflect Kipling’s precision. The story “Toomai of the Elephants” has the largest number of corrections, in red pencil. There are also scrawled instructions for layout or typography. Kipling, who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1907, was born in Bombay, during the British Raj. He spent his childhood in India and longed to return during his schooldays in England. He did so in 1882, working as a journalist. But his reputation has suffered, with English Heritage, for example, noting that he “believed in British superiority over the people of colonised nations”. The British Library’s website notes: “After the first world war… the tide of history relentlessly swept aside Kipling’s colonial vision. Values celebrated in his writings for adults soon seemed out of tune with the times. Political critics came to see him as old-fashioned at best, contemptible at worst.” The new edition, which is published on 25 November, will also feature vibrant colour illustrations by French artist Maurice de Becque.Voters in Chile head to the polls on Sunday in a general election in which the two frontrunners for president offer starkly contrasting visions for the country’s future after two years of street protests and political unrest. Polls suggest that the progressive former student leader Gabriel Boric, 35, and the far-right candidate, José Antonio Kast, are neck-and-neck ahead of five other candidates – though neither seems likely to cross the 50% threshold needed to avoid a December runoff. Boric, who shot to prominence during Chile’s 2011 education protests, has promised to “bury” Chile’s past as a cradle of neoliberalism imposed under the dictator Gen Augusto Pinochet, and pledges to build a fairer Chile marked by inclusivity, diversity and liberal social values. Kast, 55, is a staunch Catholic who opposes abortion and rails against the “gay lobby” – and a proud supporter of the Pinochet dictatorship. A perennial fringe figure in Chilean politics, he has earned support among those who believe Chile needs a firm hand on the rudder after its most turbulent period in decades. “We are fighting to create a state that guarantees rights and dignity,” Boric told a crowd in the city of Casablanca as he closed his campaign on Thursday evening. In Santiago, Kast addressed his own supporters, saying: “Chile needs peace, order, and to go back to making progress with freedom.” The country has tumbled through two years of protests, which began when millions took to the streets in 2019 to voice their frustration at deep inequalities and Pinochet’s lingering legacy of privatised social services. The demonstrations eventually petered out amid coronavirus quarantines, but they prompted a landmark plebiscite which led to an assembly to rewrite Chile’s constitution, which had been drafted without popular input under Pinochet. “People will elect the president and congress who will accompany the constitutional process and the transformations undergoing society over the next four years,” said Claudia Heiss, a political scientist at the University of Chile. “Whoever is elected is going to take those first tentative steps through the transition of the political system.” In the most open field in years, the middle ground is contested by the centrist Yasna Provoste, the only female candidate and a member of the Diaguita indigenous group, and the centre-right Sebastián Sichel. “The centre is where the real battle is taking place,” said Heiss. “Both Provoste and Sichel are competing for the moderate vote, which could eventually prove significant in drawing support away from the two frontrunners.” Sichel has enjoyed something of a resurgence in the week before the vote as Kast has made several blunders after an otherwise smooth campaign. At a meeting with foreign correspondents a week before the elections, Kast bristled when asked about his team’s fierce criticism of the “far-right” tag he is routinely given. Kast insisted that he should instead be termed a “commonsense” candidate, but the event made headlines after he reiterated his support for Gen Pinochet’s dictatorship. Other candidates include the cantankerous communist Eduardo Artés, a primary schoolteacher, and Marco Enríquez-Ominami, a former socialist congressman. He keeps a low profile between elections and is now running for the presidency for a fourth time – having never made the second round. Another candidate has spent the entire campaign in the United States. Businessman Franco Parisi, repeatedly delayed his return to the country as he has not paid his ex-wife significant sums in child support, which he would have to pay should he return. If no candidate takes more than half of the vote on Sunday, a run-off next month between the two highest-placed candidates will decide who takes the reins from President Sebastián Piñera in March 2022.As recently as this summer, Joe Biden seemed to be taking a “keep calm and carry on” approach when it came to concerns about rising inflation. “As our economy has come roaring back, we’ve seen some price increases,” the US president said in July. “Our experts believe and the data shows that most of the price increases we’ve seen were expected and expected to be temporary.” But now, with inflation hitting a 30-year high last month, Biden’s tone has become noticeably less upbeat. “Everything from a gallon of gas to a loaf of bread costs more,” Biden said in Baltimore earlier this month. “We still face challenges, and we have to tackle them. We have to tackle them head on.” Americans are taking notice of high prices with growing alarm, and their concerns appear to be negatively affecting Biden’s approval rating, which had already been falling in recent months. As the US experiences sticker shock at the gas pump and in grocery stores, Democrats are worried that inflation could imperil their legislative agenda and their majorities in Congress as crucial midterm elections loom next year. While the president and fellow Democrats had previously sought to downplay rising inflation, it has become an unavoidable issue as prices continue to climb. The labor department has reported that prices increased by 6.2% over the past 12 months, marking the most rapid uptick since 1990. Gasoline prices have increased by 49.6% over the past year, while food prices have risen by 5.3%. As prices rise, more working Americans are noticing their bills have become more burdensome. According to a poll conducted by the progressive firm Navigator Research this month, 54% of Americans now say the cost of groceries and gas is a “major crisis”, marking a 17-point increase since September. Republicans have blamed the price increases on Biden’s economic policies, arguing that rising inflation underscores the need to oust Democratic lawmakers in the midterm elections next year. “As Biden and Democrats continue to push for trillions more in reckless spending and higher taxes, skyrocketing prices and a broken supply chain under Biden are crushing American families, workers and small businesses,” said Emma Vaughn, a spokesperson for the Republican National Committee. “Americans will soundly reject Biden’s failed economic agenda at the ballot box in 2022.” There are some early signs that Republicans’ message is striking a chord with voters, as the party looks to take back control of Congress in 2022. An AP VoteCast survey showed that 35% of Virginia voters named the economy and jobs as the most important issue facing the state, making it the most common response. Those voters were more likely to support the Republican gubernatorial candidate Glenn Youngkin, who defeated Democrat Terry McAuliffe by two points in the election held earlier this month. And it’s not just Republicans who are sounding the alarm about price hikes. Senator Joe Manchin, one of the key holdouts in Democrats’ negotiations over their $1.75tn spending package, has said he is hearing more from constituents who are concerned about their gas and grocery bills. “By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse,” Manchin said in response to the labor department’s latest report. “From the grocery store to the gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.” Manchin has previously expressed concern that Democrats’ spending package, known as the Build Back Better Act, could negatively contribute to inflation. In a September op-ed for the Wall Street Journal, Manchin warned against approving more government spending, saying, “An overheating economy has imposed a costly ‘inflation tax’ on every middle- and working-class American.” The Biden administration has sought to mitigate inflation-related concerns about the bill, which passed the House on Friday. The president has repeatedly touted a letter from 17 Nobel laureates in economics, which argued the spending package would “ease longer-term inflationary pressures”. But the bill’s critics say the legislation would not address the inflation happening now and may even cause prices to rise further, urging members of Congress not to approve another large spending package. “We’re not worried about the long-term. We have inflation in the here and now, and this policy will make it worse in the foreseeable future,” said Curtis Dubay, a senior economist at the US Chamber of Commerce, a pro-business lobbying group that opposes the spending package. “The first rule of being in a hole is to stop digging,” Dubay added. “This would keep digging. So they need to not pass it.” Jason Furman, who served as the chair of the White House council of economic advisers under Barack Obama, rejected that argument. “Build Back Better will have a negligible impact on inflation over the medium term,” Furman said. “In gross terms, the total spending is one-tenth as much per year as what we just did this year [with the coronavirus relief package]. Moreover, that spending is paid for.” For progressives, conservatives’ warnings about inflation seem a convenient excuse to quash a bill that they already opposed. Natalia Salgado, the director of federal affairs for the progressive Working Families party, said the legislation would actually help average Americans deal with rising inflation by lowering their healthcare and childcare costs. For example, the Build Back Better Act would establish universal prekindergarten for all three- and four-year-old children. It would also reduce Affordable Care Act premiums and lower drug prices by allowing Medicare to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies. “If we really want to have a discussion about inflation, let’s talk about the many things that this bill is going to help minimize the cost of,” Salgado said. “Folks coming out of this pandemic were already hurting economically. It is economically imperative to pass the Build Back Better legislation.” Democrats in Congress have echoed that message, urging those who are worried about inflation to support the bill. “House Democrats’ infrastructure deal and Build Back Better Act tackle inflation head on through their historic investments,” said Congressman Sean Patrick Maloney, the chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. “Rather than working to solve economic problems, Republicans have voted overwhelmingly to block these bills that reduce prices for the American people and focused instead on their own extremist agenda.” But many of the provisions of the Build Back Better bill will not go into effect immediately. The Medicare drug price negotiations will not begin until 2025, and the universal prekindergarten program will be built up over the next few years. In the short term, it may be difficult for Biden to address rising prices. Even if the Federal Reserve moves quickly to stifle inflation, it would take months for Americans to feel the effect of the fiscal policy change. And when it comes to gas prices specifically, Biden has little sway over the global oil market, although he has called on the Federal Trade Commission to investigate “mounting evidence of anti-consumer behavior by oil and gas companies”. “Politically, people are very sensitive to inflation in gasoline prices and food because that’s just a visible item they see,” Furman said. “I’ve been in government when gas prices are going up, and it’s terrible. Everyone hates you.” On the plus side for Democrats, the frequent fluctuations in gas and food prices mean those costs could decrease over the next year even if overall inflation continues to rise, Furman said. That possibility may be Democrats’ best hope for maintaining control of Congress after the 2022 elections. However, if prices do not improve over the coming year, the president’s party may need to brace for an ugly election night next November.Use of the apostrophe is declining. That’s according to research from Lancaster University backed up by what anyone would guess was happening. I reckon it was all over as soon as you couldn’t put them in web addresses. The future will only need one sort of dot, the techies decided. The comma is putting up decent resistance, but it’s just a matter of time before we see the last of its hovering colleague. Please enjoy the correct punctuation of the itses in that sentence. Reduction in apostrophe usage isn’t all bad news, even for sticklers, because it is often used wrongly. Abandoning it may actually reduce punctuation errors. At last, the grocers will have to stop sticking things in where they’re not wanted, even if it will become harder to know whether or not any splendid metaphorical bollocks you may be enjoying all belong to one dog. But it fills me with dread. That’s because I can apply all the apostrophe rules correctly and I can’t do much else. I feel like a monk in a scriptorium who’s had a vision of a photocopier. The Virgin Mary was copying her bum and laughing at him. It makes me a bit panicky. I still don’t really know what TikTok is. I’ve got a wine fridge though, so that’s a comfort. And not primarily because, should I suddenly feel the need to ingest vast, existence-numbing quantities of wine, which I recommend from time to time, it’ll be at the correct temperature. No, the fridge itself provides the comfort because, as research published last week has confirmed, being materialistic, acquiring things, assuages fear. This was a study involving 2,200 people from Britain, the US and China. It found that those who had recently experienced fear sought security in new stuff. “In man’s ancestral past there is often an advantage to owning goods,” says the report. “The more goods one possesses, the more likely they are to withstand adverse conditions and protect themselves.” This discovery has terrifying implications, which is great news for the retail sector. But any resultant economic upturn might make us less fearful, undermining the new prosperity, thus leading to recession, leading to want and fear, leading to spending and prosperity, leading to happiness and collapse. We could be locked into a psychological boom-and-bust sine wave with an economic one closely tracking it. At least those most dedicated purveyors of alarm, the news media, can pat themselves on the back that their peace-of-mind-wrecking business model marginally helps Argos. It is little wonder that in this era of pandemic, climate emergency and apostrophe irrelevance, I lean heavily on my wine fridge for emotional support. And then it stopped working. This was a bitter blow. The very object from which I had been deriving solace turned into a blunt instrument of rebuke. I had no idea what to do. As discussed above, I know how to use an apostrophe and that is not quite, but nearly, it. I can talk and write. I had learned both of those skills by the age of five. It turns out that when I then learned to ride a bike, I had already become overqualified for my future profession. I haven’t learned to do much else. Mending a wine fridge is way beyond me. So is working out what’s wrong with a wine fridge. And so, I miserably realised, is moving a wine fridge. It’s all built in to the kitchen. You turn it off at a switch on the wall with no visible interconnecting wire. There is wood and granite impeding its movement. It felt like I was doomed to look at it, standing there incomprehensible and obsolete, for ever, like a bewildered Anglo-Saxon staring in wonder at a Roman bath. I didn’t know how to begin trying to move it. If I bought a replacement, I had no idea where I’d put it. If I did manage to move the broken one, how would I infiltrate the new one into the hole? It was bound to be a different size. I had no confidence in my powers of measurement. Who would take away the old one? Would I just use it as a cupboard for the rest of my life? I was faced with an unconquerable mountain of practical challenges and admin hassle. It all reminded me of a line in a sketch I wrote with Robert Webb in which a confused and lonely man, having just moved into a new flat, tremblingly asks: “Do you know anything about how to make a new washing machine have water in it?” My instinct to acquire things in order to feel safe had lured me into a slough of self-loathing. None of my main skills – talking and punctuation – has any power over fridges. Most MPs must feel this vulnerability. Their second jobs all seem to involve the same thing as their main one: talking in rooms. I don’t think we’d mind them neglecting their constituents nearly so much if they were off mending fridges. But they’re just bullshitting for different masters and, we suspect, saving their best bullshit for when they’re getting the higher hourly rate. It’s hard to imagine that Theresa May, who has made nearly £2m from giving speeches since leaving office, would command that magnitude of money for saying Brexit means Brexit and claiming to be “a bloody difficult woman”. She must have some cracking secret material that she wouldn’t share for a ministerial salary alone. Still, it’s closer to fridge-mending than it is to lobbying. It’s taking money for doing something, not for thinking something or advocating something. And perhaps the executives paying those ludicrous sums for whatever it is ex-prime ministers say at corporate events assuaged their own existential fears with the spending spree. A man came to mend the fridge in the end. I didn’t think that was possible any more but, in my desperation, I phoned the manufacturer who gave me another number and I phoned that and someone came round. He knew how wine fridges worked and fixed it in 10 minutes. It was like an idealised version of the 1950s. I was deeply comforted. Maybe the apostrophe still has some life in it after all.When volleyball coach Inoke Tonga was called in for a meeting with the leadership of Valor Christian high school in Highlands Ranch, Colorado, this fall, he thought he was about to be offered a promotion. Instead, he was interrogated with a series of vague, leading questions that attempted to get him to admit he was gay. Tonga had been out for years – and knew his contract never stated he couldn’t be gay and teach at Valor – but shame-filled memories of his closeted years as a young man rose up in that moment, as his job slipped away. “They offered to help me stop being gay, with my ‘struggle’,” Tonga says. “They said I should take my time to decide if I will accept their help, and they’ll tell everyone I’m on a spiritual journey.” The offer they made was for Tonga to attend some form of “conversion therapy”, and when he returned to announce he isn’t gay, cut off contact with his fiance, scrub his social media of any support for the LGBTQ community, and denounce his support for them before the school. “They said a lot of parents pay a lot of money to go to Valor, just so their kids don’t have to mentored by someone who is gay,” he recalls. Tonga declined their offer, and resigned. Outrage on the part of students, parents, alumni and allies over Tonga losing his job for being gay is part of a decades-long battle between anti-discrimination laws and the right of private Christian schools (of which there are approximately 34,500 in the US alone) to religious freedom. Ever since the 1964 Civil Rights Act threatened the tax-exempt status of Christian schools who refused to racially integrate, religious schools in the US have tangled with social justice activists seeking equal protections for minority students and employees. Freedom to discriminate In 2020, the supreme court ruled employment protections in the Civil Rights Act should extend to LGBTQ+ employees, thereby federally outlawing termination of an employee for their sexual orientation or being transgender. But buried deep within the Civil Rights Act is an exception for religious institutions who want to discriminate against employees of a different faith. “So while a secular employer can’t say, ‘I’m not going to hire you because you’re Jewish, I only hire Catholics,’ the Catholic school can say that, because they’re exempt from the prohibition against religious discrimination,” says Joshua Block, senior staff attorney with the ACLU’s LGBT &amp; Aids project. “And religious schools have argued that that limited exception should be interpreted broadly to mean that I can discriminate against anyone based on my religious beliefs.” Courts have, for the most part, been saying no to this argument, Block says. But Tonga’s story is far from an isolated incident – even at Valor Christian high school, where a lesbian teacher was pressured to leave under similar circumstances. Earlier this summer, music teacher Todd Simmons claimed he was fired from Our Lady’s Catholic Academy in Queens, New York, after filling out health insurance forms that revealed he was married to a man. A nearly identical scenario involving a gay music teacher fired from a Catholic school played out only a short distance away at the same time. The issue is further complicated in states like Florida – where the line between public school and private religious school is sometimes blurred. Steven Arauz, a sixth-grade history teacher, found himself fired from a Seventh Day Adventist school – which is publicly funded with $1m a year in tax dollars and credits – after he was featured in a Gay With Kids article where he discussed his adopted son. “You are aware that this conduct, if true, does not comport with the Seventh-day Adventist church’s standards,” he was told in an email that terminated his $49,000 a year position. “Hand over your keys. Hand over your badge. You’re not allowed on Forrest Lake property.” Block and the ACLU have found some success litigating these firings. Last month, a federal judge ruled that the firing of the North Carolina teacher Lonnie Billard from a Catholic school for being gay was a violation of the Civil Rights Act, shutting down the school’s attempt to argue that they had a religious exemption from the law. “After all this time, I have a sense of relief and a sense of vindication. I wish I could have remained teaching all this time,” Billard said in a statement released by the ACLU. “Today’s decision validates that I did nothing wrong by being a gay man.” Predator myth The work of Block and the ACLU is standing on the shoulders of decades of litigation that provides civil rights legislation the legal muscle it has today. Much of this played out in public schools, particularly in the south, where segregationists like the Alabama governor, George Wallace, stood blocking the entrance of a school that black students sought to enter. Around this time, the marketplace for private religious schools – thought to be protected from integration laws – began to explode in size. “Hoping to keep their racial purity, their white evangelical identity, a lot of rich churches created their own schools,” said Frances Fitzgerald, author of the Pulitzer prize–winning book, The Evangelicals: The Struggle to Shape America. “They thought they could get away with being segregated.” This proved not to be the case when Bob Jones University – which gave Wallace an honorary degree – found itself stripped of its tax-exempt status as a religious institution due to its ban on black students. Forced integration and taxation of private religious schools – along with bans on teacher-led prayer in public schools – created a narrative among conservative evangelicals that a liberal government was waging war on Christianity, galvanizing them into the political force known today as the Christian right. “Before this, they weren’t terribly organized at all,” Fitzgerald said of the previously apolitical demographic. “When Paul Weyrich went around trying to enlist evangelicals and fundamentalists into the Republican party, they didn’t respond to any of his issues other than forced integration of Christian schools.” This laid the groundwork for the following generation of evangelical leaders such as Jerry Falwell, Pat Robertson and Tim LeHay, who partnered with the Republican party to stir up anger around issues evangelicals previously cared little about, like abortion, drugs and the rights of women and gays. Campaigns to overturn gay rights legislation like “Save Our Children” in Florida (led by evangelical superstar Anita Bryant), or California’s Prop 6, which sought to ban gay men and lesbians from teaching in public schools, both equated homosexuality with pedophilia and accused gay teachers of being sexually motivated in their career choice. While the villains were new, the tactic of ginning up baseless fears had been the cornerstone of white flight to Christian schools a decade earlier. Bob Jones University’s lack of black students was rooted in its ban on interracial dating. When the university eventually integrated in 1971, it allowed only married black students to attend, and in 1975 allowed single black students but denied “admission to applicants engaged in an interracial marriage or known to advocate interracial marriage or dating”. While openly opposing racial integration eventually became an ineffective tool for galvanizing evangelical voters – replaced by racist dog-whistles – gays integrating themselves into the American family remained a potent touchstone for the Christian right. “In 2004, evangelical leaders were running out of money and their voters had been falling away, so they all got in a room together to decide what issues would bring their flock back to the fold, and they decided on gay marriage,” says Fitzgerald. “And so they flooded the nation with anti–gay marriage ballot measures, and that not only helped get George W Bush elected to a second term, but the ballot measures sometimes performed better than he did … They were against gay people in principle, but they also thought gay teachers were a bigger threat to kids than anything.” Think of the children “He was awesome– he really cared,” says Schuylar Daniel, a junior at Valor Christian high school, of his former volleyball coach, Tonga. On a chilly November evening, Daniel was joined by dozens of classmates, alumni and LGBTQ activists outside a Valor high school football game, protesting against the treatment of Tonga. Cars honked their horns as they drove by, showing support with signs that read “God Is Love” and “Every 45 seconds one queer teen attempts suicide.” This statistic comes from the Trevor Project, an advocacy group and crisis center for LGBTQ youth struggling with suicidal ideation. While the Christian right views gay teachers as a threat to students, the Trevor Project’s research shows that “LGBTQ youth who have access to an LGBTQ-affirming school report lower rates of attempting suicide.” Yet, “only half of LGBTQ youth reported having an LGBTQ-affirming school.” Skyler Daniel and other students and alumni are laboring to make Valor an LGBTQ-affirming school through their organization, Valor for Change. Through their Gay Straight Alliance (which has to meet off campus) and a list of demands for school leadership, the group aims to make their school a place where all students can feel safe and supported. The Guardian reached out to Valor high school to comment on Tonga and Valor for Change, but did not receive a response. Who’s a minister? While 81% of Americans say gay teachers should be able to teach at elementary schools, religious schools catering to the remaining 19% have been developing a varied strategy for keeping them out of their classrooms. “There are constitutional arguments they make, that [being forced to employ gay teachers] violates their freedom of association, free exercise of religion, but those have been rejected,” says Joshua Block of the ACLU. “One thing that hasn’t been rejected is the ‘ministerial exception’ [to discrimination laws] which is also grounded in the constitution. It says that there are certain positions that are so close to the exercise of an organization’s religious identity that the government can’t interfere with them.” So if Valor Christian high school wanted to say that because Inoke Tonga, for example, led his students in a prayer before a volleyball game, or spoke of the holy spirit guiding them during a game, could his firing for being gay fall under a ministerial exemption from discrimination laws? “It hasn’t been tested at that level of specificity,” says Block, “but a lot of religious organizations are trying to incorporate religious duties into the jobs of their employees to have that sort of insulation.” Protecting religious freedom is at the core of America’s history, identity and constitution. Over the course of the 20th century, many legal battles have been waged over when the freedom of an individual or persecuted minority should trump that of a religious institution’s freedom to behave in any way their theology instructs. There are a seemingly endless number of lines to be drawn on this issue, but for Block and the ACLU, the freedom to seek employment is essential to individual liberty. Block said: “It is one thing to have a belief that you practice in your own religious community, but when you go out into the public market and start hiring people, you are engaging with the public at large, and you have to respect that there are a lot of people out there who deserve equal treatment, even if they don’t share your religious beliefs.”One summer’s day in Tipperary as peat was being dug from a bog, a button peered out from the freshly cut earth. The find set off a five-year journey of conservation to retrieve and preserve what lay beyond: a 1,200-year-old psalm book in its original cover. Bogs across Europe have thrown up all sorts of relics of the ancient past, from naturally preserved bodies to vessels containing butter more than a millennium old, but the 2006 discovery of an entire early medieval manuscript, entombed in a wet time capsule for so long, was unprecedented, said the National Museum of Ireland. The book fell open upon discovery to reveal the Latin words in ualle lacrimarum (in the valley of tears), which identified it as a book of psalms. One particularly unexpected feature was the vegetable-tanned leather cover with a papyrus reed lining, suggesting the monks could have had trade links with Egypt. “It still blows me away,” said John Gillis, the chief manuscript conservator at Trinity College Dublin, home of the Book of Kells, the Book of Armagh and 450 other medieval Latin manuscripts. “It was by far and away the most challenging, most interesting project I have ever undertaken – and to put that in context, I am surrounded by these iconic manuscripts.” Ten years after going on display at the National Museum in Dublin, the Faddan More Psalter is one of Ireland’s top 10 treasures and now the subject of a 340-page book from the institution documenting every stage of the “terrifying” preservation process for future scholars. “The fact that such a fragile organic object survived for a millennium in wet conditions, the fact that it was noticed … and the fact that a full bifolio survived and allowed Gillis to ascertain the codicological details of the psalter are all very much against the odds,” said Maeve Sikora, a keeper of Irish antiquities at the National Museum who supported Gillis with the work. The process of stabilising the book outside the bog, drying it and then unpicking and unfolding pages where possible was painstaking. Archaeologists placed the “conglomeration” of squashed pages, leather and turf in a walk-in cold store in the museum at 4C. But there was no manual in the world to guide Gillis on how to go about the task. “I spent the first three months retrieving the mass from the fridge, bringing it up to my lab and just staring at it, trying to make sense of it before I could start any sort of intervention work. Because once you disturb it, you are in effect losing evidence,” Gillis said. “Although the bog was responsible for its really poor condition, it was also responsible for locking it in its original condition.” Initial examination was limited in order to mitigate further trauma. CT scans and X-rays to find 3D structures were excluded owing to concerns that they could accelerate the degradation. After trying sophisticated versions of freeze-drying, vacuum-sealing, and drying with blotting paper, Gillis settled on a dewatering method using a vacuum chamber installed in the museum lab for four years to minimise shrinkage and decay. It would take two years before all the folio fragments were in a dry and stable state before the daunting task of dismantling could begin, a process chronicled in the book out later this month, The Faddan More Psalter, The Discovery and Conservation of a Medieval Treasure. “It was absolutely terrifying,” Gillis said of the responsibility he felt. “I heard from someone in the British Museum that there was a picture of the mass on the walls in a staff area there with the words ‘if you think you have a bad day ahead …’ You had this nerve-racking scenario of disturbing this material, which meant losing evidence, when the whole point was trying to gain as much information as possible.” Many of the spaces between the iron gall letters had dissolved into the bog, leaving an alphabet soup of several thousand standalone letters. It would take months after the drying process to piece them all together, in sequence on the right pages. “The rewards when you slowly lifted up a fragment, and suddenly beneath this little bit of decoration would appear, particularly the yellow pigment they used. It would kind of shine back at you,” Gillis said. “And you’d go: ‘Wow, I am the first person to see this in 1,200 years.’ So that kind of privilege made all the sleepless nights and racking of the brain worthwhile. “It was the purest conservation I’ve ever carried out. There is no repair, I’ve attached nothing new. All I’ve done is captured and stabilised.” • This article was amended on 24 November 2021. John Gillis is a conservator, not a conservationist as stated in an earlier version.On Thursday morning I sent my mother a WhatsApp message. “Entertaining discussion on Radio 4 about how it’s better being a grandmother than a mother,” I wrote. She didn’t reply. It is not easy being a son. On the Today programme, Amol Rajan and Sheila Hancock had been discussing a study by anthropologists in Atlanta, Georgia, which found that grandmothers may be more emotionally connected to their grandchildren than their children. The researchers showed 50 women pictures of their biological grandchildren, the child’s parents and random children and adults, and watched the effect it had on their brains. When the grandmothers looked at the grandchildren, the part of their brain associated with “cognitive empathy” lit up. We don’t know which part of the brain lit up when they saw their children. Have scientists even identified the part associated with contempt and regret? The brain scanner was unnecessary, anyway. The evidence is everywhere. At the sight of a grandchild, the heart of even the sternest British matriarch – and I must say here, very clearly, that I am not referring to my own mother – turns to puree. Women who have never exactly been profligate with affection – again, Mum, not you – become cooing, cuddling, gaga machines. Were I referring to my own mother here, I might talk about how the beaming woman who welcomes my daughter with popcorn, TV and repeated use of the words “poppet” and “darling” is so unrecognisable to her own children that I sometimes wonder if she is being impersonated, Talented Mr Ripley-style, by an out-of-work primary schoolteacher. But, to be clear, I am not referring to my own mother. One theory behind the grandchildren empathy is that the love of grandparents helps improve the grandchild’s chance of survival. It certainly improves their chances of treats. The obvious explanation for these superior vibes is that the time grandparents spend with their grandchildren is usually voluntary, and filled with high-status activities such as games and trips to the zoo, rather than parent drudgery such as discipline and vegetables. It is as though the management consultants have been in and ruthlessly stripped out all the worst parts of parenting. Nappies and homework? No. Ice-cream? Yes. Just when you think things cannot get better for the boomers, something like this comes along. All parents are tories. Not capital T, although obviously there are a few of those around. But their ambitions for their children, born of terror, tend to the conservative. Get a sensible job. Wear warm jumpers. Be happy. Grandparents are anarchists by comparison. Eat that junk food, stay up late, go to the park without being swaddled like an early Arctic explorer. It’ll be fine. It would be nice to think that grandparents are more chilled out because they have gone round the course already. One obvious but overlooked aspect is that to have grandchildren you typically will have had children first. After the frenzy of parenting, where you somehow take on this project at the same time as trying not to get sacked and redo the kitchen, maybe you come to grandparenting with a clearer sense of priorities. After picking your children up for years, eventually you put them down for ever. As a grandparent you can appreciate these everyday joys without worrying so much about GCSE results or recorder practice. A bit of detachment can lead to more rational decisions. What’s more, when they become grandparents your parents can complain about your parental neuroses – while conveniently forgetting that they gave you those neuroses in the first place. Win-win. Sadly, I’m not sure it’s true. Eventually, my mother replies. “As a parent, you have great power, at least for a bit, and can determine if your child supports Arsenal, goes to church, watches TV, learns ballet. As a grandparent, you don’t have this power,” she adds, with only a hint of regret. “It’s a junior role. The jobs can’t be compared. With a child, you’re programmed to look after it or it will be eaten by wolves. With grandchildren, you just have to return them in one piece. It’s like being a slightly more involved babysitter.” Grandparents also don’t have to worry as much about the overall outcome. In the normal course of things, by the time your grandchildren are old enough to have become truly disappointing, you will be on your way out. Before that, you’ll have had your children to look after you in your dotage. At least we are still good for something.Britain has long faced calls to return the Benin bronzes, looted by its soldiers in 1897 from the kingdom of Benin, in what is now southern Nigeria, a former British colony. Now that pressure is set to intensify following the discovery of damning evidence that the then prime minister covered up a rape and other atrocities committed by one of his own officials in the region. Previously unpublished Foreign Office documents reveal that Lord Salisbury failed to take any action against Consul George Annesley after reading internal reports of his abuse and violence – from having a local woman, called Ekang, brought to his quarters and assaulted by his soldiers while he held her down to ordering raids in which women and children were shot. The prime minister initialled a note about Annesley’s atrocities, scribbling the words “very bad indeed”. But Annesley, the son of a Foreign Office official, was just quietly pensioned off, avoiding any public scandal. The documents have been discovered in the Foreign Office archives by historian Paddy Docherty, who described them as “irrefutable evidence that prime minister Lord Salisbury oversaw the cover-up of the atrocious crimes of Annesley”. He told the Observer: “It’s truly shocking.” He said that Salisbury was a leading Conservative figure representing “the high-water mark of the British Empire”, whose defence was “obviously much more important to him than any idea of justice”. Docherty, a historian of empire, with a particular interest in the British Empire, is astonished that these documents have gone unnoticed until now. He argues that their revelations demolish any moral argument for Britain retaining some of Africa’s greatest art. In 1897, after British military officers and others were ambushed and killed by local soldiers, British troops took revenge, exiling the king and plundering treasures now scattered worldwide. Docherty said that, while the Benin Punitive Expedition is often presented as “justified”, evidence in the Foreign Office archives proves that the invasion was planned for years. The British Museum alone holds more than 900 bronzes created from the 16th century onwards. Last month, Jesus College, University of Cambridge, became the first UK institution to officially repatriate a Benin bronze, a cockerel. Restituted works will be displayed at the Edo Museum of West African Art in Benin City, being designed by Sir David Adjaye. A consortium of European museums has agreed to loan back hundreds of bronzes, and the British Museum has been working alongside the Legacy Restoration Trust in Nigeria on a major archaeology project linked to it. Docherty’s discoveries will be included in his forthcoming book, Blood and Bronze: The British Empire and the Sack of Benin, to be published by Hurst Publishers in December. In the acknowledgements, he pays tribute to Ekang as a victim of the British Empire: “She stands in for all those harmed by the British Empire with no hope of justice, and I dedicate this book to her.” He said: “After lying hidden in the archives for over a century, the truth about Annesley and his reign of terror in the Niger Delta is revealed for the first time. [He] spent 18 months as British consul in Old Calabar from December 1889, during which he terrorised local people.” The previously unseen documents include an 1891 letter sent to the prime minister by George Turner, a Sierra Leonean employed as consular clerk, who wrote that Annesley would “imprison all those who were obnoxious to him”. Turner was chained to an iron pillar for having irritated him on the night of the rape. He was within earshot of Annesley’s quarters and recalled an assault sparked by accusations that Ekang had taken a soldier’s cap. Annesley had her brought to the consulate and Turner heard a sergeant announce: “The consul says, whoever feels inclined to cohabit with a woman must come upstairs.” Turner also said: he heard: “the poor girl dragging herself down the stairs, crying bitterly”. “The soldiers came down and made it a matter of talk and laughter how [they] actually cohabited with Ekang, the consul himself assisting to hold her down.” Docherty also found sworn testimonies about other atrocities. Archibong, king of Calabar, stated: “My house was broken into by Consul Annesley’s soldiers. My wives and female servants beaten.” The documents show that Major Sir Claude MacDonald, who took charge of the British administration of the Niger Delta in 1891, objected to Annesley’s conduct and had a fellow officer take sworn statements, including Ekang’s. In an internal letter, MacDonald concluded: “Consul Annesley seems to have acted in a most unjust, harsh &amp; unwarrantable manner.” Previously unseen documents include a note initialled by Lord Salisbury from his private secretary: “It will be a good thing if Annesley retires. There are some very nasty stories about his proceedings.” Yet, Docherty said, “nowhere in the papers does anyone suggest that Annesley should be prosecuted. It was covered up. That’s why nobody has written about it until now.” Dan Hicks, author of The Brutish Museums: The Benin Bronzes, Colonial Violence and Cultural Restitution, is a curator at the Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, which holds about 150 Benin objects that he believes should be returned. Last week, he published a report introducing guiding principles for transparency about these collections. Hearing of the latest revelations, he said: “Increasingly, we’re learning about the sheer brutality of the Europeans in Africa in these periods. This detail that’s been highlighted in the archive is obviously shocking.” The British Museum said: “The devastation and plunder wreaked upon Benin City during the British military expedition in 1897 is fully acknowledged by the Museum and the circumstances around the acquisition of Benin objects explained in gallery panels and on the museum’s website.” • This article was amended on 22 November 2021 to make it clear that it was Jesus College, University of Cambridge, which became the first UK institution to repatriate a Benin bronze.There has been traffic here for millennia, from the Roman legionaries who marched from Londinium to Camulodunum to the speedsters who now reportedly race against police cars at night. But part of the A12 in north-east Essex may finally find some peace if plans to transform a 2½-mile stretch into a country park come to fruition. Work is due to start in 2027 on a bypass between the villages of Marks Tey and Kelvedon, west of Colchester, creating a six-lane road linking Ipswich and Harwich to London. Campaigners say the old four-lane road should be rewilded, as happened with a segment of the A2 near Gravesend, which became a Cyclopark in 2012. That site is now used by Olympic gold medallists Beth Shriever – also BMX world champion – and mountain biker Tom Pidcock. Rosie Pearson of residents’ group Better Braintree – Together, said: “We have just had two weeks of Cop26 and heard talk and promises about preventing climate change. Here is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to rewild the current A12, while retaining access for the few residents directly on the route. A linear park would allow cycling, horse riding and dog walking. We should make some amends for the countryside we are about to destroy with the new road and the air pollution this will cause.” Michaela Longo’s house is 30 metres from the existing A12, and hers would be one of half a dozen households stuck between two dual carriageways if both remain in use. “It doesn’t bear thinking about,” she said. “At the moment, we have long tailbacks, and in summer the pollution is very bad. We have farmland behind us, which is lovely, but that’s where the new road will go. If the traffic at the front from the old road was gone, I could deal with traffic at the back.” Some members of Essex county council support the plan. Green party councillor Paul Thorogood said rewilding the section would “in a small way mitigate” damage caused by losing “valuable natural habitat in a county that is fast being concreted over”. Ross Playle, a Conservative councillor, said turning the old Roman road back into “a route more favourable to walking would be entirely fitting.” The consultation process began this month, and archaeologists have made more than 2,000 investigations, finding prehistoric, bronze age and Roman artefacts. A county council spokesman said it “welcomes suggestions, such as a country park, which would enhance the environment and mitigate climate change impacts”. But Tony Mack, the retired engineer who was largely responsible for creating the Kent Cyclopark, says the journey is likely to be a long one. Mack, 80, a member of the Southend Wheelers club, heard about plans for the A2 bypass in 2003, and began writing to anyone who might be able to help create a cycling paradise. “It took me 10 years,” he said. “Kent county council told me: ‘We’re losing £600,000 a year. We need another park [to maintain] like a hole in the head.’” He set up a forum to demonstrate that the idea was popular, and formed a new cycling club so British Cycling could support the project. It eventually contributed £600,000. Then came £1m from Sport England – “they turned us down at first but we lobbied them” – and more funds from the Homes and Communities Agency, Kent county council and the Colyer-Fergusson charitable trust. Now the Cyclopark has a 2.9km road circuit, a BMX track, mountain bike trails, a skateboard park, an open air gym and more. Mack said: “I knew that a road circuit wouldn’t be enough. I wanted a playground; I wanted mountain bike trails and a disability unit. And it’s all really accessible, just off the A2.”If I hear the phrase “a fish rots from the head down” in relation to the sleaze allegations assailing the Conservative party once more, I think I’ll scream. As will my wife. There we were, listening to Any Questions when the Labour MP Barry Gardiner spouted this ubiquitous nonsense. “No they don’t – they start rotting from the bloody intestines, you stupid man,” she rebuked the radio. And the science is on her side. Where the phrase derives from is open to conjecture; the Greeks, the Chinese and the Turks are all cited as possible sources. But just type the phrase into Google and prepare to be overwhelmed by examples. I was rather taken, though, with another Labour MP who asserted boldly that the fish rots from the head up, which is an altogether more surreal and beguiling concept. (I was equally taken by a protester at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow who complained bitterly that the delegates had “kicked the most important issues into the short grass”. Again an interesting concept.) Finally on sleaze, I was pleased to be reacquainted with an old friend, courtesy of Andrew Neil, urging the abolition of the House of Lords. “It went from a bunch of hereditary thickos to a bunch of snollygosters who bought their entry.” That delightful word is US slang for an unprincipled politician who cares more for personal gain and seems to be the mot juste for our times. I recently saw a headline that stopped me in my tracks: “Boris is courting political disaster by trying to guilt us into going green.” Nouns being turned into verbs is still one of my many grievances, but I really do think this one is an absolute stinker and that whoever perpetrated it should hang their head in shame. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistIt cracks itself wide open to the audience; it hits them in the face. The Wife of Willesden – Zadie Smith’s terrific adaptation of Chaucer, gloriously staged by Indhu Rubasingham and triumphantly embodied by Clare Perkins – is shot through with the spirit of its heroine, who leaps across the centuries to proclaim what she thinks it is that women really really want. The spectators are squeezed by the action before a word has been spoken. Robert Jones has redesigned the auditorium so that it is partly a cabaret space with some of the audience seated at tables in a pub, based on the Sir Colin Campbell opposite the theatre in Kilburn High Road. Jones is aiming to create “that infamous sticky carpet feeling”. Light bounces off shelves of bottles; the publican wears a leopardskin top and big gold hoops; the punters – from church and temple and mosque and schul and utter godlessness – jostle to tell their stories. The play began as a monologue celebrating Brent, the London borough in which the Kiln is based, where Smith grew up and where her first novel, White Teeth, is set; Crystal Condie appears as, among other characters, Smith (headwrap, big specs, velvet voice), chiding herself for cultural appropriation. Still, the main – well – thrust is women’s right to a shout and a raunch. The tale told by the Wife of Bath (here, Willesden) is moved from the court of King Arthur to 18th-century Jamaica, but the more lengthy prologue, in which our heroine describes how she bamboozled her five husbands and kept their peckers up, is extraordinarily close to the original – with added twerking. Anything that sounds particularly modern – or particularly lewd – is likely to come pretty much straight from the 14th-century text. That line about private parts not just being there to piss from? Chaucer. That bit about our heroine having any man – tall, short, black or white – she fancies? More than 600 years old. Perkins – whose intensity in Lynn Nottage’s Sweat three years ago must have left scorch marks at the Donmar – is tremendous. She delivers Smith’s nimble rhyming couplets at high velocity while powering her way across the stage in scarlet (that’s Chaucer too). She’s not alone. The monologue has expanded into a play in which Chaucer’s quick descriptions are made into tiny snapshots. The dodgy Pardoner becomes a charity bucket collector. When holy men – Jesus among them – are cited, they appear with brassy haloes made from golden metal trays held behind their heads. Everything is on-the-hop, vivacious. As a Ms of Bath – I was born there – I’m not sure I absolutely agree with the wife that what women want is to rule the roost, but I loved hearing her say so. The Royal Court have made a mess of things with their big new play. And have kept on making things worse. The opening of Rare Earth Mettle was overshadowed by a row about the name of the central character: a greedy billionaire called Hershel Fink. Apparently no one noticed this might be thought an antisemitic stereotype until it was pointed out by “members of the Jewish community”. The theatre apologised unreservedly, acknowledging “unconscious bias”, and changed the name to Henry Finn. “Unconscious”? I’d have thought you’d have to be in a coma not to realise that the name might be a little bit Jewish. Twice over. Now there is the play itself. Which is one of the dullest I have seen this year. It is a mystery that no one realised this before it opened; surely the anti-dull community might have pointed it out? It is doubly strange, for the playwright, Al Smith, has an impressive record. In what may be the dying gasps of BBC radio drama (now challenged by cuts) he has provided a series of incisive plays, Life Lines, based on emergency ambulance calls. These are everything the flabby Royal Court satire is not. Short, immediate, fresh, cutting. Rare Earth Mettle – the tricksily punning title should be a warning – makes you feel every minute of its more than three-hour length. The plot hinges on a potentially interesting wrangle between differently tainted parties interested in procuring the rights to extract lithium from salt flats in Bolivia. The billionaire wants to use it to make environmentally friendly fuel (good) and a lot of money (bad). An NHS doctor wants to put lithium in the water supply in Stockport in order to boost the residents’ mental health. Performances are more lively than the dialogue. Arthur Darvill is energetically goofy; Genevieve O’Reilly is delectably poised. Yet neither character has any real undertow: they seem to exist only to debate each other. As if to deflect the possibility of solemn lecturing, Hamish Pirie directs with strenuous larkiness. Moi Tran’s design is flat cardboard cutouts. Characters perform robotic funny dances between scenes. A joke about mistranslation is stretched out till it snaps. As was my patience: theatrical incarceration (even in an admirably mask-compliant theatre like the Royal Court) is harder in these Covid times. Star ratings (out of five) The Wife of Willesden ★★★★ Rare Earth Mettle ★★ The Wife of Willesden is at the Kiln, London, until 15 January Rare Earth Mettle is at the Jerwood Theatre Downstairs, Royal Court, London, until 18 DecemberThe Liberal Democrats will target only one of two forthcoming byelections in Conservative-held seats, the party’s leader Ed Davey has revealed, as he said both his party and Labour should focus their campaigns “where they think they can win”. Davey said that he would not make any formal “deals or arrangements” with Labour over how the parties approach the contests, despite pleas for greater cooperation between them. However, he suggested his party would not be putting significant resources into the London seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup, where Labour is the main challenger. He said that his party would instead be concentrating on North Shropshire, the safe Tory seat vacated by the resignation of Owen Paterson following his official rebuke over lobbying. While rejecting calls for a pact, Davey said Labour and the Lib Dems had the same goal of removing the Conservative government. “What I see is a party led by Keir Starmer, who shares our view – that we’ve got to remove Boris Johnson from 10 Downing Street,” he said. “They will campaign in areas where they think they can win and we’ll campaign in areas that we think we can win. We have to manage our resources carefully. It’s no secret that we haven’t put all our effort into some byelections. We certainly want to make our case in North Shropshire.” North Shropshire is an ultra-safe Tory seat with a majority of more than 22,000. The Lib Dems came a distant third at the last election, but the party believes local election results this year show it is now the main challenger. Insiders said there had been no discussions with Labour, but predicted both sides would “organically” recognise that they stood the best chance in different seats. Labour sources said the party would contest both seats. But the party has a bigger membership base in London, which can be deployed to help its campaign in Old Bexley and Sidcup, where the Tories are defending a majority of almost 19,000 in less than two weeks’ time. Anything other than a Tory win in both seats would be a huge shock, but the Lib Dems believe they can put up a decent challenge in North Shropshire after overturning a 16,000 Tory majority in the Chesham and Amersham byelection in June. Despite the fact that the North Shropshire byelection was triggered by the sleaze row, Davey said that “health, health, health” was actually the main local concern his party would be focusing on. “I’ve already been there twice and I’m going there a third time this weekend. And we will be ensuring that some of our best campaigners are there. You know parties put resources where they think that there’s a chance, however difficult. This is definitely tougher than Amersham and Chesham. But in the circumstances, with the Conservatives in serious trouble, with Johnson under pressure in a way he’s never been in his premiership, and the fact that we’ve got some momentum locally with a fantastic candidate, I think, why not? “Ambulance waiting times are the first thing that comes up on the doorstep. Health is top of the issues, and it’s ambulance waiting times, it’s A&amp;E problems, hospital problems and access to GPs. They’re really coming up on almost every doorstep.” Concerns over the lack of coordination among progressive parties were raised by a council byelection in West Devon last week. The contest took place in the constituency of former attorney general Geoffrey Cox, who was criticised for voting as an MP while he was in the British Virgin Islands advising its government over allegations of corruption. The Conservative council candidate won by a single vote from Labour, after a big increase in the Green vote. The seat had been held by the Lib Dems. Some figures within Labour and the Lib Dems have called for more explicit cooperation and electoral reform. Officials in both parties pointed out, however, that such an agreement could never be enforced at local level. “Pacts of non-aggression don’t have great reputations,” said one senior Labour MP.Armed police with water cannons and a low-flying helicopter have faced off against indigenous villagers brandishing sticks and bows in the latest clash over land rights in Paraguay, a country with one of the highest inequalities of land ownership in the world. Videos of Thursday’s confrontation showed officers in riot armour jostling members of the Hugua Po’i community – including children and elderly people – out of their homes and into torrential rain. Tractors then tore down the thatched wooden cabins and ripped up crops from the surrounding land, which is claimed by a Mennonite soybean farmer. Later in the day, police armed with submachine guns briefly allowed a Guardian reporter and Mario Rivarola, a craftsman and community organizer, into the ruined village. Stalks of maize lay in the churned-up mud. Clothes, flip-flops, half-finished meals and broken bed-frames were strewn about. A pair of scrawny kittens wandered among the flaming wreckage. “This is another blow against indigenous peoples,” lamented Rivarola, whose relatives had lived in the village. The surrounding land is valuable, with fertile soil, a river and a paved road on hand. But it also has a spiritual and environmental importance, he said. “The graves of our grandparents are here,” Rivarola explained, adding that the community had returned 10 years ago to occupy their ancestral land. “We want to recover its history and preserve the forest that remains.” At the Cop26 conference in Glasgow earlier this month, western leaders agreed to give indigenous peoples at least $1.7bn to support their crucial role in protecting the world’s carbon-dense forests. Of the record 227 environmental and land defenders killed worldwide in 2020, a third were indigenous, with Colombia, Mexico and Brazil topping the list of the deadliest countries. Also in Glasgow, over 100 countries – including Paraguay, after some hesitation – promised to end deforestation by 2030. But a wave of rural evictions in Paraguay this year demonstrates the challenge in converting these agreements into concrete action to halt agribusiness from advancing into Latin America’s surviving forests – and dislodging their inhabitants. Paraguay’s forests – especially in the parched Chaco region to the west – are vanishing faster than perhaps anywhere else on Earth, say researchers. Severe flooding, historic droughts and uncontrolled bushfires have made headlines in recent years. Between May and June this year, as the Covid-19 pandemic raged, at least seven native communities across the country were forcibly removed from their homes. In September, Mario Abdo Benítez, Paraguay’s conservative president, approved a law doubling jail sentences – to up to 10 years – for those found guilty of illegally occupying private land. And this November alone, five indigenous and small farmer settlements were destroyed by police, leaving hundreds homeless. More than a hundred human rights campaigners gathered in Asunción, Paraguay’s capital, branded such evictions an “express violation” of Paraguay’s constitution and international treaties. “There’s a direct relationship between these evictions and climate change,” said Guillermo Achucarro, a climate policy researcher with Base-Is, a thinktank. Agriculture is Paraguay’s largest single contribution to global heating – accounting for about half of the country’s emissions of gases like carbon and methane – followed by deforestation. “The people who deforest and emit greenhouse gases are the big landowners,” Achucarro added. “Most of them are soybean planters and cattle ranchers. They’re the same people that control the police and use them to kick out indigenous and campesino communities.” In Paraguay, land is concentrated in fewer hands than anywhere else in the world, according to the World Bank. Just 2% of people own over 80% of farmland. Paraguay’s delegation to Cop26 included several agribusiness representatives but no indigenous people. Along with Venezuela and Bolivia, Paraguay was initially among the only Latin American countries not to sign the historic agreement to end deforestation within a decade. It then backtracked amid a public outcry. “It was shameful,” said Achucarro. Indu, the state institution responsible for safeguarding Paraguay’s 19 native peoples, did not respond to requests for comment. Asked how he felt among the destructive aftermath of the eviction at Hugua Po’i, Rivarola was silent for a while. “Powerless,” he finally said. “But sooner or later we will win this land back, the territory of our ancestors. We’re not going to give up the fight because of this.”Sajid Javid has said he was racially abused almost every day at school when he was growing up, as he urged the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) to “take a long, hard look at themselves” over racism in the sport. The health secretary was asked about the crisis at Yorkshire County Cricket Club, after the stark testimony last week of the former cricketer Azeem Rafiq about his treatment at the hands of fellow players. Javid said he had been horrified by the leaked report that emerged from the club this month, which suggested the behaviour Rafiq had been subjected to was “banter”. At the time, Javid said “heads should roll” over the handling of the issue. “It really just shocked me that in this day and age, the people doing this report would have these views, that somehow being called ‘P***’ was banter. It’s not, it never has been,” he told Sky News. Javid said that “when I was growing up, I was called P*** nearly every day at school. I didn’t like it then, I don’t like it now.”. He added: “I think the good news is our country has come a long, long way since then, but clearly not every institution in this country has taken that journey.” Rafiq told MPs on the culture and sport select committee that the P-word was used against him “constantly” and that players of Asian backgrounds were told to sit near the toilets and called “elephant washers”. Javid, whose parents migrated to the UK from Pakistan, accused Yorkshire County Cricket Club of being “stuck in the dark ages” in its approach. The club’s chair, Roger Hutton, as well as two members of the board, resigned after the backlash over a decision not to take any disciplinary action against those involved, which resulted in sponsors withdrawing their support. Javid acknowledged a process of change at the club had begun, with a new chair, Lord Patel, installed, but said “the ECB should be doing its job to ensure that this is taken seriously throughout cricket in the UK”. Asked whether the government should intervene in some way, Javid said he remembered meeting the ECB when he was culture secretary and being told what they planned to do about racism but “many years later, look at what’s happening, look at what’s been made public”. “I don’t think the ECB has taken this issue very seriously: I think they need to take a long, hard look at themselves and now it’s the real test for them, and let’s see if they can pass it,” he said, underlining the fact that culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, took the issue very seriously. Rafiq received an unreserved apology from the cricket authorities, in a statement that acknowledged “racism and discrimination is a blight on our game”.Manchester United have confirmed the departure of Ole Gunnar Solskjaer and said they are looking to appoint an interim manager to the end of the season. Solskjær’s fate was sealed at an emergency board meeting on Saturday night after the team’s 4-1 defeat at Watford. He gave an emotional interview to the club on Sunday in which he said: “I’m going to leave by the front door, because I think everyone knows I’ve given everything for this club.” Eyes welling with tears as he discussed Michael Carrick taking temporary charge while an interim manager is sought, he said: “I’m becoming emotional now because he’s top, they’ll be fine. I’ll watch them and support them.” United’s statement announcing his exit said: “Ole will always be a legend at Manchester United and it is with regret that we have reached this difficult decision. While the past few weeks have been disappointing, they should not obscure all the work he has done over the past three years to rebuild the foundations for long-term success. “Ole leaves with our sincerest thanks for his tireless efforts as manager and our very best wishes for the future. His place in the club’s history will always be secure, not just for his story as a player, but as a great man and a manager who gave us many great moments. He will forever be welcome back at Old Trafford as part of the Manchester United family. “Michael Carrick will now take charge of the team for forthcoming games, while the club looks to appoint an interim manager to the end of the season.” Mauricio Pochettino, the Paris Saint-Germain manager, could be a candidate to take over in the summer. He was coveted by United during his tenure at Tottenham but the timing was never right for him. He has, though, never played down the prospect of being interested in United and it is understood he would not do so now. PSG, who have no desire to change manager mid-season, activated a one-year option on Pochettino’s contract over the summer after he was linked with an emotional return to Spurs. His deal runs to June 2023 but an agreement allowing him to leave could be possible at the end of this campaign. Despite PSG being 13 points clear at the top of Ligue 1, having played a game more than their closest challengers, Pochettino has been heavily criticised for his team’s performances. He said last Wednesday in an interview given to newspapers including the Observer that he was still living in a hotel in Paris, with his wife, Karina, remaining in the family home in London. Solskjær had been allowed to continue despite a 5-0 hammering by Liverpool and a meek 2-0 reverse against Manchester City, but the loss at Vicarage Road was a step too far for the club’s owners. They felt Solskjær had earned the right to be given a final chance to turn things around after the most recent international break but concluded change was needed after the desired reaction was not seen at Watford. Solskjær’s assistants Mike Phelan and Kieran McKenna are staying. “This club means everything to me and together we’re a good match, but unfortunately I couldn’t get the results we needed and it’s time for me to step aside,” Solskjær said. United’s minimum target is to qualify for the Champions League. The team are well off the title pace despite the summer signings of Jadon Sancho, Cristiano Ronaldo and Raphaël Varane, who has barely played since early October because of injury, and are six points from fourth place. “I’ve been backed,” Solskjær said. “The board and the owners have backed me in [terms of] bringing good people in, good players in and I think, or I know I leave this club with a better squad. The environment is fantastic, it’s an environment I’m proud of leaving.” Solskjær took over in December 2018, initially on a caretaker basis, and last season the team finished second in the league and as runners-up in the Europa League. United’s board spent time discussing Solskjær’s future after the defeat by Liverpool and stood by him after shows of support from Sir Alex Ferguson and the directors Ed Woodward and Richard Arnold.19 December 2018 United name Solskjær caretaker manager a day after sacking José Mourinho. The Norwegian had extended his contract at Molde earlier in the month. Pundits aren’t convinced. “Is this where United are really at?” asks Robbie Savage. “Really, the biggest club in the world appointing an interim boss who manages Molde?” 22 December 2018 United beat Solskjær’s former club, Cardiff, 5-1 in his opening game. He then becomes the first United manager to win his first five games in charge since Sir Matt Busby in 1946, and is named manager of the month. “Honestly, I’m a little bit against individual team awards for a team sport,” he says. “We want to move up the table and this is the start of it.” 28 March 2019 After winning 14 out of 19 games, Solskjær signs a three-year deal as permanent manager. “This is the job that I always dreamed of doing, I’m beyond excited.” Ed Woodward: “Ole brings a wealth of experience. He’s the right person to take Manchester United forward.” United go on to finish sixth. 26 July 2020 At the end of a season of solid, mostly unspectacular progress, United finish third – just the second time United have secured a top-three finish since Sir Alex Ferguson retired. They reach the semi-finals in the League Cup, FA Cup and Europa League, but fall short in all of them. 4 October 2020 United lose 6-1 at home to Tottenham. “We have contributed a lot to our own downfall, but to explain is quite difficult,” says Solskjær. “It’s the worst day of my career as Manchester United manager and the worst day for all of them as United players. But we’ve bounced back before.” Later in the season, having failed to make it beyond the Champions League group stage, they lose the Europa League final to Villarreal. A title challenge fades, but they finish runners-up on 77 points and register a brilliant 9-0 February win at Southampton. 4 July 2021 Solskjær signs a three-year contract extension, with an option for a further year. Woodward: “We are more confident than ever that, under Ole’s leadership, we are heading in the right direction.” 18 September 2021 United win 2-1 at West Ham to set a record for being unbeaten in 29 Premier League away games. 24 October 2021 United lose 5-0 at home to Liverpool. Solskjær calls it his “darkest day” as a manager. “But I have come too far to give up. I am not built that way. This is the lowest I have been but I accept the responsibility, that is mine and mine going forward.” 6 November 2021 Pressure builds again after a one-sided 2-0 loss in the Manchester derby. Bruno Fernandes says United’s players need to “look in the mirror” because they are “not at the same level” as City. “We have to speak less and do more. We have to change because this has happened many, many times already.” Roy Keane adds: “Man United are in a bad place. There’s a way out of it, but is Ole the man to do it? Huge question marks … Ole has to look at himself in the mirror and go, ‘I need to do better here.’” 20 November 2021 Solskjær takes United to Watford, where they lose 4-1. “It is difficult to explain,” he says. “We are in a very bad moment. We have a lack of momentum and we are in a very bad period … But I believe in my staff, my players and myself.” United hold an emergency board meeting, where his fate is decided. 21 November 2021: Official confirmation that Solskjær is out.Boris Johnson faces calls for an inquiry into treasury minister Lucy Frazer and claims of an “untenable” potential conflict of interest involving a £15bn government contract with a firm headed by her husband. Frazer moved to the Treasury in September and discloses her husband, David Leigh, is the boss of recruitment firm Alexander Mann Solutions (AMS) in the latest list of ministerial interests. The firm has a seven-year public sector resourcing contract with Crown Commercial Service, an executive agency of the Cabinet Office, overseeing the supply of temporary government workers through 351 agencies, including workers to the Treasury. It emerged last year the firm had supplied six workers to HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) or the government-owned Revenue and Customs Digital Technology Services Ltd who were on tax avoidance schemes known as disguised remuneration. These schemes typically involve a loan that is unlikely to ever be repaid and avoids income tax and insurance. Sarah Olney, the Liberal Democrat MP and a member of the loan charge all-party parliamentary group, said: “It is extraordinary that the financial secretary to the Treasury was appointed to this role, when her husband is the boss of the company that holds a £15bn framework contract to supply temporary workers, including to the Treasury and to HMRC. “It is hugely embarrassing that contractors have been recruited via the public sector resourcing process who have used disguised remuneration arrangements while working for HMRC. HMRC says its suppliers must ensure the tax compliance of workers. So what action have they taken in this situation? There should be an investigation into all of this, including the clear and untenable conflict of interest that clearly exists.” Leigh was appointed chief executive of AMS in November 2019. The firm only earns a proportion of the revenues from its multibillion-pound government contract. In a previous list of ministerial interests published in May when Frazer was solicitor general, it was stated: “The attorney general’s office has put in place arrangements to ensure that the solicitor general is not involved in issues relating to that framework and that no conflict arises.” Disguised remuneration schemes are controversial because of the pursuit by HMRC of 50,000 workers who use the scheme for about £3bn in unpaid taxes. The schemes were sold as complying with tax laws to a range of workers, included nurses and social workers, and many faced ruin. The government introduced some reforms, but campaigners said they were not sufficient and tens of thousands of people still face the loan charge. HMRC introduced the loan charge legislation in 2016 so it could pursue the unpaid taxes. Steve Packham, spokesperson for the Loan Charge Action Group, said: “It beggars belief that at the same time that many contractors face life-changing bills due to the loan charge, contractors using the same kind of schemes were being recruited to HMRC through the contract overseen by AMS, whose CEO is the husband of the new financial secretary to the Treasury. It’s yet another extraordinary part of the ongoing loan charge scandal. “HMRC are all too happy to take action against individual workers, what action have they taken against their own suppliers and agencies, who they say must ensure tax compliance for all supplied workers?” The government said: “The minister has complied with the requirements set out in the ministerial code to the satisfaction of the independent adviser. This interest was declared as far back as 2019 and was considered by the independent adviser on ministers’ interests. The contract in question is managed independently by HMRC and was awarded prior to the appointment of the minister – and prior to her husband’s employment with the company in question. Arrangements are in place to ensure there is no conflict of interest and the minister has made no decisions relating to the contract in question since taking up the role.” AMS said: “AMS does not condone any tax avoidance schemes and contingent workers are required to comply with all applicable tax laws.” The firm works with HMRC to conduct regular audits to ensure compliance with tax laws.Jason Reitman takes the reins of the franchise that his father, Ivan Reitman, launched. And theirs is not the only DNA that’s shared between this film and the 80s original. Various supernatural entities and a sizeable chunk of plot are either worshipped or pillaged, depending on the level of pre-existing audience goodwill. The film’s main appeal is not what it appropriates from other Ghostbusters pictures, but that it’s a nostalgic nod to the Spielbergian family adventures of the same period. A vigorously John Williams-influenced score by Rob Simonsen elicits an almost Pavlovian feelgood response from viewers of a certain age. The casting of Stranger Things star Finn Wolfhard brings a similar resonance for a younger audience. He plays the older of two siblings who discover their dead grandpa’s secrets when they are forced to move to his spooky, run-down farm.On a recent November morning, more than 20,000 western monarch butterflies clustered in a grove of eucalyptus, coating the swaying trees like orange lace. Each year up to 30% of the butterfly’s population meets here in Pismo Beach, California, as the insects migrate thousands of miles west for the winter. Just a year ago, this vibrant spectacle had all but disappeared. The monarch population has plummeted in recent years, as the vibrant invertebrates struggled to adapt to habitat loss, climate crisis, and harmful pesticide-use across their western range. Last year less than 200 arrived at this site in 2020 – the lowest number ever recorded – and less than 2,000 were counted across the California coast. But ahead of the official annual count that takes place around Thanksgiving, early tallies show monarchs may be thriving once again across California. The rise has sparked joy and relief, but the researchers, state park officials, and advocates say that doesn’t mean the species is safe. Even with the exponential increase, the population is still far short of once-normal numbers. It’s still unclear whether the butterflies are making a dramatic comeback or will continue to decline. “The takeaway is that the migration isn’t gone, which some people really feared last year,” says Emma Pelton, the senior conservation biologist for the Xerces Society, an organization dedicated to protecting pollinators and other invertebrates. Between 4 million and 10 million butterflies once graced the California coasts before dropping to just over a million at the end of the 1990s. In the decades that followed, the population plateaued at about 200,000. Then, in 2017, the numbers crashed to fewer than 30,000 butterflies at the annual counts. Monarchs are resilient and adaptive but they continue to face challenges. This year’s uptick is small when put in perspective with past population levels, but “the good news is that it is not too late”, Pelton adds. A remarkable migration There’s still a fair amount of mystery surrounding the western monarchs and their incredible annual migration. Each year, they follow a celestial compass and head west from the Rocky Mountains to the coast. Remarkably, each generation of butterflies often returns the same groves along the coast each year, sometimes even a particular tree, without ever having been there before. Generally, they arrive in California around November and disembark in the spring, heading east as the weather warms. A separate population of monarchs spends the winter in Mexico, coming from Canada and the eastern United States. Their dedication to routine makes them easier to count each year. But the process isn’t exactly simple, especially when the numbers are low and they are harder to spot. In the Pismo Beach grove, which usually hosts the largest gathering, there are three state parks officials tasked with tallying them before the Thanksgiving count that relies on help from volunteers. Armed with binoculars, butterfly counters estimate the numbers based on clusters that can be seen in the branches, roughly 50ft (15 meters) from the ground. California state parks has partnered with advocacy organizations to produce a welcoming environment for them. That means planting more of the non-native eucalyptus trees, which the butterflies love to roost in. The reasons behind this sharp increase remain a mystery. Monarchs that live in the west tend to have three or four generations each year, each with a different role to play in the migration that can span thousands of miles, and there are opportunities at each stage for big shifts. But what’s driving their precipitous decline is clear. Their historic habitats in grassland ecosystems across the US are being destroyed. Commercial agriculture is eating away at their range which is increasingly laced with deadly pesticides. And, susceptible to both fluctuations and extremes in temperatures, monarchs are vulnerable to climate change. That’s partly why they are considered a so-called “indicator species” revealing the devastating toll taken on other insects and ecosystems. “The butterflies are just very adaptable and strong,” David James, an entomologist at Washington State University who has spent decades studying the species says. “But they are giving us a warning too – and we need to take heed of that,” he adds. “Their decline is going to affect other organisms.” ‘There’s still time to act’ The butterflies have also felt the impact of extreme heat, fires, and drought, as well as the severe winter storms on the California coast where they spend the winter. “Some of those storms have ripped the trees out and thrown butterflies to the ground,” James says. But he also believes last year’s extremely low numbers may have been the result of dispersion, not necessarily death. “When we only had 2,000 overwintering at the traditional sites, at the same time there were many reports inland in San Francisco and the LA area of monarch butterflies reproducing in people’s backyards and parks and gardens throughout the winter,” he says, noting that this spread makes them tricky to count. But even if last year’s low numbers can be attributed to behavior changes, that’s still a sign climate crisis is causing problems. “They are indicating to us that things are going wrong,” James says. Individuals can make a difference by planting native nectar plants, including the milkweed that monarchs lay their eggs on and limiting the use of pesticides. Members of the public can also volunteer to monitor monarchs across the west. And, according to Xerces’ Emma Pelton, the promising numbers show that small changes can have a big impact. “The main message to me is that there’s hope,” she says, noting the way monarchs have inspired the public to reimagine how they see insects and the role that everyone can play in their conservation. “The insect apocalypse narrative and the very real biodiversity crises that we are facing, those can feel really dark” she says. “But the issue is not intractable and we can make a difference. There is still time to act.”When historians look back on this period, one of the things that they will find remarkable is that for a quarter of a century, the governments of western democracies slept peacefully while some of the most powerful (and profitable) corporations in history emerged and grew, without let or hindrance, at exponential speeds. They will wonder at how a small number of these organisations, which came to be called “tech giants” (Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Microsoft), acquired, and began to wield, extraordinary powers. They logged and tracked everything we did online – every email, tweet, blog, photograph and social media post we sent, every “like” we registered, every website we visited, every Google search we made, every product we ordered online, every place we visited, which groups we belonged to and who our closest friends were. And that was just for starters. Two of these companies even invented a new variant of extractive capitalism. Whereas the standard form appropriated and plundered the Earth’s natural resources, this new “surveillance capitalism” appropriated human resources in the shape of comprehensive records of users’ behaviour, which were algorithmically translated into detailed profiles that could be sold to others. And while the activities of extractive capitalism came ultimately to threaten the planet, those of its surveillance counterpart have turned into a threat to our democracy. Some of the powers the companies wielded were relatively familiar, basically just contemporary manifestations of older kinds of industrial power: monopolistic domination of certain markets. But future historians will also note that some powers acquired by the tech giants of the early 21st century seemed genuinely novel. They included: the power to transform the public sphere by the algorithmic curation of our information feeds; the ability to silence the most powerful politician in the western world by suddenly banning him from company platforms; and the power effectively to render people invisible by delisting them from Google searches. Democracy’s long slumber ended in 2016 when two political earthquakes shook the political world – the Brexit vote in the UK and the election of Donald Trump in the US. Although both shocks were indicators of a deep malaise in liberal democracy, they were widely – but wrongly – attributed to social media. There’s no doubt that technology played a role in the upheavals of 2016, but anyone who attributes such seismic shifts just to the operations of tech companies hasn’t been paying attention to the recent history of either capitalism or democracy. In fact, blaming tech provides a convenient way of ignoring the deeper causes of the turbulence. Despite that, the focus of media and public attention has largely been on the power and role of tech companies in our societies. The years since 2016 have seen flurries of activity – antitrust lawsuits; Senator Elizabeth Warren’s presidential campaign; congressional hearings; a major investigation by the US House of Representatives; leaks from inside the companies; sensational media revelations (the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Facebook’s role in facilitating genocide in Myanmar, YouTube’s role in radicalising mass shooters etc); probes by competition authorities in the UK, the EU and elsewhere. By some counts, there are at least 70 such actions under way around the globe at the moment. In the US, for example, nearly 40 states have launched competition lawsuits against Google and the Department of Justice is pursuing one against Facebook. In Europe, the European Commission has filed competition and other charges against Amazon and Google, while a number of other tech companies have been suing Apple over its alleged anti-competitive behaviour in the management of its app store. To date, however, we’ve seen little in the way of tangible, effective curbs on tech power. Sensational media revelations or political slogans such as “Break Them Up” may create headlines and engender fevered discussion, but they are not a substitute for radical regulatory intervention or legislative action. And although US congressional hearings have improved of late, they have too often just been yelling matches in which grandstanding legislators summon tech executives for castigation. That’s not to say that there haven’t been some serious interventions by various authorities. Whopping fines for corporate transgressions have been levied on Facebook and Google, for example. In Google’s case, the European Commission has imposed a total of $9.5bn in fines on the company since 2017. The problem is that there’s little evidence that even such massive penalties constitute a serious deterrent for such insanely profitable companies. To give just one example. In 2012, Facebook was subjected to a consent decree by the US regulator, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), in which it undertook always to obtain its users’ consent before sharing their information beyond established privacy settings. After the Cambridge Analytica scandal, the FTC ruled that the company had violated that decree and fined it $5bn, the biggest penalty it had ever levied. And the immediate result of this news? Facebook’s share price went up – from $201 to $205! The task of bringing these kinds of corporations under public control is a truly gargantuan one. As anyone who has worked in government knows, industrial regulation is hard for liberal democracies. First, it requires political will, which in turn requires public concern and popular support. Second, it needs vision and new ideas about how to extract the benefits of technology for society while minimising the harm that comes from the unrestrained corporate power that controls it. And third, it requires legislative determination and staying power, because structural change in a democracy takes a long time. All of these basic requirements have been absent in the decades when the tech giants were growing into their present dominance. Which means that democracies are now playing catch-up and, at worst, chasing horses that have long since bolted. * * * In recent times, western governments have belatedly become converts to the idea that “something must be done” about tech power. Whether they understand the nature and scale of the task is debatable. To those who are sceptical about governments’ capacity to bring about structural change, the stock riposte is that since democracies have dealt with this kind of challenge before, they can do so again. After all, in the closing decade of the 19th century and the early years of the 20th the American republic took on the great industrial trusts assembled by the Rockefellers, Morgans, Carnegies and Vanderbilts and brought them under some kind of democratic control. But this was only possible because there was widespread public concern about the trusts’ manifest abuses of their consolidated power, concern that had been stoked by a formidable amount of investigative reporting by writers and journalists such as Ida Tarbell. This public concern was transmuted into political pressure. Three of the four candidates in the 1912 US presidential election, for example, ran on platforms that were deeply hostile to such accumulated industrial power. In contemporary democracies, however, no political party campaigns on a platform like that, for the simple reason that voters don’t seem to be all that interested in tech power. That’s not entirely surprising: public understanding of digital technology is limited by its formidable complexity. More importantly, because the internet and the services that run on it have become intimately interwoven with people’s everyday lives, they have become dependent on it, a dependence that has been vividly underscored by the pandemic. So although opinion polls may report that people are concerned about tech power, their behaviour tells a different story – that they suffer from what psychologists call “cognitive dissonance”: the stress that comes from continuing to do something that is contrary to what you believe to be right. This is the source of the “privacy paradox” that grips social media users, who fear (rightly) that their privacy is undermined by the services, but nevertheless continue to use them. High-minded disdain for such contradictory behaviour is unfair and counterproductive, because it ignores the power of the network effects that keep people locked into online platforms. Try telling a grandmother who uses Facebook to keep in regular touch with her grandchildren in Australia that her concerns about privacy are hypocritical. What critics of social media conveniently overlook is how much “ordinary” people value these “free” services, even as they may harbour suspicions about the ethics of the companies that provide them. Politicians in liberal democracies, with their gaze permanently fixed on electoral cycles, know this only too well. The Australian government had a sharp reminder of it last February when Facebook blocked news to its users in the country amid a dispute over a proposed law that would force it and Google to pay news publishers for content. After a few days, a settlement was reached, involving changes to the proposed legislation. This was predictably followed by disagreement about who blinked first – Facebook or the government? The inescapable conclusion, though, was that the democratically elected prime minister who would ban access to, say, Instagram (a Facebook property) has yet to be born. Sanctimonious criticism of social media users’ lack of moral fibre is unfair also because it attributes to them more agency than they actually possess. Most people imagine that if they decide to stop using Gmail or Microsoft Outlook or never buy another book from Amazon then they have liberated themselves from the tentacles of these giants. But the penetration and connectedness of networked technology is such that the only way of avoiding the tentacles of tech power would be to go completely off-grid. * * * Three years ago, an intrepid journalist named Kashmir Hill conducted an interesting experiment to see if she could avoid using Amazon, Facebook, Google, Microsoft or Apple services. “Over six weeks,” she reported, “I cut them out of my own life and tried to prevent them from knowing about me or monetising me in any way – not just by putting my iPhone in a drawer for a week or only buying local, but by really, truly blocking these companies from accessing me and vice versa. I wanted to find out how hard it would be – or if I could even do it – given that these tech giants dominate the internet in so many invisible ways that it’s hard to even know them all.” The results of Ms Kashmir’s experiment were fascinating. She demonstrated that our lives now run on a technical infrastructure that is owned, operated and controlled by a handful of giant corporations, from which there is currently no escape unless you plan to hibernate. But perhaps the most sobering outcome of the experiment was the extent to which almost every digital service we use is underpinned, in one way or another, by Amazon’s cloud-computing service, AWS. And in a way this may help to explain why western governments are so chary of taking on tech giants, particularly Amazon. For it turns out that even the security services of major democracies are using Amazon Web Services (AWS). Just to take a couple of examples, the CIA has been using it since 2014 and recently it was revealed that the UK’s spy agencies have given a £500m-plus contract to AWS to host classified material to boost the use of data analytics and “AI”. GCHQ led the procurement of this high-security cloud system, which will also be used by MI5 and MI6 as well as the Ministry of Defence. Of course, these arrangements are accompanied by the usual soothing official bromides – alles ist in Ordnung and so on. But it does make one wonder how keen a future British government might be to impose stringent competition regulations on its new partner in national security. The USP of liberal democracies is that they are governed by the rule of law. But legal climates change over time and so it has been with judicial attitudes to monopoly power over the decades. The first anti-monopoly statute was the Sherman Anti-Trust Act, passed by the US Congress in 1890. The act was crafted to prevent the concentration of power into the hands of a few large enterprises to the disadvantage of smaller enterprises. And it gave the US Department of Justice the authority to take action against offenders. Crudely put, in the view of the act, “big equalled bad” and this shaped competition enforcement and thinking over the next half century. But, as with most major statutes, consistent action proved increasingly difficult over succeeding decades as new industries evolved and circumstances changed. Then, in 1978, came a landmark book, The Antitrust Paradox, by a distinguished American jurist, Robert Bork. Bork provided a scathing critique of how the Sherman Act had become dysfunctional: originally aimed at protecting competition, it had increasingly been used to protect weak and uneconomic competitors, a perverse outcome for the US economy. Instead of focusing on corporate consolidation (ie size), Bork proposed that the prime focus of antitrust action should be consumer welfare, which in practice meant protection from unfairly high prices. The fact that over a period a corporation had grown very large was not in itself problematic, so long as there was no evidence that it was harmful to consumers. Big no longer automatically meant bad. What no one could have known in 1978 was that Bork’s view would provide a get-out-of-jail card for tech firms that grew into giants but could not be accused of harming consumers by raising prices, because their products were “free” (Google, Facebook, Twitter) or super-competitive (Amazon). The freedom that this gave to tech companies was memorably articulated by the Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel in his Zero to One manifesto: “Monopoly is the condition of every successful business,” he wrote, and “competition is for losers”. The conventional wisdom embodied in The Antitrust Paradox may have explained the somnolence of democratic regulators when the companies were expanding. At any rate, it could have reduced their appetite for action at a time when it might have been more effective. In that sense, perhaps the most significant development of the past few years came in 2017 when a young graduate student named Lina Khan published a remarkable article in the Yale Law Journal. In a way, its title – Amazon’s Antitrust Paradox – with its echo of Bork’s landmark book, should have given the game away, because it mounted a head-on challenge to the conventional wisdom that regulation should focus on consumer welfare. Khan’s argument was that a company shouldn’t get a free pass just because it makes its customers happy. Benefiting from the slumber of regulators as it grew, Amazon had amassed structural power over increasing parts of the economy. It had unparalleled amounts of data on its customers, was commercially very aggressive and its massive logistical and warehousing infrastructure enabled it to wield power greatly disproportionate to its actual market share. In that sense, it had come to resemble the railroads that John D Rockefeller and his fellow titans controlled in the 1890s. “The thousands of retailers and independent businesses that must ride Amazon’s rails to reach market,” Khan wrote, “are increasingly dependent on their biggest competitor.” Just like the bad old days in fact. Her article garnered more than 140,000 hits, which made it “a runaway bestseller in the world of legal treatises”. The question was, would it, like Bork’s book four decades earlier, change the conventional wisdom on antitrust? Early indications are that it has. Khan was one of the leading figures who guided the investigation into monopoly tech power conducted by the US House of Representatives’ antitrust subcommittee. Then in November 2020 Joe Biden was elected president and in March 2021 he made Khan the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, the federal agency whose principal mission is the enforcement of civil US competition law and the promotion of consumer protection. Other indications of the change in the regulatory climate came with Biden’s appointment to powerful positions of tech critics such as the Columbia legal scholar Tim Wu and Meredith Whittaker, the woman who organised the 2018 walkout at Google, when about 20,000 employees protested against how the company handled alleged sexual harassment. These are important changes because the tech giants are all US companies and the federal government is the only public authority that can make deep structural changes in the industry. Other jurisdictions, most importantly the EU, can force changes in the way the companies operate on their territories, but only the US government can make Google divest itself of YouTube or force Facebook to set Instagram and WhatsApp free. These changes in the Biden administration are good news because they suggest that the slumbering democratic giant has finally woken up. But they’re only the beginning of what could be a long process. The last big competition case in the US, when the government tried to have Microsoft broken up for abusing its monopoly power over the PC operating system, took more than four years from launch to conclusion and ultimately failed. There’s little in the current plethora of analogous suits and actions to suggest that they will be any quicker to produce results. Years ago in his book The Confidence Trap, the political theorist David Runciman pointed out that democracies are congenitally complacent, hooked as they are on the dangerous belief that – given enough time – they can muddle through just about anything. With the climate crisis, the costs of that complacency are now becoming clear. The existential question for liberal democracies is whether that also holds for curbing the power of big tech. John Naughton is an Observer columnist and co-founder of the Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy at Cambridge University and the chair of its advisory boardOlga Tokarczuk became more widely known to English-speaking readers with the 2010 translation of Primeval and Other Times, a multigenerational fable of 20th-century life in a Polish village overseen by four angels. But it was the digressively discursive Flights, a mix of memoir and invention themed around travel and the body, published in her native Poland in 2007 but only translated into English 10 years later, amid fashionable Anglo-American impatience with novelistic norms, which has done most to make her name on both sides of the Atlantic, where her 2018 Nobel win was generally greeted with enthusiasm instead of the “who?” that tends to be reserved for feted European grandees. Readers of Flights might have been surprised when Tokarczuk’s Nobel lecture distanced herself from the autofictional vogue in favour of the empathetic virtues of omniscient narration, but she clearly isn’t a writer to be pinned down. Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the Dead, the next of her books that was translated (she has published 18), was an existential noir written fast to keep her in funds while she was embroiled in the research for her latest release, a sprawling historical-theological picaresque that was first published in Polish in 2014 and now comes heroically rendered into English by Jennifer Croft. Set during the second half of the 18th century, comprising about 300 shortish present-tense segments with archly functional intertitles (“What Elżbieta Drużbacka Writes to Father Chmielowski in February of 1756 From Rzemień on the Wisłoka”, say, or “Meanwhile…”), it toggles between dozens of characters in several central and eastern European states to tell the story of Jacob Frank, an elusive Jewish mystic hailed as the Messiah by a breakaway sect in what is now Ukraine. We follow a growing band of adherents to his new religion, a mix of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, as they embark on a cross-border hunt for territory in which to live free from persecution – from Jews as well as Roman Catholics, whose clergy gladly accept his dangerously (and treacherously) juiced-up claims about what is inside the Talmud. Part of the novel is told through the retrospective testimony of Jacob’s schoolmate, Nahman, a tobacco-trading rabbi who serves as his not-always-trusted fixer. Jacob’s dead grandmother Yente also occasionally turns up to oversee events as her body crystallises in a cave where, in the future, a band of Jews will hide from the Nazis. As Jacob’s power grows, so too does his extravagant sense of seigneurial privilege over his adherents – not only sex on tap, but breast milk too – which means he’s rarely above suspicion. With more than a third of the novel to go, he’s jailed as a heretic, with plenty of twists to come. It reads like the wildest invention, yet isn’t, and while the novel’s absence of authorial hand-holding can be taxing, more challenging still is its vast sweep, as characters drift in and out of focus over the action’s 50-year span. Most destabilising of all is the passivity of the book’s voice, a kind of undeviating poker face that leaves judgment and intent radically open to interpretation. Tokarczuk tells the story with a sufficiently light touch that you’re left unsure whether Frank was a radical thinker, whose doctrinal provocations were of epochal significance, or simply a con artist whose tricks got wildly out of hand. Uncertainty becomes a running gag: Jacob is rumoured to be a Russian tsar, to have two penises and even to be dead, mistaken for a decoy. You suspect the indeterminacy in Tokarczuk’s work, as well as her public critique of her government’s populist ethnonationalism, adds to the controversy that surrounds her in Poland. This particular novel calls into question the permanence of borders as well as other classifications of culture and creed, which means there’s probably something for everyone to dislike; abroad, the stakes may not be as high, but it remains potent. A panorama of early Enlightenment Europe that doubles as an open-minded study in the mysteries of charisma, it is perhaps above all – and aptly – a gargantuan act of faith, a novel in which your reading has barely begun by the time you’ve turned the last of its 900 pages. • The Books of Jacob by Olga Tokarczuk, translated by Jennifer Croft, is published by Fitzcarraldo Editions (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyNana-Kofi Kufuor’s new two-hander opens with an energising exhibition of verbal dexterity – a pacy delivery of two simultaneous monologues, overlapping, interweaving and intersecting. Gillian describes how uncomfortable and out of place she has been made to feel in the M&amp;S store that both characters are, separately, leaving. A blue light flashes. Jelani d’Aguilar, as Reece, mimes being seized and roughly handled by police officers, his friends having legged it. He’s done nothing wrong, he insists, lippily. We are confronted with questions that go to the heart of the action. Are these experiences those of any unconfident young woman; or of any teenage boy from an inner-city comprehensive who finds himself in the wrong place at the wrong time? Or are they the result of racism? Because Gillian and Reece are black, and because no direct comments have been made, it’s impossible to know for sure. This impossibility is an everyday reality for black people in the UK, who also have to deal, daily, with irrational animosity and discrimination, both overt and systemic. As his face is ground into the gravel, Reece tells the officers that Gillian is his teacher, that she can vouch for him. Gillian walks away. Next day, in school, Reece finds her alone in a classroom, takes her keys, locks the door and accuses her of assimilating. Kufuor uses Reece’s anger dynamically, to open up an exposition of black experiences of interactions with white people, collective (eg transatlantic slavery) and personal (Gillian’s attack at a nightclub). The subject is vital, but the structuring becomes mechanistic, veering between drama and polemic. Kufuor keeps the action buoyant by mixing humour and emotion in the dialogue, sharply focused in Dermot Daly’s direction and superbly delivered by Misha Duncan-Barry and d’Aguilar. Kufuor’s play (produced by the Red Ladder Theatre Company) is dramatically uneven, but it is also important. Like Azeem Rafiq’s testimony to MPs, last week, it demonstrates that our society needs to pay attention to voices that are too often ignored. My Voice Was Heard But It Was Ignored tours until 30 NovemberRichmond Park, London Originally created as a deer park by Charles I in the 17th century, Richmond is the least central of the royal parks, but has fast, easy connections by tube and train to central London. It’s also the largest of the parks, covering an area of 2,500 acres, with a varied landscape of hills, grassland and ancient trees, still encircled by the original walls (albeit rebuilt in places). The capital’s largest Site of Special Scientific Interest, the park is home to a rich variety of wildlife, including owls, kestrels and the herds of roe and fallow deer that have grazed the land since 1637. King Henry’s Mound – a bronze age burial chamber – is the place for views stretching all the way to St Paul’s Cathedral. Fishing, golf, horse riding and cycle hire are all on offer. Afternoon tea at Pembroke Lodge, an elegant Georgian mansion, is a great way to round off a visit. royalparks.org.uk Jesmond Dene, Newcastle A historic park in the heart of suburban Newcastle, the Dene is a steep-sided valley, offering a tranquil place to walk that feels miles from the busy city streets. Created in the 1850s by a prosperous businessman, a landscape of weirs, rock islands and a waterfall were sculpted from the river valley that had previously been dotted with water mills. The Pets Corner – home to goats, sheep, peacocks and rabbits – is a big draw for younger children, along with a play area designed for under-eights. The Mill House Café does a nice line in light lunches and homemade cakes, or treat yourself to an upmarket lunch at Peace and Loaf (peaceandloaf.co.uk), a restaurant helmed by Dave Coulson, a finalist on MasterChef: The Professionals. jesmonddene.org.uk Seven Lochs Wetland Park, Glasgow A new nature park just 15 minutes’ drive from the centre of the city, the park’s “kettle ponds” are home to a huge variety of wetland birds, including the grey heron, great crested grebe and majestic whooper swans, that fly from Iceland to over-winter in the park. Kids will love the downloadable activity packs and the “Play Wild” area, while numerous footpaths offer the chance of spotting roe deer and rare butterflies alongside the rich birdlife. The nearest place to refuel is the Glasgow Fort (glasgowfort.com) – an outdoor shopping centre with a clutch of familiar-name restaurants, which is 10 minutes away. sevenlochs.org Ecclesall Woods, Sheffield The largest ancient, semi-natural woodland in South Yorkshire, Ecclesall comprises three separate woods, located in the southwestern corner of Sheffield, close to the border with the Peak District national park. Covering nearly 140 hectares, there are 15km of public bridleways and footpaths, leading off from the JG Graves Discovery Centre (open daily 10-3pm) – named after the philanthropist who helped the Sheffield Corporation buy the woods in 1827. An architecturally striking wooden construction, with a glazed central atrium overlooking a wildlife pond and bird-feeding station, this is the place to start and finish, with maps and other information available, along with hot drinks and homemade cakes in the Woodland Coffee Stop (open Tuesday to Sunday, 10-4am). For something heartier, the Rising Sun (emberinns.co.uk) is a cosy inn nearby, offering classic pub dishes. friendsofecclesallwoods.org.uk Manchester Green Trail The first project of its kind in the UK, the Green Trail is a walking circuit made of 14 routes that circumnavigate the city of Manchester, connecting parks, woodlands and open spaces. There are 14 separate walking trails, with downloadable maps available; some more urban, such as the Whitworth Park to Alexandra Park route through Moss Side, while others are further out and have a properly rural feel, such as Heaton Park to Queens Park. Routes are of varying lengths, with the shortest around two miles, meaning that whatever level of walker you are, there will be a route to suit. gmwalking.co.uk Lickey Hills Country Park, Birmingham Just 10 miles southwest of the city, the Lickey Hills roll out across 524 acres, offering cycling, walking and horse-riding paths and a sculpture trail. It also boasts the best viewpoint in the area – 275m-high Beacon Hill, with 13 different counties visible on a clear day. The park is famous for its trees – the arboretum has 70 different species – while large conifer plantations offer walks beneath Scots pines and Norway spruce, and the Geology Trail takes in the five main rock-types that lie beneath the hills. The Lickey Hills golf course offers 18 challenging holes for adults, and a “tri-golf” course for children, while the visitor centre lends out rounders equipment for family tournaments and has free table-tennis and an adventure playground nearby. After all the activity, the Duck Pond Café (duckpondcafe.co.uk), located at the golf course, offers restorative tea and cake. birmingham.gov.uk Water of Leith Walkway, Edinburgh Stretching for 13 miles from Leith in the northeast of the city to Balerno in the southwest, this riverside walking trails runs right through the heart of Edinburgh, past the Gallery of Modern Art and the Royal Botanic Gardens. Designated an Urban Wildlife Site, the banks are home to more than 80 species of birds, including herons, goosanders and kingfishers, and dotted with patches of ancient woodland. The route can be cycled or walked, with maps available from the visitor centre, located at the halfway point. If the whole route is too much for one day, break the walk with a night at the Bonham (thebonham.com), located close to the river in the city’s leafy West End. waterofleith.org.uk Golden Acre Park, Leeds Six miles north of central Leeds, Golden Acre Park began life in the 1930s as a privately owned amusement park, with a swimming pool and miniature railway, before closing due to the war. Now divided into several different areas, the park boasts the largest heather garden in Europe, wildflower meadows and sandstone rock gardens, along with a tranquil lake that is home to herons, geese and swans. Although there’s no play area, there are flat, family-friendly cycling trails, and the Golden Acre café (open daily, 10-3.30pm in winter) serves up crowd-pleasing cakes and sandwiches, with an outdoor patio if the weather is kind. If it isn’t, the Lawnswood Arms (hungryhorse.co.uk) is a short drive away, offering hearty pub food and a comfortable retreat. discoverleeds.co.uk The Taff Trail, Cardiff The Taff Trail is a 93km way-marked walking route, running from Cardiff’s waterfront to the town of Brecon in the Brecon Beacons National Park. The first eight-mile stretch is a great way to discover the city through its green spaces and parks, while walking along the banks of the Taff – once the city’s main trade artery and now a haven for wildlife. Grey herons and kingfishers are regular visitors, with leaping salmon often seen at Blackweir, where the Blackweir Tavern (blackweirtavernpub.co.uk) makes an ideal stopping point for lunch or a refreshing beer. If you want to explore further on foot, the Bay Trail is a great way to discover the attractions and activities along Cardiff Bay. outdoorcardiff.com Speke Hall Garden and Estate, Liverpool Situated next to Liverpool airport and a stone’s throw from the centre of the city, this riverside estate has over 400 years of history. The picturesque, Tudor timber-framed manor house is surrounded by lush gardens and woodland that runs down to the banks of the Mersey. A great choice for families, with a child-friendly hedge maze, two play areas and an activity trail, the estate is also steeped in history – Stockton’s Wood was once used to hide aircraft from German spy planes in the Second World War. The Home Farm buildings house a café, serving up the Trust’s trademark homemade soups and cakes, as well as Speke’s Volumes – a second-hand bookshop with all profits going to the Trust’s conservation work. Round off the day with a trip to Hale village, home to two cosy pubs (visithalevillage.co.uk). nationaltrust.org.ukThere have been more new businesses formed so far this year than ever. Literally ever. A year ago I wrote about the surge in startups, 12 months later the trend has continued in a big way. According to data from the US Census Bureau analyzed by the Economic Innovation Group, there were about 1.4m new startup applications filed with the government through 30 September 2021. That’s compared with 1.14m during the same period in 2020 and 987 thousand in 2019. Every year before had been significantly less. “With three months left in this unparalleled year, it now seems almost certain that the elevated pace of business formation in 2021 will be sufficient to surpass the record-breaking total of 2020,” the researchers wrote. The news will no doubt leave many with a case of the whys. Why would so many new businesses be formed in the wake (actually during) one of the biggest economic collapses in recent memory? Why would so many people be taking risks at a time when it seems to make more sense to gravitate towards the security of a big government and corporate job? Why would people want to start up a business in an era of economic and political uncertainty? As with most big questions there’s never just one answer. But as a student of small business I can say that there’s certainly a few very specific reasons to explain what’s going on. The first has to do with need. The rise in entrepreneurship isn’t necessarily about the romantic notion of owning one’s business or “changing the world” as so many like to report. It’s more real than that. It’s because 22 million people became suddenly unemployed as a result of the pandemic. It’s because 35 million people struggled to pay their rent and countless others could barely afford childcare. People like to talk about business ownership as a dream but for many during last year’s economic downturn (which still unfortunately lingers), it was an economic necessity to do something to put food on the table. Which is why so many people sold products online, drove Ubers and became freelancers. People did this not to supplement their existing income but to provide income. The second reason is capital. Never has capital been so widely available and so cheap. Thanks to the stock market surge and stimulus payments, household wealth has soared to historic highs. That means that people have more savings to invest in their startups. Interest rates – though likely to increase soon – have remained at historic lows throughout the past 10 years, providing an almost cost-free environment for investors and venture capitalists to risk their money. Other sources of financing – from merchant advances to crowdfunding to credit cards and online lending services – have offered a myriad of choices to the entrepreneur looking for cash. Technology – once a significant investment – has become so cheap that a single Etsy seller can look like and act like an international conglomerate. Websites offering free or low-cost tax advice, email, business formation services and legal services proliferate. The cost of starting up a business has never been cheaper and the capital needed to launch has never been as available. Finally, there are many new opportunities. For someone wanting to start a business, there are many places to throw a hat in the ring. The data shows that accommodation and food services lead the pack in new business applications (a 75% increase from 2019) and when you think about the explosion of home sharing and rental platforms as well as delivery services does this come as any surprise? When you consider the explosion in work-from-home workers do you doubt that professional and administrative services startups have also jumped? Or that in the midst of a housing boom we’re seeing more people jump into the construction field? Or that with supply chain challenges and the pleas for more drivers and space for all those online goods we’re seeing a 74% jump in transportation and warehousing services? And you know all those corporate workers that complained before the pandemic of being so “slammed” and overworked? Turns out many of them had the time to start up online stores (retail trade is up 62%) on Etsy, eBay and Amazon while still holding down those same full-time jobs that were presumably keeping them so busy! All of this is great, but let’s not get too ahead of ourselves Very, VERY few of these new startups will actually become the next big thing. The vast majority will probably never have employees. But it’s still good to see that so many people want to be independent. They want to not rely on a corporation for all of their income. They look for challenges and, in some cases, have a dream of building something that provides not just a job for themselves, but a livelihood for their families. Despite what we read about globalism, big government and corporate monopolies, entrepreneurism is still going strong in this country because the fundamental economic and political structure of our country makes the American dream still possible.Some Pacific countries will have less than a quarter of adults vaccinated by the end of the year, with predictions that Papua New Guinea will take five years to vaccinate just one-third of its population, undermining economic recovery and threatening huge loss of life across the region. The predictions come from modelling released on Sunday by the Lowy Institute, which takes into account factors including access to vaccines, numbers of healthcare workers, urbanisation, topography and vaccine hesitancy to estimate when Pacific countries will hit key vaccine milestones. The modelling reveals a divided region. Papua New Guinea, which is in the midst of a devastating Delta outbreak, currently has around 3% of its adult population vaccinated. Solomon Islands is predicted to have just 23% of its adult population vaccinated by the end of the year, with Vanuatu predicted to have just 29% of adults fully vaccinated. “Looking at what was happening in PNG and the rest of Melanesia shocked me a little bit,” said Alexandre Dayant, the lead author of the model. “According to our model, PNG wouldn’t get to more than 36% of its adult population by August 2026. This is very concerning. It raises a big question: what will happen to countries that are not getting fully vaccinated in the future. Are they going to be the pariahs of this world?” However, many smaller Pacific nations reached almost 100% vaccine coverage months ago, supported by partner nations such as the US, Australia and New Zealand. Palau, in the north Pacific, has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, with more than 99% of its adult population fully vaccinated. The country of nearly 20,000 people is now rolling out booster shots. Similarly, Nauru, Niue, Cook Islands and Tuvalu have close to 100% of their adult populations fully vaccinated. The research also looked at supply of vaccines to the region from donor countries. Australia has committed to provide 11.4m doses – 66% of the region’s supply – with Covax committing 4.5m doses, followed by New Zealand, China, the US and India. “The issue is not vaccine supply, it’s vaccine demand,” said Dayant. “One of the biggest reasons for vaccine hesitancy is misinformation. “Misinformation spread much faster than the virus in the Pacific. One of the big issues in the Pacific is that social media is a key source of information … This undermines the effort that the international community is making to inject the vaccine into people’s arms.” However, Dayant said that messaging in Australia around the safety of the AstraZeneca vaccine, and the fact that huge quantities of it were donated to Papua New Guinea even as health officials cautioned against its use in those under the age of 60 in Australia, undermined confidence in the vaccine in Pacific countries. “Some of them were saying: ‘Hold on, if it’s not good enough for Australian people, why should we take it?’” Many Pacific countries have remained largely Covid-free throughout the pandemic by keeping their borders closed to international arrivals, something that has come at enormous economic cost to tourism-dependent economies. Fiji, one of the largest and most developed Pacific countries, had a very serious Delta outbreak in the middle of 2021, recording more than 50,000 cases in a country of just under 1 million people, and nearly 700 deaths. Just 8% of Fijian adults were fully vaccinated in June 2021, when the outbreak began, but an ambitious vaccine rollout program, and a controversial “no jab, no job” policy, saw vaccination rates skyrocket. As of Friday, 90% of adults in Fiji were fully immunised and more than 97% of adults had received at least one dose. The country plans to reopen quarantine-free travel to tourists from some countries, including Australia, in December.A showboating self-promoter; an overbearing bully; a distraction from his daughters’ careers: all of this and more has been levelled at Richard Williams, the larger-than-life father and coach of Venus and Serena Williams. This crowd-pleasing biopic, starring a grizzled Will Smith as Williams, redresses the balance somewhat with a more sympathetic portrait. It’s worth noting that both the Williams sisters and their half-sibling Isha Price are listed as executive producers. Even so, the film doesn’t entirely shy away from the more difficult aspects of Williams’s personality. Smith is excellent, fully inhabiting the character in one of the only roles to date that has required him to fully shed his habitual gloss of Will Smith charm. Williams’s personality is angular and uncomfortable, shaped by poverty, violence and discrimination. Of course he was never going to be an easy fit within the rarefied circles of the tennis elite. Smith is matched by Aunjanue Ellis, playing wife and mother Oracene Price with warmth and dignity. It’s a very watchable picture, but one that, like the plan that Williams famously wrote for his daughters, feels at times like a checklist of challenges overcome and decisions vindicated.A theatre actor mourning the sudden death of his wife and coming to terms with her numerous betrayals forms a bond with the emotionally shuttered young woman who is hired to drive him during a residency in Hiroshima. That’s the core of a sinuous, looping plot, but this beguiling adaptation of a short story by Haruki Murakami is a languid thing that leaves plenty of space around the central relationships to explore the creative process, professional and personal jealousies and guilt. The latter is something that Yûsuke (Hidetoshi Nishijima, superb), who is directing a multilingual production of Uncle Vanya, and his driver, Misaki (Tôko Miura), find that they have in common. Yûsuke’s cherished car, a glossy red Saab 900 Turbo, is a thing of beauty, but a temperamental beast; Misaki is unfazed by its quirks. Her calm handling of the vehicle impresses Yusuke, as does her discretion. But for all the miles of road they cover together, it’s an even longer journey for either to achieve any kind of healing. With its eddying, fluid score and judicious use of silence, its satisfying layers of storytelling, this is a supremely confident piece of film-making from Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, albeit one that, at three hours long and with a rather Chekhov-heavy second half, will certainly require the right mindset.I’ve had 30 years of trying to do lots of things at once. Now I want to stand and stare a bit more,” says Lulu Guinness from the splendid isolation of her gothic folly in deepest Gloucestershire. “Lockdown also taught me how much you can get done from your phone.” It was during the pandemic that Guinness, 61, with two grown-up daughters, swapped her London terrace for life in the countryside. She recently put the house she bought with her ex-husband Valentine Guinness, from the Irish brewing dynasty, on the market. “At first I saw this place as a getaway. But I’ve moved on.” Guinness, best known for her glossy lip-shaped clutch and vintage-infused handbags, has found the move transformative. Lulu’s Folly, a hexagonal, three-up-three-down perched on the rim of a sheep-dotted valley, is where she now lives and works. Freed from the office commute, she’s had time to go back to her roots and be more creative again. Sketching, painting and embroidering tiny flowers, the ideas have been flowing thick and fast. “After decades of working hard this all feels like a bit of reward. Doing things by hand is good for the soul,” she says, somehow pulling off a mix of Mad Men-in-the-shires glamour in Hunter wellies, a 50s-ish dress and trademark red lipstick. The folly, which she’s stealthily “Lulu-fied” with her vintage bits and bobs, became her haven during a bleak time. In December 2019 her younger brother, Simon Rivett-Carnac, a financier, killed himself at the age of 53. Her mother died shortly afterwards on Christmas Day, a consequence, Guinness maintains, of the shock and trauma of losing her son. “My brother didn’t start suffering from depression until he was in his 40s. He tried to cope with it – he was good at hiding it – but I think he found it baffling. He was successful and generous; he lived for life and friends. That is why people were so shocked.” To promote awareness of male suicide, the family has set up the Riv Trust. “My brother’s death showed that you don’t have to have difficult circumstances – or a bad childhood – to suffer from mental illness,” says Guinness. “That’s why we decided to establish the charity. It helps small projects working in the field of mental health. We want to make people aware that it can affect anyone.” Guinness can discuss the family’s loss with equanimity because she has always talked openly about her own depression. “I was diagnosed after the birth of my first child. Of course, I have bad days, but I’ve become better at dealing with it. Those who know me will tell you that I am good at acting up. I’m more resilient.” And she has always worked. “There was a point when my family questioned whether I should carry on. There were discussions.” But she says her manic depression is part of her creativity. “The only time I’ve ever been a problem for my family was when I tried to come off medication. I’d feel fine and stop taking the pills. And that was terrible. I applaud people who can do things naturally, but it’s not for everyone.” Charities have praised her contribution to lifting the taboos surrounding mental illness. “At first I’d have to warn my parents every time an article came out; they believed that birth and marriage were the only reasons you should appear in the papers.” It was never “about poor me”. What she wanted to do was to reveal the truth behind her polished public image. She produces an old magazine shoot: the designer perching on a chair in her “perfect” Notting Hill house. “The reality is that I probably read that article in a clinic. That’s what I wanted to show. The gulf between reality and an unattainable image.” Country life supplies its own nature cure. “I don’t want to sound whimsical, but flowers are my main love. I’ve always used them to change my mood. Flowers have become my therapy, growing them, arranging them in vases. I’m not a gardener, but my landlady has been very kind. She has taught me a lot,” gesturing to the tulips cascading from vases on stone sills. She’s become a fan of sheep, too. “I’d never given them 30 seconds’ thought before. But in spring I’d chat to the shepherd about the lambs.” Bemused colleagues received daily updates. “Sheep stop you from thinking about anything else. If I’m feeling stressed or sad, I’ll go and see the sheep. It helps me to get out of my head. I was very urban, but I’ve started appreciating nature.” While the rest of us binged on Netflix she listened to books. The wryly dry David Sedaris “got me through a lot; the way he describes family life is so acute that it sometimes makes me wince. You can learn so much from fiction,” she continues, citing Elena Ferrante and Elizabeth Day as recent reads. “What I love is writers who capture the human condition. Who get inside the heads of others. That’s what I am really interested in. It puts things in perspective.” She’s keen to show me the view from the bedroom where pointy, arched windows open on to peaceful views. “I heard Ruby Wax talking about the importance of silence, recently. Here, I have silence – and time to think. Sometimes people assume I’m tired because I’m not talking. It’s not that. I’m basically a recluse, who likes people.” In the early days, she was inevitably asked how she managed to combine bringing up a family with running a business. “The answer was that I didn’t socialise much. Like many of us, I enjoy my own company – and I need time to process my ideas.” I had expected Guinness, with her high-profile following (Bella Hadid and presenter Clare Amfo have been spotted carrying her witty, clutch-able creations) to be rather grand. “Lots of people think that.” Instead, she is funny and direct, if prone to disappear on the odd creative tangent. “I talk – I don’t edit.” Her “grounded-ness” comes from her maternal family, who ran department stores in the northeast. They were Jewish and had lived in Liverpool before moving to Shropshire, where they “became thoroughly countryfied. Being Jewish wasn’t really talked about, you know,” says Guinness, speculating that their reticence was an overhang from the Second World War, when people lived under the threat of invasion. “Many were genuinely frightened; so they didn’t discuss religion. I think that after that it almost became a habit.” Her couture-wearing grandmother introduced Guinness to her love of “old-fashioned, silver-screen elegance… I would spend hours going through her wardrobe: the coats, the handbags, the matching shoes,” she says, smoothing her Elnetted coiffure. “That’s where it all started.” Guinness’s “talented, sporting father” was a commander in the Royal Navy and she had a peripatetic childhood: stints abroad combined with living in the country. “I was brought up to be a Sloane Ranger. Now I’ve gone back to my shopkeeping roots, which is excellent.” It began with a briefcase in 1989. “I wanted to design something for the new power-shouldered female executive – with handy pockets.” But the buyers at Browns and Joseph encouraged her to design something that expressed her colourful, vintage style. Her “life changed” in 1993 when she produced her rose-festooned vase-shaped bag. “It caught everyone’s imagination.” At first she resisted using her married name and called her label Lulu. But she soon found she was fighting a losing battle. “Besides, I had to earn a living.” Like her forbearers, she is a grafter. “People used to assume that because I was marred to a Guinness there was loads of money. That has never been the case.” Her Guinness (they divorced 20 years ago) is a playwright. “I didn’t marry into the royal family you know. I’ve had to work hard.” She has put her name to shoes, jewellery, a Mini. “I’ve done it all. I’m my own worst self-flagellator.” High-street partnerships brought her wares to a wide audience: “I’ve never been interested in the top tier of the market. I don’t have rules. I can’t stand snobbishness,” says Guinness, who has a cult following in Asia where “they appreciate things that are a bit different. We’ve always been the alternative to the It bag.” A turning point came in 1993 when the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum acquired the Florist’s Basket bag. “I felt I could call myself a designer. But in this business, you’re only as good as your latest idea,” she reflects. “Perhaps that’s why I went into fashion without a big plan. It has always suited me to be on to the next thing. I’m terribly inquisitive about what’s now: the zeitgeist, call it what you will. What people want now.” Her most constructive critic is her partner, John Ingledew, a writer and art teacher. “He’s a collector and a collagist, like me. We love being surrounded by ideas. What first struck me about him was his enthusiasm for teaching. He’s an inspirer. I like people who have a mission,” she says summing up her “soulmate” of 16 years. So much has changed since the “pile-it-high” noughties. “It’s no longer about being tied to collections. Now it’s all about small drops. Technology means we can be nimble.” This suits Guinness’s fertile, highly visual imagination: “I can put my ideas into production much more quickly.” She’s a canny networker, using social media – “my creative factory” – to unearth new talent for collaborations. One of her earliest influences was the Surrealist French designer Elsa Schiaparelli. “She worked with emerging talents, like Picasso and Cocteau. I’m not comparing myself with her, but partnerships are the way forward. Not just with young people – someone I’m working with is in their 70s. I’m drawn to makers who can talk about their influences and ideas.” Guinness shows me her latest bag design. The Folly is a portable version of home complete with an “in joke” image of the designer, the red-lipped, contented chatelaine of all she surveys. “A friend came to see me recently. She asked, ‘Are you happy here, because you deserve it. You work so damn hard.’ And I said, ‘Yes, I am.’” The Riv Trust can be contacted at therivtrust.org.uk. If you or anyone you know have been affected by these issues, call the Samaritans on 116 123The owner of Facebook and Instagram is delaying plans to encrypt users’ messages until 2023 amid warnings from child safety campaigners that its proposals would shield abusers from detection. Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire has been under pressure to abandon its encryption plans, which the UK home secretary, Priti Patel, has described as “simply not acceptable”. The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) has said private messaging is the “frontline of child sexual abuse online” because it prevents law enforcement, and tech platforms, from seeing messages by ensuring that only the sender and recipient can view their content – a process known as end-to-end encryption. The head of safety at Facebook and Instagram’s parent company, Meta, announced that the encryption process would take place in 2023. The company had previously said the change would happen in 2022 at the earliest. “We’re taking our time to get this right and we don’t plan to finish the global rollout of end-to-end encryption by default across all our messaging services until sometime in 2023,” Antigone Davis wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. “As a company that connects billions of people around the world and has built industry-leading technology, we’re determined to protect people’s private communications and keep people safe online.” Meta already uses end-to-end encryption on its WhatsApp messaging service and had been planning to extend that to its Messenger and Instagram apps in 2022. It has already encrypted voice and video calls on Messenger. Announcing the privacy drive in 2019, Zuckerberg, said: “People expect their private communications to be secure and to only be seen by the people they’ve sent them to – not hackers, criminals, over-reaching governments or even the people operating the services they’re using.” Meta’s apps are used by 2.8 billion people every day. The tech industry made more than 21m referrals of child sexual abuse identified on its platforms globally to the US National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in 2020. More than 20m of those reports were from Facebook. Davis said Meta would be able to detect abuse under its encryptions plans by using non-encrypted data, account information and reports from users. A similar approach has already enabled WhatsApp to make reports to child safety authorities. “Our recent review of some historic cases showed that we would still have been able to provide critical information to the authorities, even if those services had been end-to-end encrypted,” she said. Patel has been a vocal opponent of Meta’s plans. “We cannot allow a situation where law enforcement’s ability to tackle abhorrent criminal acts and protect victims is severely hampered,” she said in April. The issue is also a concern for Ofcom, the communications regulator tasked with enforcing the online safety bill, which will become law around 2023 and imposes a duty of care on tech companies to protect children from harmful content and prevent abuse from occurring on their platforms. Ofcom’s chief executive, Melanie Dawes, told the Times on Saturday that social media companies should ban adults from directly messaging children or face criminal sanctions. The NSPCC’s head of child safety online policy, Andy Burrows, welcomed Meta’s move. “Facebook is right not to proceed with end-to-end encryption until it has a proper plan to prevent child abuse going undetected on its platforms,” he said. “But they should only go ahead with these measures when they can demonstrate they have the technology in place that will ensure children will be at no greater risk of abuse.”If this was Newcastle United’s Christmas Day come early, it was more Home Alone than the Queen’s speech – thrilling, dizzying and with a lot of collateral damage to pick through at the end. This day, intended as Eddie Howe’s coronation, did not go to script at all – but does it ever at St James’s Park? From the moment on Friday night it was announced that the new head coach had tested positive for Covid and would miss his own welcome party, one suspected this wasn’t going to be the straightforwardly triumphant start that was hoped for. Having known each other for the best part of a quarter-century and coached together for 13 years, Howe and his assistant Jason Tindall had an extraordinary – and socially distanced – beginning to an experience that already promised to be unique. “It’s certainly a first for Ed and myself,” said an exasperated-looking Tindall with some understatement after a game in which he had led from the touchline, frantically making regular dashes down the tunnel to speak on the phone to Howe, who watched on a feed from hotel quarantine. Serving a period of self-isolation is frustrating enough but Howe’s mood during this chaotic afternoon is anyone’s guess. The vast majority of the 52,121 flocking to Saturday’s visit of Brentford were expecting something and they got it, even it wasn’t an instant miracle. The names on fans’ shirts on the streets before the game – Albert 27, Shearer 9 – which weeks ago seemed like nostalgia for a long-lost era now projected newfound optimism. The cover of the match programme was simply a sketch of a suited Howe holding a black and white bar scarf aloft. It was all that needed to be said. As with the relief of Mike Ashley’s overdue exit, a new boss confirmed that the painful Steve Bruce reign really was over. Howe’s first XI delivered a sort of Keegan-lite display, marrying genuine attacking enterprise with jaw-dropping defensive negligence. By half-time, Newcastle had had more efforts at goal than they have averaged per entire game this season – they ended up with 23 in total. When Tindall said post-match: “Everyone needs to attack and everyone needs to defend,” he sounded like an NBA coach and at times, particularly in the first half, it felt as if his players were dragging the surrounding bear pit up and down the parquet of Madison Square Garden with them. These might not have been the near-conquerors of the 1990s but there was a similar sense in the opening 45 minutes that anything could happen. The cliches about the unreasonable demands of Newcastle fans are largely false and even with the team in peril at the foot of the table this is already the start of what they have yearned for: a sense of feeling alive rather than the grubby inertia of recent years. Few are under any illusions that immediate glory is around the corner, a reality accentuated by Grant Hanley’s late winner for Norwich that left Newcastle bottom of the table. Yet as Brentford’s Thomas Frank – looking no less frazzled than Tindall at the climax – put it, “you saw the first signs” of a profound chance of tack. It was “definitely much more front-footed, definitely more aggressive”. At the front of this was Joelinton. His searching cross almost created an opener for Callum Wilson in the third minute and the Brazilian, said to have been reinvigorated by Howe’s energetic training regime, began as if reborn. His drag-back and change of direction just inside his own half to leave Rico Henry floundering was the sort of imagination that has been seen way too rarely by these fans but Henry’s next contribution underlined Newcastle’s problem, with a free header giving Brentford the lead. Joelinton’s equaliser before half-time, his unerring finish a total stranger to the struggles of the past two and a bit years, hinted at the potential for a fresh start. “We’ve seen the quality he has,” Tindall enthused. “He’s going to be a big player for us.” There is still a way to go, with the chance of a potential winner spurned late on as the No 7 took too long to shoot – in contrast with Saint-Maximin’s sublime finish to secure the point, a combination of supreme technique and confidence – but the will was never in doubt. There are no quick fixes but hope has returned. And it means a lot.Depression is more than just dark, or down: it’s unremittingly bleak. Botis Seva’s Blkdog, a dive into the choreographer’s own period of depression, is that too. Its opening scene shows seven hooded, hunched figures barely visible in the gloom, seated at an untouchable distance from each other, faces down and away from us. A lighting rig descends to form a low ceiling that casts more shadow than light. From a murky soundscape of electronic smears and thuds two voices intermittently emerge, one of a child, another of a therapist. Suddenly the dancers slump, knocked sideways by a whiplash beat. Where will this mix of alienation, oppression, memory and interrogation lead? In some senses, to many different places. The dancers scurry into lemming lines that circle the stage, cluster into unstable groups riven by the musical rhythm, or drill themselves into synchronised squadrons. The movement style, often close to the ground, is restless and inventive: beetling runs, cossack squats. Often a solo will stand briefly out from the group, one spotlit figure flailing upon the floor, or shuddering in perfect time to the rattles and scratches of the score. There’s a cardiac resuscitation performed urgently yet coldly upon a supine body, a soulless orgy of simulated doggy sex offered for our pleasure (“give the people what they want”). Later, tricycling figures, playtime costumes and finger-pointing blame-games shift the piece towards the territory of childhood – though that certainly doesn’t banish brutality, both psychological and (with a baseball bat) very physical. Yet if the scenes are different, their means are similar: groups either regimented or ragged, solos signalled by sudden spotlights and sonic switches, actions synched to rhythms, the stage smogged and strafed by lights. Though executed with consummate skill (plaudits to lighting designer Tom Visser and composer Torben Lars Sylvest as well as all seven dancers), the cumulative effect over 80 minutes is a certain relentlessness: taut, technically impressive and hard-hitting – again, and again. Perhaps that’s in keeping with the subject: it is, and will be, a depressingly cruel world. Where does this lead though? Seva gestures towards God (there are tentative hymns at the end); I yearned for a more human face. Touring to The Lowry, Salford (26 November) and The House, Plymouth (1 December)The EU has urged David Frost to end his “political posturing” over negotiations on the Northern Ireland protocol and accept that he cannot undo Brexit. The European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič was commenting after Lord Frost, the UK’s Brexit minister, called for an injection of “more urgency” into the talks aimed at solving the dispute over checks and controls on goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. The comments by Frost and Šefčovič on Sunday suggest the two sides are as far apart as ever, dashing hopes raised by the cabinet minister Michael Gove’s remarks that he was “confident” article 16, which would suspend some or all of the protocol, would not have to be triggered. Šefčovič told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show he was surprised by Frost’s call for urgency because “sometimes I have the feeling that in our meetings I’m the only one who pushes for urgent solutions”. He said the EU had offered a solution on 30 June to one of the main issues over medicine supplies but that the UK was still dragging its heels. “I remember very well Lord Frost telling me that what is very important for him is not only content but also process and therefore I was waiting [to see] if we can deliver on that solution jointly. And I have to say that [as of] today this is not the case. “I don’t think that it will solve the most pressing issue for the people of Northern Ireland and therefore we might be acting alone to make sure that the Northern Ireland people have the medicines they need,” he said. On the removal of checks down the Irish Sea, Šefčovič reiterated that the EU had already made proposals to cut customs paperwork by half and eliminate 80% of the checks on food. In an article in the Mail on Sunday, Frost said those “solutions don’t deal with the problems”, pointing out that 200 retailers had stopped delivering to Northern Ireland and Marks &amp; Spencer had withdrawn its entire click and collect range for Christmas “because of the uncertainties in delivery timetables”. “There’s a simple solution. Goods which both we and the EU agree aren’t going to leave Northern Ireland should not be treated as if they were moving from one country to another – because they are not,” he said. “But at the moment the EU says it is impossible. I urge them to think again.” Pressed on this point, Šefčovič said it was impossible to remove all surveillance of goods as the EU needed an “overview” on movement of goods entering the single market. “We cannot undo the Brexit,” he said. Frost’s comments on Sunday suggest the UK’s approach has not changed despite an apparent shift in tone two weeks ago and that triggering article 16 remains a possibility. “The current problems with the protocol go to the heart of our territorial integrity, of what it means to be one country and one market. They will not just disappear,” said Frost. “I still hope the EU can show the ambition needed to fix the problem by agreement. If they can’t, of course we will have to safeguard our position in other ways.”So, what next? Ole Gunnar Solskjær has gone, and with him perhaps Manchester United’s most visible problem, but a sentimental appointment wasn’t the only issue holding the club back. United are institutionally dysfunctional and it will take more than a change of personnel in the dugout to change that. Solskjær was a fine appointment as caretaker, perhaps the last good decision Ed Woodward made as United CEO. The return of a popular club legend, the sunshine man whose rays of decency could dispel the acrimony of the latter days of José Mourinho’s reign, made sense. The problem was that rather than waiting until his short-term contract expired, Woodward gave him the job on a permanent basis. Even by the end of that season, as United won only two of their final 12 games, it was apparent a mistake had been made. Solskjær’s teams lacked the sophisticated organisation that differentiates the very best from the rest. The board could have made an assessment with the benefit of as much evidence as possible; instead they allowed themselves to be carried by emotion. That lack of organisation was never resolved. Solskjær could set up a team to defend deep and strike on the break, which brought a series of notable results in big games, but they struggled to break down well-organised defences. Of course, when you have a squad as loaded with talent as United’s, you will score goals most of the time, but the draw at West Brom, the home defeat by Sheffield United, and perhaps most especially the draw against Villarreal in the Europa League final were indictments. This season, the flaw was compounded by the signing of Cristiano Ronaldo, another nostalgia-driven investment, another reminder that United as a club see themselves as being less about the production of effective football than saleable content. This is a squad put together less for utility than celebrity. Suddenly it was no longer possible to sit deep and counter because there was a chugging goal-machine who had to be selected up front. With a great midfield, as Real Madrid showed with Casemiro, Luka Modric and Toni Kroos, it is (just about) possible to compensate for Ronaldo and his unwillingness or inability to press. Scott McTominay, Fred and Nemanja Matic do not constitute a great midfield. The inertia of the United directors, their hope that everything would somehow come good, that a functioning team could somehow be constructed out of some famous people and some 1990s memes, means they have missed out on the best available candidate, Antonio Conte going the way of Thomas Tuchel and Mauricio Pochettino (when he joined Paris Saint-Germain). United’s statement said they will appoint an interim manager until the end of the season. But then who? Zinedine Zidane, Pochettino, Brendan Rodgers, Julen Lopetegui? Would Laurent Blanc be up for it? Could Ralf Rangnick be persuaded to leave Lokomotiv Moscow and take over as sporting director? And that is probably the biggest issue. The United board might not be so susceptible to each passing tide if there were somebody there who grasped modern football. The most damaging aspect of the Solskjær appointment was probably that it meant plans for a high-profile sporting director were shelved. John Murtough was appointed as football director in March but his visible impact has been minimal. With a figure who could guide the overall outlook there might be a coherence to signings, rather than a series of half-baked half-theories vaguely pursued before the allure of nostalgia and glamour takes over again. This is a squad that has been expensively assembled, but it lacks coherence and whoever is appointed will have to face that first of all – and that means sales as well as signings. Why was Paul Pogba not offloaded when he might have generated a fee? It’s not necessarily a criticism of them as players, but why are Donny van de Beek, Eric Bailly, Juan Mata, Alex Telles and Diogo Dalot at the club if there was no place for them in Solskjær’s plans? But the biggest problem is Ronaldo. It’s all very well him scoring late goals to salvage games against teams such as Villarreal and Atalanta, but why do those games need salvaging? Zidane left Real Madrid at the end of his final season there, since when Ronaldo has seen off Max Allegri, Maurizio Sarri and Andrea Pirlo before Solskjær: that’s five coaches in three and a half years across three clubs. How can he be fitted into a modern system? The truth is that, for all his goals, he probably can’t. While he remains at the club, whoever the manager is will be compensating for his presence and that militates against an integrated philosophy. His status dwarfs all else and that leads to a compunction, not to use him as an impact sub or only in matches in which United are likely to dominate the ball, but to play him in the majority of games. And the effect of that ripples out, reducing opportunities for Jadon Sancho (a £73m signing this summer who has seemingly been sacrificed on the altar of Ronaldo), Mason Greenwood, Marcus Rashford, Anthony Martial, Jesse Lingard and Edinson Cavani. What United need, fairly obviously, is a coherent structure. They need to build a system that presses, that allows the team to function as a unit, both going forwards and backwards. But achieving that with this squad, with a board forever adding new gaudy accoutrements, is far from straightforward. And while the present situation is clearly filtered through a modern lens, the sense of frustration, of stars never quite making a constellation, has been, beyond the Busby and Ferguson eras, fairly standard at Old Trafford since the second world war. Only three managers have won the league with United. Without major changes throughout the club, it may be a long time before there’s a fourth.What if, rather than defeating an opponent in the ring, a fighter was in fact doing battle with their personal demons? What if sporting triumph could be viewed as a metaphor? Well, quite. The directorial debut from Halle Berry approaches the bloodied, battered tropes of the fight movie genre so earnestly, it’s almost as if she simply isn’t aware that the plot is chock full of the biggest cliches since the slow motion shot of blood spraying across the canvas. Berry also stars, playing a disgraced mixed martial arts fighter now working as a cleaner who hides liquor among her detergents and stoically accepts the abuse of her boyfriend/manager. It’s not badly made, necessarily, just entirely unsurprising. The saving grace is British theatre actor Sheila Atim, arresting and intriguing in a key supporting role. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 24 NovemberCorruption leads to excess. Excess leads to downfall. Phyllida Lloyd’s production of Verdi’s Macbeth, currently revived at Covent Garden, feels like a cautionary tale for our times. When the Thane of Cawdor takes on a second job as assassin, he and his even more dangerous queen celebrate their coronation by dressing head to foot in vulgar gold: the ultimate in bad-taste bling. Such hubris never ends well. Gold is seen as the ultimate prize here. It glimmers in the darkness of Anthony Ward’s designs. Macbeth and his wife make their proclamations from a gilded cage; Duncan arrives on a golden horse, while later, Macbeth sees a spectacular vision of golden kings riding golden horses – Scotland’s future monarchs, but none of them his own offspring. Verdi’s 1847 opera (heard in his 1865 revision) is a conundrum. It takes Shakespeare’s outline but uses few of his words, relying instead on a pretty clunky libretto from Francesco Maria Piave. An antihero is at its centre; there’s no love interest in the plot (Macbeth and his wife are much more interested in power than each other) and, Macduff aside, there’s no juicy role for a tenor. Verdi turns the focus instead on Lady Macbeth, giving her the best music, spectacularly sung here by the Italian soprano Anna Pirozzi. She’s every inch the diva, in total command, vocally and dramatically. It’s a tremendous performance. The strength of her drive is in fine balance with Simon Keenlyside’s superstitious, doubting Macbeth, who morphs into a bloodthirsty tyrant, desperate to kill to stay in power. Keenlyside last sang this role in 2011. His voice has broadened and thickened over time and more vibrato has crept in, but its mahogany quality lingers, particularly when Verdi at last gives him a decent aria, Pietà, rispetto, amore, as he waits to face invading troops. Those troops arrive in one of the many spectacular set pieces that pepper this production, the vast chorus swarming on to the stage as citizens, soldiers, exiled Scots (Patria oppressa is beautifully done) and, of course, witches. Conductor Daniele Rustioni directs some particularly fine playing from the orchestra’s brass at the chilling opening of Act 3, when their magic potions are brewing. The witches are not confined to blasted heaths in this production (revived by Daniel Dooner), but turn up everywhere in Macbeth’s court, reflecting Verdi’s view that “they make up a real character and one of the greatest importance”. But my goodness, they do get in the way sometimes, joining the other symbolic irritants of the gilded cage, the bleak snow and an ever-present, large, modern, hoop-shaped tap that can never wash away all that blood. There’s no clue in Beethoven’s string quartet No 16 in F, Op 135 that it would be his last completed work. Only in the profound, hymn-like third movement is there any sense of a drawing down of blinds. The rest positively sparkles with mischief and daring. This is Beethoven unconscious of his fate, testing the boundaries of classical form, which, when played with the technical assurance of the Brentano String Quartet, feels positively revolutionary. In last Monday’s lunchtime concert at Wigmore Hall, the US players set about the pared-back writing of the first movement, with its tiny, two-part themes and snatches of pizzicato, as though setting a riddle. That sense of mystery continued in the second movement, where Beethoven plays mind games with quirky, uneven rhythms. The thick, slow-moving texture of the infinitely sad lento was beautifully handled before we were back into the playground of possibilities that is the last movement – all wit and invention, immaculately played. The Brentanos had opened with another final work: Mendelssohn’s Quartet No 6 in F minor, Op 80 from 1847 (when, incidentally, Verdi was writing Macbeth). Mendelssohn wrote it as a requiem for his beloved sister Fanny, who had died earlier that year. He too was to die before the year was out, aged only 38. The cry of anguish that is the first violin’s initial entry set the mood of melodic melancholy that continued into the motoric, almost obsessive cross-rhythms that drive the second movement, given a suitably blenched quality here. Yet even in his deepest pain, Mendelssohn could not help but write beautiful music, inserting a delicious cantabile melody into the Adagio, played with exquisite care by the Brentano Quartet. That care continued into the finale, this time keeping a tight rein on the rising despair, but even their disciplined playing could not overcome the anguish of the closing bars. You can hear this concert on Radio 3 tomorrow at 1pm, catch up on BBC Sounds, or watch it streamed on the Wigmore Hall website. Highly recommended. Star ratings (out of five) Macbeth ★★★★ Brentano String Quartet ★★★★★ • Macbeth is at the Royal Opera House, London, until 30 NovemberCovid booster jabs are likely to be offered to all adults eventually, with the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation already considering the issue, the health secretary has suggested. Sajid Javid urged people aged 40 to 49 to come forward for their third dose of vaccine from Monday, as the offer of a booster is extended to them. “If it makes sense to go further, we will. The latest data shows that the boosters are immensely effective,” he told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show, stressing that he would follow JCVI advice. The UK reported 40,004 new cases of Covid on Sunday and 61 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Just over 450,000 booster jabs were administered, meaning there have been 15m third doses delivered. Publishing its latest recommendation for 40- to 49-year-olds to be asked to come forward for a third jab, the JCVI said last week that “future considerations include the need for booster vaccination [third dose] for 18- to 39-year-olds who are not in an at-risk group, and whether additional booster vaccination [fourth dose] for more vulnerable adult groups may be required.” It said it would provide further advice in due course. Apparently referring to that statement, Javid told Times Radio: “They’ve actually said in their recent advice that’s something they would want to do in any case, to 18 and above.” The JCVI had previously recommended that over-50s and those with health conditions that make them vulnerable to the virus be given a third dose. Government sources suggested a fresh recommendation for younger adults could come within weeks. It follows research published by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) last week indicating that a third dose provides very strong protection. The UKHSA study suggested that protection against symptomatic infection for the over-50s was 93.1% for the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and 94.0% for the Pfizer/BioNTech jab two weeks after a third dose of the vaccine. There are hopes in government that successful delivery of a booster programme – which has accelerated in recent weeks after a slow start – will help prevent the need for tougher restrictions over winter. It is understood ministers have been advised that with cases increasing sharply in mainland Europe, there are two possible scenarios in the coming weeks, one of which involves a sharp increase in hospitalisations and deaths and the reintroduction of restrictions. The other would be the UK benefiting from the higher immunity that has built up since the summer reopening to avoid a devastating fourth wave. It is expected to be several weeks before it is clear which course the virus is taking. Prof Andrew Pollard, director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, told The Andrew Marr Show that he was hopeful about the prospects for the coming weeks, partly because the virus had been circulating more freely in the UK already. “If we look at what’s happening in other countries at the moment, they’re just experiencing the start of another wave of spread of infection,” he said. “And the reason why the virus spreads is a combination of changes in social distancing – whether that’s lockdown measures or mask wearing – plus the immunity in the population. “We’ve actually had some spread going on since the summer, and so I think it’s unlikely that we’re going to see the very sharp rise in the next few months that’s just been seen [in continental Europe] – we’re already ahead of that with this particular virus, the Delta variant.” Asked about the tougher restrictions being imposed in some countries, Javid acknowledged that the winter period was likely to be difficult, but said the government would stick to its “plan A” of increasing booster jabs. “We have long warned that this horrid virus likes the winter, and likes the cold, dark days that that brings, but the one big difference here is our booster programme,” he said, pointing to the fact that 15m booster doses had so far been delivered. “That is absolutely key for us to keep this virus at bay.” He called on people to accept the invitation to have a third dose “because that’s the best way we can look forward to the kind of Christmas that we all want to see”. The government embarked on an advertising blitz last month amid fears the booster programme had got off to a slow start. The government’s plan A for tackling the virus in England, published in its autumn and winter plan, also involves reminding the public to stick to advice on mask-wearing and ventilation. Its plan B – which could be implemented if hospital capacity comes under unsustainable pressure – includes reintroducing mandatory mask-wearing, working from home guidance and vaccine passports for large venues. Boris Johnson initially announced in July that the government would make vaccine passports mandatory for venues including nightclubs, but the government abandoned the plan after vociferous objections from Conservative MPs. Scotland and Wales have introduced vaccine passports.Conservative MPs have had second, third and fourth jobs for years. From time to time, the intersection between some Tories’ idea of public service and their pursuit of money has burst into the headlines. But thanks to an uneasy mixture of low expectations of politicians, a certain deference, and the idea that Tory avarice was part of the natural order of things, most of the people involved have been left alone. Suddenly, though, we seem to be in one of those political moments that is not so much about new revelations as an instant realisation that what was tolerated or ignored yesterday ought to be rejected today. Why the shift? The most obvious explanation is Boris Johnson’s self-described act of “crashing the car” in the Owen Paterson case, and how an attempt to change the rules on parliamentary standards highlighted the contorted ethics of scores of MPs. But there are other reasons, too – one of which is a huge change that is only just starting to be understood. Two years ago, 107 new Conservative MPs were elected, and the views they have and the places they represent are starting to have a fascinating effect on Tory politics. Up until the Brexit referendum, the Conservative party tended to be seen as the enduring voice of the shires and suburbs, speaking for and to those who were either rich or comfortably off, and millions of others who at least aspired to be. When the party had extended its appeal in the past, it was by offering people individual advancement, rather than by economic interventionism – most spectacularly, when Margaret Thatcher encouraged people to own their council houses via the right-to-buy scheme. In that context, if the people at the top of the party made money by fair or foul means, they were only living the dream they offered the electorate at large– not least in the 1980s, when the comedian Harry Enfield invented a ubiquitous character called “Loadsamoney”, and the old Tory vision of the property-owning democracy was joined by the brief dream of millions of people owning and trading in shares. But eventually, something very interesting happened. From around 2012 onwards, in response to Labour’s weakening connection with some of its old core vote, some adventurous Conservatives (the Harlow MP Robert Halfon is a good example) had held out the idea of the Tories somehow becoming a new “workers’ party”, and re-embracing the idea of an activist state. None of this ever cohered into anything solid. But when Brexit broke politics open, and seats in the so-called red wall fell to the Tories, vague hopes of the party acquiring a new support in the post-industrial north and Midlands suddenly became a reality. After Theresa May had already begun to point her party in a more collectivist direction, this huge electoral shift was reflected in Johnson’s promises of “levelling up” and his apparent belief in the power of government. But in retrospect, because the prime minister’s politics are emotional and short-termist, and thanks to both his own wealth and his ties to other moneyed people, he perhaps failed to realise something obvious: that the politics of the red wall might well demand a profound change not just in rhetoric and policy but in Tory behaviour. We now see the results of that oversight. If in solid Conservative seats many people’s feelings about MPs’ interests and ethics are suddenly hostile, you can imagine how so-called sleaze is going down in such new Tory territory as the old Derbyshire coalfield or the Potteries. Over the past 10 days, this part of the current Tory drama has begun to play out in the Commons chamber, as well as the party’s inner circles. Among the 13 Tory MPs who voted against changing the rules governing the parliamentary standards system were the new Conservative representatives of such seats as Hartlepool, Scunthorpe and Newcastle-under-Lyme. Mark Fletcher, the MP for Bolsover (elected in 2019 in a seat represented for 49 years by Labour’s Dennis Skinner), abstained on the vote, but later made a righteous speech in the Commons taking aim at “some senior colleagues on the backbenches” who thought he had not yet understood “how this place really works”. His punchline came with a compelling irreverence: “I think that two years here is more than enough to know the difference between right and wrong.” None of this has yet hardened into factional warfare. But there does seem to be a deepening estrangement between the kind of long-serving, often complacent MPs whose seats tend to be in traditional Tory areas and younger colleagues who have a self-awareness suited to the social media age, and often practise their Conservatism in more challenging territory. As an unnamed Tory recently told the Daily Mail, the former kind of MP thinks that their annual pay of £82,000 “is the basic salary, which they can build up outside Westminster”, while the latter “considers £82,000 all the money in the world”. Moreover, seasoned Tories are often old-school Thatcherites who are sceptical about “levelling up”, whereas many of the party’s new MPs were elected on the promise of government coming to the aid of their areas. The fact that more senior Conservative MPs include a lot of zealous backers of Brexit – think of Paterson, John Redwood or Iain Duncan Smith – gives the story a fascinating twist. When a movement pulls off a revolution, the casualties are often its elders. And so it might prove in this case: our exit from the EU was led by older, rightwing Tories, but has given rise to a younger cohort of Conservatives, many of whose visions of post-Brexit Tory politics are very different from theirs. Where the prime minister sits in all this is a very interesting question: dining at the Garrick, currying favour with older, more privileged Brexiteers, and trying to smooth over the Paterson fiasco with the most trifling of changes to rules on second jobs does not really suggest someone who understands either basic leadership or the challenges his party faces – nor where its future probably lies. Johnson should also be worried about the apparently dwindling credibility of his “levelling up” drive, symbolised by last week’s broken promises on improvements to the rail system and the fact that the government’s social care plans will disproportionately hit pensioners in less well-off places. There is something about the combination of that story and the second-jobs mess that highlights glaring Tory shortages: of working-class voices in the cabinet, any policy as potent and totemic as right to buy – and, even after two years, any real sense of what “levelling up” actually means. The usual caveat applies: Tory woe does not entail a convincing Labour revival. But one modern political truth seems unquestionable. We live in irreverent, rebellious, volatile times – and though senior Conservatives have so far used those currents to their advantage, they may sooner or later find themselves being swept away. John Harris is a Guardian columnistPeople may have died unnecessarily during the Covid pandemic because medical devices were not as effective on people of colour as they were on white patients, the health secretary has said. Asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show whether he thought people had died because oxygen-measuring devices did not work as well on darker skin, Sajid Javid said: “I think possibly yes, yes. I don’t have the full facts.” Javid made his comments as he announced the launch of a review into systemic racism and bias in medical devices to examine why people of colour and women have worse health outcomes. In a partnership with Javid’s US counterpart, the review will look at introducing new international standards to ensure medical devices have been tested on people of all races before they are allowed to be sold. Javid told Sky News’s Trevor Philips on Sunday that Covid had highlighted health disparities. “If you were from a BME background, a third of admissions were from [a] BME background in ICU units at the height of the crisis, and that’s more than double the representation of the population,” he said. Research shows devices such as oximeters, which estimate the amount of oxygen in a person’s blood, work less effectively for patients with darker skin and could have contributed to thousands of unnecessary deaths during the pandemic. “There are research papers already on this and no one did anything about it,” Javid said. “Now, I’m not saying this was deliberate by anyone, I think it’s just it’s a systemic issue potentially, with medical devices and it may go even further than that with medical textbooks, for example.” Writing in the Sunday Times to announce the review, Javid said: “It is easy to look at a machine and assume that everyone’s getting the same experience. But technologies are created and developed by people, and so bias, however inadvertent, can be an issue here too. So questions like who is writing the code, how a product is tested and who is sitting round the boardroom table are critical – especially when it comes to our health. “The pandemic has brought this issue to the fore, but the issue of bias within medical devices has been ducked for far too long. Although we have very high standards for these technologies in this country – and people should keep coming forward for the treatment they need – we urgently need to know more about the bias in these devices, and what impact it is having on the frontline.” The review would also focus on gender bias, covering, for example, how MRI scanners can be made accessible to pregnant or breastfeeding women, he said. Javid, who is the first UK health secretary of colour, will be working with Xavier Becerra, the first Latino to take on the role of US health secretary. The launch of the review comes after Public Health England data showed that deaths from coronavirus among people of colour were two to four times greater than those among the white population in England, according to a paper in the Lancet. A report by the Labour peer Doreen Lawrence last year also found there were thousands of avoidable deaths during the pandemic and made 20 recommendations to improve patient care for marginalised communities. She criticised the government for a lack of action since 2010, when the Marmot review found gaping health inequalities and recommended an urgent national strategy be implemented, including better training and clear government accountability for progress.My friend Lizzie Emeh, who has died aged 44 after a short illness, was a pioneering artist and songwriter who championed the rights of people with learning disabilities in the UK. In 2009 she made history with her debut album, Loud and Proud, becoming the first person with a learning disability to release an album of original songs in the UK. Born and brought up in west London, Lizzie was of Irish and Nigerian heritage. Her parents, Kathleen (nee O’Neill) and Jonathan Emeh, were told she would never walk or talk due to severe medical complications. However, at four years old she proved the doctors wrong, and throughout her life she continued to defy the odds. Music was a key part of Lizzie’s childhood, and she started singing aged 10. From the age of 11, Lizzie boarded at Parkwood Hall cooperative academy, a school for children with learning disabilities, in Swanley, Kent. Her career really started to develop in 1999 when she was discovered by Heart n Soul, a creative arts community based in south-east London. From 1999 to 2007 Lizzie toured with the Heart n Soul Experience across Europe, performed for three consecutive years at Glastonbury festival, and took Heart n Soul Unplugged to Asia. In 2009, she released her debut album, Loud and Proud. It charted her key life experiences and she described it as “eclectic, wide-ranging and with lots of soul”. The album was a rallying call for people with learning disabilities. Lizzie won two national awards for her contribution to music, and she actively encouraged a number of learning-disabled artists to develop careers in the music industry. Lizzie was a charismatic, engaging force of nature on a mission to effect change. She used her success to share her inspiring life story with thousands of people across the UK. She was also part of a groundbreaking research project at the Wellcome Collection in London, called Heart n Soul at the Hub, exploring learning disability, love and human value. A major highlight was performing with Beverley Knight at the opening ceremony of the London 2012 Paralympic Games in front of 80,000 people. Lizzie was a fearless performer, and audiences loved her authenticity, her direct lyrics and the soulful power of her voice. Over the past few years, she had collaborated with the London Symphony Orchestra and released a further three EPs. Lizzie met Eddie Goodman 18 years ago via a mutual friend at the LeeGrove Club, also known as the Tuesday Club, for people with learning disabilities, based in Grove Park, south-east London. They were friends for a long time, got together around 2010, and were married in 2016. Lizzie is survived by Eddie, her sister, Monica, and her brothers, Chris and Eddie.American novelist and short story writer John Edgar Wideman, the first person to win the PEN/Faulkner award for fiction twice, is known for his experimental literary style exploring the African American experience. Eighty years old now, his personal history is full of trauma and tragedy and in this new collection, published 40 years after his first book of stories, there are tales about being Black, being dead and dying, some imagined and some based on his own experiences. Most are preoccupied with the concept of time, whether it’s the life sentence his brother is serving in prison for being an accomplice in a robbery turned murder, the 12 days in which his 15-year-old son was a fugitive after killing another teenager, or the hour and a half that he and his brother spend wandering New York’s Penn station looking for each other. Largely these melancholic stories examine the criminal justice system and how it manipulates and suffocates time: “Prisons trips away time. Leaves your body bare, bones shivering… Time shrivels to routine, repetition. Time inverted. Longer a sentence, less time matters.” One tale, Atlanta Murders, featuring two chickens crossing the road, refers to the murders committed between July 1979 and May 1981 in which at least 28 children were killed. Once on the other side of the road, one chicken ponders the semantics of the term “humanely raised”, which it has seen on packs of chicken breasts. “If you know in advance that you are preparing captive, living creatures to be slaughtered and eaten, how in the world can you raise them humanely?” the chicken asks. “Or does humanely simply mean nothing? Except whatever human beings want the word to mean.” The other chicken never trusted the chicken eaters’ language; always knew it was a chicken. “Funny you put it that way, sir,” says the narrator. “I always knew I was Black.” Wideman doesn’t try to exonerate the incarcerated people he loves or once knew by telling their stories. In fact, in not doing so, he ends up exposing more details about their crimes. These tales create a tapestry of suffering, weaving together different kinds of pain, from the greyness of waiting in line for the microwave in the visiting room to the fluorescent brightness of a cop pressing your body into a city street. The author’s experimental use of syntax works to shift reality, altering each tale’s narrative momentum. The sentences in Art of Story are so sharp they scratch the skin, whereas in Arizona – a letter addressed to American soul singer Freddie Jackson, wherein the narrator praises his song You Are My Lady, which was playing in the car while he drove his son to his sentencing – Wideman’s conversational prose, curious and vulnerable (“When I hear you sing I remember you were there beside me and here I am now beside you”), feels as though it is searching for a nipple. Even in moments of bewilderment, when new questions are painted upon old ones, when Wideman’s stream of consciousness style momentarily mystifies, you are never truly gone, just suspended above a familiar scene, forced to interact with a detail you missed or ignored. This is truly inimitable storytelling. No one writes an American horror story like John Edgar Wideman. • Look for Me and I’ll Be Gone by John Edgar Wideman is published by Canongate (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applySnoop Dogg has packed a lot into his first 50 years. Born again at least twice, first Rastafarian then Christian, everyone’s favourite west coast canine has also been an actor, vintner, TV chef, venture capitalist, actual chef, philanthropist, Bollywood starlet, movie producer, marijuana merchant, sports commentator and esports league owner. Actually, all that happened in the past 10 years. A decade in which, perhaps not coincidentally, he hasn’t scored a single hit. Still, Snoop has saved enough cultural capital to bag a new job at Def Jam, hence this all-star 19th album. (Of course he’s also working on a Def Jam kids’ album.) The Algorithm’s concept is too boring to explain, but thankfully the music isn’t. Uncle Snoop hosts, drifting in and out of most of the album’s 23 songs, sounding less sleepy than on some of his recent efforts. Among the veterans, Method Man, Busta and Mary J Blige step up best, alongside decent tracks from relative newcomer Jane Handcock. Big Subwoofer and Murder Music are the obvious bangers, but if you tire of fiftysomethings salivating over strippers and shootings, try rising star October London’s solid contributions I Want You and Qualified.Albrecht Dürer (1471-1528) was the most intrepid traveller in the history of art. From his home city of Nuremberg he crossed the Alps more than once in treacherous conditions, staying in icy mountain shelters. The ship on which he sailed for six days to see a beached whale in Zeeland was almost lost in a winter storm. He lived in Venice in times of cholera, and possibly picked up malaria on a trip to the Low Countries where he was astounded by Aztec gold in Brussels and the Van Eyck altarpiece in Ghent. And all of these journeys were undertaken during outbreaks of the plague. His travel journals are full of astonishing sights – soaring comets, conjoined twins, the bones of a giant (which in fact belonged to a whale). He sees, and draws, girls in Dutch costume, Turkish merchants, African women. Boats lie at low tide in the port of Antwerp, fantastical castles rise on pinnacles above the river Rhine. There is a sheet of magnificent sketches of dozing lionesses, a blue baboon and even an alarmingly sharp-eared lynx in the new zoos of the Low Countries. Alas, only the last appears in this long-anticipated exhibition devoted to Dürer’s travels. To say that the experience in the Sainsbury Wing is baffling would be an understatement. Veering between wondrous, meandering and occasionally inexplicable, this is a show without a map. It opens – incredibly – with two works that are not by Dürer. And there are so many more to come: other painters’ portraits of Christian II of Denmark or the Holy Roman Emperor; other people’s saints and lions and river landscapes. Good as it is to see Bellini’s Assassination of Saint Peter Martyr – Dürer visited the ageing Bellini in Venice – it is always on view in the galleries upstairs. As is Jan Gossaert’s The Adoration of the Kings, and Dürer, who took a trip all the way to Middelburg, in the present-day Netherlands, to see one of his altarpieces, was less impressed by Gossaert. There is no clear chronology and barely any discernible narrative. The show feels on the one hand congested – too many passengers on board – and on the other, lacking in the forcefield presence of the German master. A humdrum portrait medal of Dürer, instead of a single one of his many self-portraits in ink, chalk, silverpoint or paint – so spectacular, so pioneering, so original – can only mean inevitable bathos. Still, there are marvels by Dürer along the way. He is up there in the Alps getting an image of the shelter down on paper: noticing the fragility of the ruined roof and the weirdly human profile of the foreground rocks. His print of Saint Jerome praying to a modest cross in a precipitous mountain landscape is so characteristically precise in its botanical fervour that you can tell the spruce from the pine and number all the different kinds of grasses. But Jerome’s frowning lion, in other visions, has a human face, luxuriant golden locks and elegant fingers for claws. In one image he even seems to have the elongated nose of the artist himself. Dürer had not yet seen a lion in reality (when he did, the image would be supremely accurate). His beast contains at least something of himself. And those fingers might be Dürer’s emblem, as much as the celebrated monogram signature. For his art is all about pointing things out. The way a hand holds a book open, human fingers fanning like the wing feathers of a bird. The curious proportions of an infant, its head outlandishly large compared with its torso. The way a single eyelash, curling lustrously upwards, can make a powerful man look disarmingly childlike. The mysteries of his art are even more apparent when compared with the works of surrounding artists. The excessive detail of Dürer’s prints, for example, those dense anthologies of data and detail, swarming with figures and distant landscapes, yet irreducibly strange; the conjunction of topographical exactitude and free-flowing fantasy. Take the figure of Nemesis, standing on a fully allegorical globe, balanced upon a deckle-edged cloud that might be made of linen, so tight are the folds. But beneath her is the South Tirol in marvellous detail, as drawn on a trip to Venice. Above all, there is the evergreen question of androgyny. From real sitters to imaginary saints, it is hard to know whether Dürer’s heads are male or female, or some combination of both – and if so, why? Everything may look so clear in the great print Melencolia I: the morose angel, the dejected cherub, the hourglass and the numerological chart, the whole clutter of allegorical symbols in definitive black and white. Yet who can solve the riddle of this scenario? Who knows what paralyses the angel and whether this thunder-faced being is male or female? The distant sea glimmers beneath a falling star. Perhaps Dürer saw it on his travels. This print, along with Saint Jerome and the celebrated A Knight, Death and the Devil – the knight a man of steel in a German helmet, riding ever-onwards in a trance – form the so-called “master engravings”. And prints make the majority of his works in this show – justifiably, given that Dürer took them across Europe, and they were everywhere prized. They also paid his way, on occasion, and helped secure a pension from the Holy Roman Emperor. The travel journals include meticulous accounts, showing that Dürer sometimes swapped prints for goods, including lengths of velvet and white cloth. He also sold portraits that were drawn on the spot, often in fugitive charcoal. These are dazzling: nearly lifesize images of Low Country patrons, quick with scintillating life. But best of all are the silverpoint drawings of his fellow artists – Lucas van Leyden, all youthful acuity, and the beady-eyed Belgian painter Jan Provoost, who looks too urgent with thought to hold still for the length of the sitting. After this gallery of portraits, which also includes dynamic masterpieces by Quinten Massys, the show becomes diffuse, concentrating on religion more than travel and forced back on digital presentations. It lacks a climax. Nothing in the last room feels conclusive or aptly dramatic. This being so, and the price of entry being so high, it seems worth suggesting that anyone contemplating Dürer’s Journeys might stare hard at the colossal magnification of his engraving of Saint Eustace outside the door, to accustom the eye to this fiercely incisive artist. The horse and five hounds all waiting while Eustace prays – portraits of quivering vitality, kept in patient abeyance beyond anything human – are staggering sights to behold. Which is, after all, what the art of Dürer is all about. Dürer’s Journeys: Travels of a Renaissance Artist is at the National Gallery, London, until 27 February“When I see a stereotype,” says French director Julia Ducournau, “I try to kill it.” She certainly did that in July by winning the top prize at the Cannes film festival. The most revered and exalted award in cinema, a world away from the erratic glossiness of the Oscars, the Palme d’Or tends to honour films that both further the language of cinema and shed light on the loftier questions of earthly existence. You expect humanism, seriousness, perhaps a dash of difficulty. What you don’t expect is in-your-face sexuality, serial slaughter, a ferocious, electrically coloured techno-metal aesthetic – and radical DIY nasal surgery. But that’s what you get in Ducournau’s Titane – only the second Palme d’Or winner by a female director, the first being Jane Campion’s shared win with The Piano in 1993. Her win, says Ducournau in transatlantically inflected English, “was incredibly powerful to me. Through this prize, a lot was happening. It took 28 years [since Campion’s win] and I believe it’s not going to take 28 years again.” She points to 2021’s award successes for women – Chloé Zhao at the Oscars with Nomadland, Venice winner Audrey Diwan (Happening), Romania’s Alina Grigore in San Sebastián (Blue Moon). “That can’t be looked past. Women kicked serious ass this year.” When Spike Lee’s jury gave Titane the Palme, Ducournau thanked them for “recognising our hungry, visceral need for a more inclusive and fluid world, and for letting monsters in”. Titane is a visceral monster indeed – a shapeshifting, wildly kinetic, sometimes downright deranged blend of thriller, nightmare horror and futuristic black comedy. “Titane” is French for the metal titanium (it can also mean a female titan), and the film has a metallic hardness throughout, in its look, its music, its heroine’s nine-inch-nails demeanour. Ducournau exudes imposing assurance, and projects a somewhat metallic look herself, a Vogue-cover glamour suggestive of an experimental rock chanteuse or a Russian tech billionaire, her hands studded liberally with rings. Titane, I suggest, is considerably less respectable than you’d imagine a Palme d’Or winner to be (notwithstanding Tarantino’s Pulp Fiction in 1994) – not your expected sober, searching look at humanity. “I feel that my film talks about humanity very much,” Ducournau insists. “It’s the only thing it talks about.” Titane’s heroine is a young woman named Alexia who has a metal plate in her head, makes a living doing raunchy dancing at car shows, and also kills people. Running from the law, she masquerades as the lost son of a firefighter, with whom she forms a tense, tender relationship. Beneath its layers of frenzied excess, Ducournau sees Titane as a love story between the pair. “There’s something pure and absolute about their love that emerges, beyond all the representations and lies and social constructs that we’ve been through in the film.” Alexia is played by Agathe Rousselle, an intense-eyed newcomer with extraordinary, sharp-edged facial features: her presence is unnerving and ambiguous, at once embodying vulnerability and all-out feral intensity. Rousselle herself has described Alexia as a psychopath, although, Ducournau says: “There’s so much more grey zone about this character.” Wanting someone unfamiliar in the role, she set out on a search for androgynous faces; it was her casting director who discovered Rousselle on Instagram. “Of all the people I’d seen,” Ducournau says, “she was the one I wanted to film the most. I knew that her facial angles would transform every time I put my camera somewhere around her, that I would not get the same person.” Rousselle is also very scary, I say. Ducournau looks puzzled. “You mean, because I’m scary as well?” I didn’t say you were scary. “You said, ‘also’.” No, I meant Rousselle is angular, and also scary. Do people tell you you’re scary? Ducournau laughs. “I don’t think I am, actually. Confident maybe, but not that.” Confident she certainly is. Enough to tell Titane’s co-star Vincent Lindon – one of French cinema’s most eminent male leads – that he would have to completely transform his body for the role of fire chief Vincent. That involved committing to two years of weight training – in his early 60s, at that. When I earlier asked Lindon about Ducournau, he made her sound, if not scary, certainly formidable. “She’s arrogant, and irresistible, like the great generals, like Napoleon. You want to give her everything. I said: ‘I give you my brain, my heart, my body, I trust you, do what you want.’” It sounds like inflated actorly rhetoric, but when you see how far Titane takes Lindon from familiar territory – he’s more often seen in downbeat roles, embodying careworn, bourgeois crisis – then you see he’s not joking. Born in Paris, Ducournau, 38, is the daughter of doctors – her mother a gynaecologist, her father a dermatologist. The inside and the outside, I say. She gives me a look of disapproval. “No, that’s a gross comment. It’s about the individual. They always told me that there’s one case per patient, that everyone reacts differently, everyone – and it’s incredibly humane to say that.” She studied at the Sorbonne and at elite French film school La Fémis, places that presumably require some degree of confidence. “Oh my God, that’s so funny! I never saw the Sorbonne as somewhere you had to be very confident in. There’s no way you can achieve anything by not being in constant, utter, painful doubt – especially in my job. Directing is pretty much making choices all the time – all the time, choices, choices – and you have to work with your instinct a lot. That doesn’t mean it goes with confidence – it means that I’m gonna go there and I’m gonna make it work, no matter what.” You can’t easily imagine Ducournau losing her cool, but she admits she’s nervous about that evening’s London film festival screening of Titane. “I’m dreading it. I’m so scared that I’m gonna get booed or something. At every single screening, this is one of the fears that I have.” And has it ever happened? “Never.” People may not have booed her films, but they have allegedly fainted. With her 2016 debut feature, Raw, Ducournau seemed to burst into existence fully formed, with an absolutely singular voice. In fact, she had previously made a mark with her 2011 short Junior, about a girl going through adolescent shifts of gender identity, a process involving much peeling and dripping prosthetic skin. Raw scooped numerous prizes, at Cannes and elsewhere, including London film festival’s Sutherland award for best first film. A coming-of-age drama steeped in blood, carnality and savage humour, it was about a veterinary student who discovers her inner cannibal. It was a triumphant outlier at a time when France’s cinema seemed to have drifted away from the so-called “new French extremity” of the turn of the century, embodied by Gaspar Noé, Claire Denis’s gore-soaked Trouble Every Day and Marina de Van’s extremely bizarre body-horror drama In My Skin. Ducournau’s imagination could come across as blackly morbid, but what she does is simply natural to her, she insists. “Everything comes from something very personal – I’m not going to tell you what, but I can tell you that I’m everywhere in my films. None of them are autobiographical, but it all stems from something that I have in me. “Everything I do comes from such a deep, sincere and loving place in me – it also obviously has my energy. If we got to hang out tonight and have a drink, it would probably feel it matches what you see in the film because I have a lot of energy to spare.” Given how aggressively her films rattle audience sensibilities, you wonder whether they strictly come from such a loving place towards her viewers. To take a blunt example, there’s the ruthlessly confrontational scene in Titane in which Alexia, running from the law, decides to alter the shape of her face, in an act of guerrilla auto-rhinoplasty that could make the toughest viewers blanch. “Do you realise that during that sequence you don’t see anything?” Ducournau says. “You don’t see anything. For me that’s a whole achievement. All is about how I make you anticipate the worst, and because I plant this idea in your head, you can actually get to feel her pain.” Indeed, we may not see anything at all, because we may be flinching away from the screen. Basically, then, this is her version of the shower scene in Psycho, all editing and suggestion? “Yeah. Hitchcock was actually very important in the making of Titane. Not Psycho, but Vertigo was a big reference.” Ducournau sees her Cannes win, among other things, as a blow struck for genre cinema – and maybe it’s significant in the case of Titane that the French word genre means both “genre” and “gender”. “The nice thing about this prize is that it acknowledges that using genre, you can be very much in touch with what it means to be human. It was something that was frowned upon for a very long time – genre movies could only exist though their shock value, only be a niche. I’m very happy that this prize shows the opposite of that.” A committed horror aficionado, Ducournau saw the notoriously nightmarish The Texas Chain Saw Massacre at the age of six, when she came across it by chance on TV. “I don’t think I felt a lot when I saw it. It did not traumatise me at the time.” If it sounds like the kind of primal moment that might have formed her imagination, it wasn’t, she says. “I think reading Edgar Allan Poe was a moment for me that opened a space in my mind, but not this – it was too by chance.” What does she look for watching horror now? “Honestly, I look to be scared – but I’m never scared. I used to be and I loved it, but when you get to be a director, you know exactly how things are made. You look at everything and you analyse everything – the sound, the effects, the actors, the camera angles. It doesn’t ruin the experience of cinema for you, but it makes it certainly very different – it’s very hard for me now either to be scared or truly to be moved.” Directing hasn’t completely cauterised her sensibilities, though. Recently, Thomas Vinterberg’s Another Round moved her to tears; she loves the director, she says, because he’s a master of that “grey zone” she values. She also enthuses about the current boom in female horror; she particularly rates British films by Rose Glass (Saint Maud) and Alice Lowe (Prevenge). For her, female horror is “a horror that comes from the inside. With most male directors, it’s something that comes from outside, that attacks you. For women, it comes from something that has more to do with identity. In daily life, as a woman, you are so often subjected to outside attacks that it creates shifts in your own identity. “I think there is a violence that is very specific to female film-makers, as far as horror is concerned – a violence that is inside, not a violence you have to fight, a violence you have to handle within yourself. This inside-outside thing makes the whole difference.” It’s difficult to categorise Titane as female horror per se because the film is so much about subverting gender stabilities. With protagonist Alexia later becoming Adrien, the film has inevitably been read as a trans drama, but Ducournau seems shocked by the suggestion. “What? Oh my God! My character is not transgender – is this what you understand? It definitely talks about being fluid in our understanding of gender. For me, it was really to do with being able to shed any representation or social construct that goes with gender.” Gender is not the only preconception that Titane challenges – borders also crash down between the human and the mechanical. I mention the scene where Alexia appears to have sex with a car… “She doesn’t appear to,” Ducournau says, with manifest impatience, “She does have sex with the car. I think it’s pretty clear by the end of the film.” I’m surprised she’s so categorical about this, given her insistence on the “grey zone”. This is precisely the moment in Titane where we ask ourselves if we really saw what we saw. But Ducournau is adamant. In her work, what you see – however outre – is what you get. “This is the universe I create, and these are the rules of that universe. So yes, she very much does. Is there any doubt about that? “If I show you something, it’s really happening.” Ducournau is now a bona fide auteur star, but she’s resistant to becoming public property and is very guarded about her personal life. “Who cares what I do on a daily basis, or what I am, or whatever. The only thing that counts is the art, my films – they’re my only true way of expressing myself, and after that, I’ve said it all. And then you take it, and you make it your own – and that’s how we communicate.” Ducournau has already had one US experience: before shooting Titane, she directed two episodes of the TV series Servant for M Night Shyamalan. No doubt the Hollywood offers have been coming in since Cannes, but Ducournau has been so busy promoting the film in the US and elsewhere, “I don’t even have time to call my agent.” Now France has audaciously named Titane as the country’s official submission to the Oscars. You can only imagine the palpitations it would give the famously conservative Academy voters. Trigger warnings may be in order, especially for anyone who’s had a nose job. • Titane is in cinemas on 31 DecemberBarry Coope, who has died from cancer aged 67, was a folk singer, instrumentalist and musical arranger who sang in an a cappella harmony trio with Jim Boyes and Lester Simpson, and played keyboard and sang in a duo with John Tams. Coope, Boyes and Simpson came together in 1992. Jim was looking for new musical partners after his trio Swan Arcade folded, and the three voices gelled immediately. Jim’s bass voice, combined with Lester’s middle-range singing and Barry’s high harmony gave a rich and tight sound that was unlike any of the established harmony groups on the folk circuit. For Jim, Barry’s considerable harmony skills were the trio’s great strength. Their repertoire was largely drawn from songs of social and political comment written by Jim and Lester, alongside similar songs from other songwriters. Their albums, starting with Funny Old World (1993), were released on the No Masters label, a co-operative established by northern songwriters. Traditional songs were featured on Hindsight (1998) and Triple Echo (2005). They recorded albums of traditional Christmas songs including A Garland of Carols and Voices at the Door, and regularly toured a seasonal show featuring local Derbyshire carols. They became popular in Belgium through regular performances at the Passchendaele peace concerts, leading to several CDs including Passchendaele Suite (1996) and In Flanders Field (2014) made in collaboration with Belgian musicians. It was through a visit to Belgium that Barry and the other band members first met the children’s author Michael Morpurgo. Already impressed by their singing, Morpurgo created Private Peaceful, a collaborative project featuring readings from his award-winning book and songs arranged by Coope, Boyes and Simpson. This was followed by On Angel Wings, a retelling of the nativity story with carols, both released on CD with Morpurgo as the storyteller. Coope, Boyes and Simpson also replaced Swan Arcade in the occasional harmony big band, Blue Murder, with the Waterson family, recording No One Stands Alone (2002). In the 1990s, Barry had been a member of Tams’ group The Questionnaires as well as the John Tams Band, and he teamed up with Tams in a much-sought-after duo, performing at festivals including Glastonbury, Cambridge and Cropredy. The two men had already duetted on Tams’ album Over the Hills and Far Away: The Music of Sharpe (1996), and Barry brought his harmonies and keyboard skills to Tams’ award-winning albums Unity (2000) and The Reckoning (2005). The two men won best duo in the 2008 BBC Radio 2 folk awards. Barry also performed with Tams in War Horse readings with Morpurgo. Barry contributed as both instrumentalist and solo and ensemble singer to the BBC Radio 2 series of Radio Ballads, also released on CD in 2006. Tams regarded Barry’s voice as “one of the greatest I’ve ever come across. He was exceptional: the best and truest singer of his and any generation.” Barry was born in Belper, Derbyshire, son of Walter Coope, a miner, and Joyce (nee Haslam), a housewife. After Heage secondary modern school, Barry worked for Johnson and Nephew wireworks and then for Lubrizol, a speciality chemicals company. He retired in 2016 and received the Royal Society of Chemistry’s industry technician of the year award. He was first inspired to sing at Belper folk club. In the 1970s and 80s, he played in the Derbyshire folk bands Ram’s Bottom and Rogues Gallery. In 1982, Barry performed in a touring show of English dance, music and song, The Everlasting Circle, produced by the English Folk Dance and Song Society. During the show he met the folk musician Fi Fraser; they married the following year. Barry was song director at Sidmouth folk festival in Devon from 1983 to 1984, then, in 1986, he joined the Old Hat Dance Band, playing on their eponymous 1992 album, where his subtle yet rock-steady keyboard playing underpinned the band’s bouncy dance rhythms. Barry also played keyboard with the duo Chris Wood and Andy Cutting when they performed at dances, and appeared on their 1992 CD, Lisa. Barry’s nationwide performances were fitted around his full-time job. He was still very rooted in his native Derbyshire, and was an inspiring leader of the Rolling Stock community folk choir, and a member of the occasional charity fundraising folk big band the Derbyshire Volunteers. Coope, Boyes and Simpson retired in 2017, and, the following year, Barry, Fi, Jo Freya and Lester (later replaced by Jim Causley) started a new band, Narthen (Derbyshire dialect for “Now then”), but Covid-19 disrupted their plans. Barry’s final performance, with the band, was at Sidmouth festival in August. Barry is survived by Fi and their daughter, Katy, and by Rachel, his daughter from a previous marriage, which ended in divorce. • Barry Coope, folk singer and musician, born 9 July 1954; died 6 November 2021The mayor of the island of Vulcano, in Sicily’s Aeolian archipelago, has ordered the evacuation of about 150 people and banned tourists due to increased volcanic activity and gases in the area. Last October, Italy’s civil protection agency issued an amber alert for the tiny island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, about 15 miles (25km) north of Sicily, after a series of significant changes in volcanic parameters. The mayor, Marco Giorgianni, ordered the evacuation of approximately 150 people in the island’s harbour area, which is considered by Italian authorities to be the most exposed to sulphurous gases. “Data indicate an increase in gases that create strong concern because they can constitute a threat to public health,” the mayor said on Saturday in a meeting with residents that was broadcast live on Facebook. According to the Italian National Institute for Geophysics and Volcanology (INGV), there has been an increase in heavy gases that reduce the quantity of oxygen in the air, creating respiratory difficulties that can have deadly effects. Local authorities have also created a “red zone” where the level of gas attributed to volcanic activity is more concentrated, with values of carbon dioxide (CO2) above normal levels, and restricted the movement of remaining residents from their homes between 11pm and 6am. The island will be off limits for tourists for a month. On 21 October, several people on the island reported that volcanic emissions had caused sickness in their pets. “One day I suddenly noticed that my 10 cats were lying on the floor as if they had passed out,” Stefania Lombardo told the Italian daily la Repubblica, “and I wasn’t feeling well either, I had difficulty breathing. They told me it was just a panic attack, then the doctors confirmed that the cause for the sickness was the exhalation of gases from the crater.” Last month, referring to “increased degassing, temperatures and seismicity” on the island, Marco Pistolesi, a volcanology professor at the University of Pisa, said, “for those who know the island, this has never been observed before”. The last eruption on Vulcano was more than 130 years ago and lasted from 2 August 1888 to 22 March 1890. The Romans believed that the tiny island was the chimney of Vulcan, the god of fire.English National Opera’s The Valkyrie marks the start of the company’s new Ring cycle, conducted by Martyn Brabbins and directed by Richard Jones. The opening night, however, had its fair share of troubles. Days beforehand, for starters, Westminster Council vetoed the use of flame effects in the last act on safety grounds. Annilese Miskimmon, ENO’s artistic director, accordingly asked the audience to use their imaginations, as Wagner would perhaps have wished. The production is itself, however, notably uneven, and the fire-less final scene felt anticlimactic at the end of what was ultimately a far from fulfilling evening. This is Jones’s second Ring for London, and though magic-realist noir has now replaced the absurdism of his 1995 Covent Garden cycle, his starting point for Valkyrie remains the same, with Sieglinde (Emma Bell) casting spells to summon Siegmund (Nicky Spence) into her life through a trapdoor in the floor. Stewart Laing’s designs suggest a dying, post-apocalyptic world, where humanity exists alongside sinister anthropomorphic creatures, Wotan’s ravens among them, and black ash falls repeatedly from the sky. Hunding (Brindley Sherratt) keeps Sieglinde confined in a wooden shack, while Matthew Rose’s hot-tempered Wotan and Rachel Nicholls’s Brünnhilde (dressed to resemble a younger Billie Eilish) hang out in what seems to be its upmarket equivalent. Fricka (acted by the indisposed Susan Bickley on opening night, while Claire Barnett-Jones sang from the wings) is tellingly out of place here, with her airs, graces and urban glamour. Some of it is striking: Hunding’s brutality towards Sieglinde is truly horrific; a film of Alberich (usually unseen in Valkyrie), plotting and conniving, accompanies and intensifies Wotan’s Act II narration; and Siegmund recognises Wotan as his father as he dies, a shockingly poignant moment. Elsewhere, however, there are lapses: Hunding has acquired a gang of henchmen, who hang around too long in Act I, deflecting attention from Spence’s central narration; actors in equine headgear make entertaining Valkyrie horses, but Jones also has Grane shuffling about through the closing scene, a major distraction; and, for some inexplicable reason, a solitary figure does a Riverdance routine during the opening moments of the Ride of the Valkyries. The unevenness, however, is as much musical as theatrical, for which Brabbins bears some of the responsibility. The playing is superbly detailed, but interpretatively there is too little tension in too many places, and some erratic speeds. Act I is slow and muted rather than exciting and erotic. Wotan’s Farewell, in contrast, seems almost rushed. Act II fares best, with Wotan’s narration urgently done and the emotional gradations of the Todesverkündigung carefully plotted. The cast isn’t always helped by an awkward new translation by John Deathridge, that can pull against the accentuations of the vocal lines, though there are some strong performances. Spence, singing with an apology for a cold, makes a fine Siegmund, noble, anguished and touching. Rose, for whom Wotan lies fractionally high, is powerfully intense in Act II, but tires a bit by the end. Nicholls subtly judges Brünnhilde’s gradual involvement, moral and emotional, with the humanity that she will one day join. Her metallic tone offsets Bell’s greater warmth, though we don’t hear enough of the latter’s words. Sherratt’s Hunding is unspeakably malign, and effectively having two Frickas reminded us what a superb singer Barnett-Jones is becoming and what a wonderful stage animal Bickley can be. A flawed evening, its parts not adding up to a satisfactory whole. In rep at the Coliseum, London, until 10 DecemberWhich British monarchs would have survived their illness or wounding if today’s medical knowledge had existed then? (Bonus question: which monarchs would we have had but for illnesses that are now easily preventable?) Jane Shaw Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Where should I move to in order to best survive the climate crisis (thinking within the UK, but open to other suggestions)? Pamela Gray-Jones, London Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply There isn’t any escape; all the good places will be popular. The rest need not actually turn to desert or be under water, but just won’t be able to sustain the people stuck there. It will be very, very ugly. So let’s try to prevent it happening. CanalChris The effects are very unpredictable and often downright perverse. If (for example) the Gulf Stream gets turned off by polar meltwater, one likely effect is that the north-west coast of Europe will become icebound every winter, Britain being on the same latitude as Labrador. Some regions will become disastrously dry, while others will become disastrously wet. AnChiarogEile Some friends did this exercise some years ago and apparently Winchester is at a good height to avoid rising waters. I would avoid anywhere in the Netherlands for this reason. Cider_Woman James Lovelock suggested in 2008 that Britain would be an oasis compared to some other places (the rest of Europe). So select somewhere well above sea level (not Winchester; Winchester is already full). Whatever you do, avoid Winchester … MeinHerr The Winchester, till it all blows over, surely? GrannyBev You should stay where you are, change your lifestyle and help those around you to also change theirs. There is only this one planet and there is no “away” to go to. Face the problem and do something that will help to create a viable future. Reterritorialisation The romantic in me would like to think that moving to the isolation of the Scottish Highlands is the answer; sadly, it’s not. London – that’s where the finances are, that’s where the politics is. It’s the place least likely to be affected by shortages and the first place that will attract protective measures (there’s a reason London had a technologically advanced flood barrier built in the 80s and not the other UK port cities). honeytree What struck me was the profound selfishness of this question. It reflects the cult of individualism that has partly created the problems we are facing. We have a collective responsibility to deal with the crisis of planet heating. The questions you should be asking are: “What can I do to be part of the solution and what can I stop doing that’s making me part of the problem?” Maggie Wicks, Wakefield You will have to think upper northern hemisphere, which rules out most of the UK, with the possible exception of northern mainland Scotland, Shetland and Orkney (the only issue being accessible potable water in sufficient quantities). Outside the UK, think polar and subpolar regions such as northern Canada, northern Scandinavia, Alaska, China and Russia. As the climate warms, these regions will transform to become much more habitable; they will also have access to significant amounts of fresh water. ArcticIslander Habitable, yes, yet still without much sunlight in winter – and agriculture will be difficult. Mnemon I would have said northern Canada, Patagonia, Siberia; well above sea level. But the recent extreme weather in north-west Canada – 49C! – has made me think again. The problem is not just everywhere becoming hotter than at present, but the disruption of climate as masses of air (and water) change their patterns, initially chaotically, possibly in the fullness of time (decades? centuries?) establishing moderately stable new patterns. Conceivably, Britain may be relatively well placed, depending on what happens with the Gulf Stream and jet stream. pol098 Admit that asking this question, 40 years after the global south asked this question, means you are already in the safest place. Enjoy. zahera Russia. Climate change will make Russia the No 1 winner. The steppes and tundras will become arable again, as they were in the time of the Golden Horde. GardChr So far, it appears that the North American midwest, where I live, has less climate change than other areas. LONAHANSEN Michigan. A geopolitics and globalisation expert, Parag Khanna, says in a newly published book, Move: The Forces Uprooting Us, that the Great Lakes region – and specifically Michigan – may become the best place on the planet to live by 2050 because of climate change. TimInMichigan I can’t think of a better place than Mwanza, Tanzania. On the shores of Lake Victoria, so abundant fresh water. An equable climate, 1,000 metres above sea level. And a stable government that is not corrupt. JimToddMwanz The question aptly demonstrates the reason why climate change is being addressed so ineffectually. Some people, even nations, believe that they can escape unscathed … Legomania Even if we think a location might be good, there are possible negative and positive feedback mechanisms that are yet to kick in or might accelerate in ways we had not imagined. Perhaps a better question is which location has the best options for adapting to any potential impacts? Plato301 We’re betting on Galicia in Spain. We’re 5km from the Atlantic, so, by definition, a maritime climate with few spikes in temperature and blissfully cool summer nights compared with the Languedoc. Rainfall is spread throughout the year, although autumn is usually the wettest season. True, the largest cities are at sea level, but it’s plenty hilly enough that you can move up – our house is at 100 metres. The only risk from climate change I can foresee is if summers get dryer (which they already are, to a lesser extent) – the risk of forest fires. There are a lot of eucalyptus trees here, although it’s forbidden to plant new ones now. Oh, and our wines here are 11-12.5%. winebore Top of the priority list is water. If you don’t have a secure source of water, move immediately. sonicuniverse Not near a nuclear power station. Dirkum Climate-change effects, if not controlled now, will be incremental and knock on in a variety of ways – it’s not simply a matter of finding the Garden of Eden and planting potatoes. There will be unrest like you’ve never known. Undesirables roaming the countryside. Sickness. Lack of services. Probably war. Nowhere will be safe. All I’d suggest for now is you move to a more remote region to a house with a large garden and a spring, preferably within a friendly farming community. If you really want some idea, try to imagine what the world will be without electricity. SawdustCaesar This ideal, tiny, perfect place will quickly be filled with a couple of million others, who will quickly go at each other’s throats because there’s not enough space and resources at this best place … MichaelHoe When I saw the effects of the recent heatwave in Canada in an area that normally has a temperate climate, I realised that it is impossible to predict exactly what is going to happen and that nowhere is predictably, reliably safe. The only thing is to try to build a resilient community where you are. Take steps now to reduce your carbon footprint and start building a resilient local community. mrsdoom I wish to nominate Upper Edinbane on the truly magnificent and wondrous Isle of Skye. The reasons being: the wind sweeps in mainly from the west, clearing the air of pollution. It is not over-inhabited. It is located on a hilly incline, so no danger whatsoever of flooding. There are beautiful views, including those of the village of Edinbane below. There is a true community spirit. One day, I intend to retire there and write poetry to inspire others. John Osborn You need to move the opinion of everyone you come into contact with, so they become activists and destroy the power of the inactivists. Mark Hayden You shouldn’t – and such an attitude is akin to rich guys rushing to the lifeboats on a sinking ship. Instead, you should support effective climate action by contributing time, money and effort, then changing your lifestyle accordingly. If you must move, buy an intensive farm and switch it to regenerative methods and/or silviculture, but stop trying to avoid the problem when you should be trying to help solve it. Iain Climie This has already been well documented. May I suggest the book Six Degrees by Mark Lynas and maybe How to Blow Up a Pipeline by Andreas Malm. The only places people will be able to live: the south coast of Alaska; the coast/west side of the Rockies, from British Columbia up and down into Oregon; the south-west region of Chilean Patagonia and Fireland; the Antarctic peninsula; the central ridge of New Guinea; the Himalaya foothills in east India; western parts of China and maybe the Tibetan plateau; parts of Scandinavia; small enclaves in the Pyrenees, Alps and British mountains; and the coastal regions of Greenland. MV Italiaander, the Netherlands (yes, still, haha) I chose to move to an abandoned farm in the barely inhabited woods of inland Sweden and based my decisions on these guidelines: far away from large population centres far away from places that are strategically desirable (ports, military bases, fertile land, minerals, power plants) a society with high levels of trust in government and neighbours and with little or no “pre-existing conditions” such as unresolved internal conflicts from the past As land is cheap here, I was able to buy a lot of land around the house. I’m not the only anticipated climate refugee in this area, so others have come to similar conclusions. Anticipated Climate Refugee (from Belgium) May I suggest Antarctica. Temperature has already reached 18.3C (64.9F) in summer and it has the world’s fastest increasing temperatures. In the past 50 years, the peninsula warmed almost 3C (5.4F), significantly higher than the global average of 0.9C (1.6F). It’s getting greener, too, and it will soon be possible to keep cattle and grow food. Fresh water will probably be in good supply – thanks to all the melted glaciers. Sadly, there will no penguins. Anders Jalakas, Uddevalla Personally, I think there are too many unknowns and that survivalism requires too much personal investment to stand even a small chance of success. In my opinion, the climate crisis is first and before all a food crisis in disguise. So my best bet is to find a place in a village with a strong sense of community, with a tradition for growing their own food locally, wherever that may be. Far from the maritime coasts, obviously, and preferably in or near mountains, but not too close to forests, to avoid the risk of uncontrollable fires. Based on the assumption that we expect more warming than cooling, a land that is not necessarily facing south all day. I chose a village in the Tatra mountains of Slovakia. Yannick Cornet In the late 60s, an anarchist magazine in Germany or the Netherlands published a map of Europe post-nuclear war. The only parts of Europe to avoid fallout were the peninsulas in south-west Ireland. As a result, these places filled up with hippies. As long as you weave your own yoghurt sandals, you couldn’t put a foot wrong in Castletownbere or Ballydehob. Pascal Desmond I am in the process of moving to Fuerteventura, in the Canary Islands. A land of near permanent sunshine and solar power. A land of almost limitless wind for wind power. We don’t waste precious water washing cars, flushing the toilets etc, as all supplied water is desalinated sea water. Drinking water is bottled (yes, I wish it wasn’t plastic bottles). If only other countries harnessed wind and solar in the same way and used desalinated water for most everyday jobs – the world would be a better and safer place. Malcolm Weston Llandrindod Wells! Here in mid-Wales, we are elevated at 212 metres, so no flooding, plenty of trees in and around the town, more than a metre of rainfall every year. A beautiful town with venues waiting for top class acts to discover, restaurants waiting for top-class chefs – in short, waiting for urban climate refugees. OK, your children will learn Welsh, but hey, “dim problem”. Keith Brelstaff Hexham, Northumberland. It’s so beautiful, peaceful, acres and acres of beautiful country. Steven Smith Oklahoma: Already has storm shelters Centrally located Plenty of weed to get you through a hard time Blake Shelton and Gwen Stefani. Katie S Not Yuma, Arizona … it’s hot as hell here now. Todd FredetteThe marriage wasn’t unbearable, but it didn’t feel right any more. The lightbulb moment came when she realised she needed to think about what she truly wanted, rather than about what society had trained her to think she wanted. Also, she became aware that remaining in an unhappy marriage meant she wasn’t being the parent she wanted to be: following her heart would cause heartbreak to her family now, but it had a noble purpose. Today, her ex lives within walking distance and they share parenting. She got out, and she wants to tell the world how it’s changed her life. Who is this woman? Well, it could be Adele, whose new album reveals why she decided to leave her husband Simon Konecki, and what it means for their son Angelo, nine. “It just wasn’t right for me any more… I didn’t want to end up like a lot of other people I knew. I wasn’t miserable-miserable, but I would have been miserable had I not put myself first,” she said in a recent interview. But it is someone else’s story, too – Glennon Doyle, the writer who transformed from a Christian mommy-blogger into a feminist mentor, and who’s been hailed by Adele as her go-to emotional guru. Oprah and Reese Witherspoon have also sung her praises; and Doyle campaigned for the white female vote for Joe Biden (another fan). Her close friend Elizabeth Gilbert (of Eat, Pray, Love fame) has predicted Doyle’s star will rise still further, and called her “the next Gloria Steinem”. “I’d been conditioned to believe that a good mother never hurts her children and she certainly doesn’t break up her family,” Doyle writes in her new book, Get Untamed. “I decided to quit showing my children how to slowly die and instead show them how to bravely live. I became their model, not their martyr.” When Doyle’s book was published 18 months ago and became an instant New York Times bestseller, Adele took to Instagram to share her thoughts. They were, you could say, positive. “If you’re ready – this book will shake your brain and make your soul scream,” she wrote. “I am so ready for myself after reading this book! It’s as if I just flew into my body for the very first time.” So the first question to ask Doyle on our Zoom call is: does she actually know her superfan Adele? “Well…oh God, I never know how to answer this question,” she says, in a voice that’s steady and determined. “I’m not going to comment about that: but I will tell you that I love Adele! I’m freakin’ excited for her album and I only see good things for her. She’s a model in going off the menu and untaming, and I think the new album is all about her ferocity.” I’m getting the feeling she does know Adele; indeed, it would be odd if the two women hadn’t connected, given they both live in LA and that they’re clearly a mutual fanclub. Doyle – petite, blonde, perfect-looking in a cream sweat top for our chat – is new to LA: she moved four months ago from Florida, she tells me, having lived there for many years. Why the switch? “We lived in a very Trump-y area,” she says. “It was OK until it wasn’t. People in Florida didn’t even believe in Covid. There’s a line in Untamed that says, about my marriage, why am I staying here when the doors aren’t even locked? And I finally thought that about Florida: why were we staying there?” Ex-husband Craig moved with them, and now “lives five blocks away; the children run between the two”. It sounds similar to Adele’s post-divorce life: Simon lives across the street from her and Angelo. Doyle’s credo is that women are everywhere in chains, but that they can free themselves by realising they can think outside the box – think outside the prison – and make their own minds up about how they live, who they live with, and how they behave. Like Adele – or perhaps Adele is this way because of Doyle’s example – she is “off the menu”. And once you find you’re having to order off-menu in one part of your existence, says Doyle, you realise few of life’s menus are to your taste. “My sexuality, my faith, my working life, my views about gender, my mothering, my daughtering…I have to go off menu with all these,” she says. “In all these areas of my life I’ve had to go off the menu to find what fits for me.” Adele has been drawn to her writing because she identifies with all this, explains Doyle. “I think what Adele found [in Untamed] and what a lot of women find… is herself. So many women feel exactly the same way, caged by gender, sexuality, religion. And you get to this point in your life when you say, fuck it. I can’t please everyone so I’m going to try to figure out a life that works for me.” So far so reasonable: but some readers of Untamed have criticised it for taking privilege as the norm. Doyle tells me her co-parenting with Craig is “ridiculously beautiful”, and Adele’s set-up sounds similarly dreamy: but how many divorced women can afford to include their ex-husbands in their household caravans, as the wealthy Doyle and Adele clearly can? Doyle is upfront about how fortunate she’s been. “The reason I was able to leave my marriage was because I had enough money in the bank to begin again,” she says. “I had insurance and all of the things people need and all the things everyone should have.” I read her a sentence from her new book, which is an interactive journal inviting readers to record their own ideas on how to become untamed. “The braver we are, the luckier we get,” she writes. Surely, I ask, the truth is more likely to be the other way round: the luckier we are, the braver we can be. To my surprise she agrees straight away: in fact, she says, she almost cringes when she sees people reading her books (there were two previous memoirs before Untamed, charting her recovery from addiction and eating disorders). “Sometimes I’ll see someone reading one of the earlier books and it feels like looking at someone staring at your senior pic from high school. It’s like… why?” Her life and her books, she says, are a continual reinvention. “I write the most deeply personal things and usually the more personal it is, the more universal it seems to be.” And indeed, the story at the heart of Untamed and in the introduction to Get Untamed is a cracker of a tale, expertly told (it’s currently being developed into a TV series). Nearly six years ago, Doyle arrived in Chicago for a literary festival; and her whole world changed the moment a soccer player called Abby Wambach walked into the room. “Suddenly, a woman is standing where nothingness used to be… she stands still there… taking an inventory of the room. I stare at her and take inventory of my entire life.” That moment, Doyle writes, returns her to her wild; it reminds her that society has tamed her, but that freedom is still out there. She tells her therapist, who advises her that she can’t trust her feelings: “Good mothers don’t break their children’s hearts in order to follow their own,” she writes. But soon afterwards she realises the opposite is true: “My children do not need me to save them. My children need to watch me save myself.” Despite never having even kissed a woman, she calls Abby, who she hasn’t seen since Chicago, and tells her she loves her and has decided to leave Craig for her. Today, the two women have been married for four years: so how does it feel, I ask, to be unchained? “I feel like the same person,” she says. “But I think I’ve gotten to the point where the biggest problem in my life is me. I’m not in any relationship, religion, identity, work life that seems wrong to me.” Life is still tough out there in the wild. “Sometimes people think our story is Juliet and Juliet, it’s a fairytale, but this is still a marriage, it still forces us to deal with our shit constantly, it’s still about raising teenagers.” “We can do hard things,” is a kind of mantra for Doyle: it relates to her battle to get away from addiction, but also to the story of how she left her marriage. What, then, of the “hard things” of staying in a marriage long-term? I’ve been married 33 years, to the same man; I don’t feel a martyr, a victim. I don’t feel chained, but it’s certainly been, as Doyle might put it, “freakin’ hard”. Also, and perhaps interestingly, there have been times when I haven’t really known why I was staying, and I’m sure he felt the same – and yet, in our late 50s, we’re happier than ever. Doyle says that, though in her own case she feels she was “a coward” to stay in her marriage after she discovered Craig had had affairs, “Sometimes doing the brave thing is so singular, only you can understand it. Sometimes the bravest thing is when you do the thing that’s true to yourself. There’s no hard thing and easy thing in life. Really it’s a question of ‘choose your hard’.” Get Untamed: The Journal (How to Quit Pleasing and Start Living) is published by Vermilion at £12.99. Buy a copy for £11.30 at guardianbookshop.comTwo centuries after the first gas lights appeared on the streets of London, casting a romantic glow through the gloom, a few hundred remain in some of the most historic areas of the capital. But not for much longer. Westminster city council is planning to convert 299 gas lights to electricity, saying LED lights are environmentally better and easier to maintain. The plan is opposed by a group of residents who claim the council’s reasons are “spurious”. Their campaign is supported by the architectural historian Dan Cruickshank who said the introduction of gas street lights in the early 19th century “transformed city life” and was “a significant moment in the history of London”. The council plans to electrify its gas lights over the next two years, partly in response to the climate emergency. It says its replacement LED lights “replicate the aesthetic of the gas lighting and do not significantly alter the look and feel of the area”. A spokesperson said the council also had a “duty to keep the street lighting in good working order and maintain light levels to a set standard. Unfortunately, gas lighting is increasingly difficult to maintain and does not provide sufficient light to illuminate the highway. Alternatives to electrification have been explored but none achieve the carbon reduction, cost-effectiveness and lighting levels required.” Residents have told the council they “strongly oppose” the plan. Michael Young, who lives in a street with several gas lights, said it was an “emotive subject”. The lights were “an enchanting feature of the area” and their replacement would mean “losing something historic”. Chris Sugg, a descendent of William Sugg, whose eponymous company installed gas street lights in London and elsewhere from 1837, said his great-great-grandfather would be “turning in his grave” at the proposal. “Westminster is the oldest city in the world that was lit by gas … and thus has a responsibility to history to retain the original – or at least the remainder of many iterations and developments of this means of lighting,” he wrote on his blog. Cruickshank, an author and broadcaster who was involved in a successful campaign to save gas street lights in Covent Garden in the 1970s, said the cost of maintaining the lamps was a real issue, but “it can be done if there’s a will”. The gas lights were “intensely romantic” with a quality of light that was difficult to replicate with electricity, he said. “The first gas lamps appeared about 1819 on Westminster Bridge. They transformed city life by making the streets safer. Their introduction was a significant moment in the history of London,” he said. He said the environmental impact of switching from gas to electricity would be offset by the need to “dig up the roads to lay new cables” and the carbon footprint involved in the manufacture of new lamps. There are about 1,500 gas street lights across the capital, including hundreds in royal parks and palaces that are outside the council’s control. In Malvern, Worcestershire, the town’s historic gas street lights were saved after local campaigners came up with a way of making them more energy efficient. Instead of a pilot light, which burns constantly, the lamps were fitted with electronic ignition. About 25,000 gas street lights remain in Berlin, with gas-light tours offered by foot, bus and bicycle. Prague has about 700 working gas street lights, and there are four – manufactured by William Sugg and Co – still in operation in Hong Kong. Almost half the Westminster gas lights earmarked for conversion to electricity are listed, meaning that changes may require consent, with advice from Historic England. A spokesperson said: “Historic England has engaged with Westminster council regarding the replacement of historic gas lighting with gas-effect LED lighting. We understand the council is seeking a sympathetic solution, mindful of the historic character of Westminster and its requirements to provide street lighting … We are expecting further discussion in the coming months.” • This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to clarify that while Historic England offers advice on changes to listed buildings, it does not make decisions on consent.That’s all from me - thanks for your company and emails. I’ll leave you with Suzanne Wrack’s match report. Bye! Peep peep! Arsenal stay top of the WSL after a stylish, authoritative victory at Leigh Sports Village. They outclassed a good United side, with Vivianne Miedema and Katie McCabe scoring the goals early in the second half. They were seriously impressive and look well equipped to go to the distance with Chelsea in the title race. 90+2 min This game, and the 6-1 defeat at home to Chelsea, have shown United how far they are from challenging for the title. 90 min Five minutes of added time. Carrie Jones misses a half chance for United, shooting wide from 10 yards. 88 min Mead is fouled just outside the area on the left by Boe Risa. She takes the free-kick herself, and overhits it. Next. 87 min And another substitution for United - Katie Zelem off, Vilde Boe Risa on. 86 min Another change for Arsenal: Caitlin Foord replaces the goalscorer* Vivianne Miedema. * Is that tautologous? 86 min There was a brief flurry from United after the second goal, but the last 10 minutes have been comfortable for Arsenal. 84 min Nobbs flicks the ball neatly over Staniforth and finds Mead on the left. Nothing comes of it, but it was a nice little reminder of Nobbs’ confidence and class in possession. 83 min Beattie is okay to continue. 81 min Beattie is receiving treatment after a crunching challenge with the substitute Jones. 77 min A substitution apiece. United bring on the teenager Carrie Jones for Kirsty Hanson; Arsenal replace the outstanding Katie McCabe with Nikita Parris. 77 min Miedema strolls up and clips an insouciant free-kick that hits the top of the bar! 75 min Nobbs is fouled right on the edge of the area by Blundell, who is booked. That could, probably should, have been another penalty to Arsenal - I think the contact was on the line. 74 min Arsenal aren’t pressing as often now, which is one of the reasons United are having more of the play. It sounds contradictory but Arsenal were controlling the game more at 0-0 than they are at at 2-0. 70 min Staniforth’s superb cross is put behind by Maritz, who did extremely well to get in front of Galton at the far post. The corner is played short and crossed beyond the far post, where Russo heads wide. A half chance at best. 68 min McCabe’s driven corner is headed across goal by Catley, which leads to a game of pinball in the United area. The ball is cleared, then tossed back into the area and finally launched over the bar by Catley. 66 min United have had a lot of the ball since going 2-0 down. It’s their best spell since the first six or seven minutes of the game. 64 min: Good save by Zinsberger! United almost pull one back. Staniforth, 35 yards out in the inside-right channel, flipped a fine pass over the defence to find Zelem near the penalty post. She took the shot first time, on the run, sidefooting a half-volley that was kicked away by Zinsberger. 59 min Almost a chance for United, when a cross from the right nearly breaks for Galton. But it doesn’t, and that’s the end of that. 58 min Kim Little usually takes Arsenal’s penalties but she went off at half-time. It was expertly finished by McCabe. Earps dived the right way, to her right, but McCabe calmly curled the ball over here. Katie McCabe scores coolly, clipping the ball over the diving Earps and into the net. It was a slightly strange incident - Mannion slid in to block McCabe, who miskicked an attempted shot but was then taken out by Mannion. PENALTY TO ARSENAL! Mannion brings down McCabe in the area, and Arsenal have a great chance to make it 2-0. 54 min McCabe waves a pass over the top towards Miedema. She waits for support and stabs the ball down the side to Mead, who tries to return the favour with an early return pass. Miedema gets to the ball first, on the edge of the six-yard box, but is crowded out by United defender. 53 min Hanson is limping heavily after that challenge from McCabe; I’m not sure she’ll be able to continue. 52 min “Death, taxes, political sleaze and, more happily, Miedema goals,” chirps Charles Antaki. 51 min McCabe is booked for a late challenge on Hanson. 51 min “I’m at the game and it’s freezing,” says Ruth Purdue. “Seems to me that Arsenal are just pressing so well. United can’t get the ball into midfield.” The workrate of their attackers, Mead in particular, is so impressive. 50 min Miedema has now scored against every WSL team she has faced. Earps’ positioning was all wrong but it was still a cracking strike from Miedema. She received a sharp square pass 25 yards from goal, moved the ball to the edge of the D and pinged a low drive into the net. Earps was a long way to the left, for reasons that aren’t entirely clear, though I’m not sure she would have saved it anyway. Vivianne Miedema rifles Arsenal into the lead! 46 min Peep peep! Manchester United begin the second half. Arsenal have a made half-time change. Jordan Nobbs has replaced Kim Little, who presumably has an injury, in midfield. Peep peep! After five seconds of added time, the referee decides it’s time for a breather. Arsenal were much the better team in the first half, though they tended to create openings rather than clear chances. The closest they came was when Beth Mead rattled the crossbar early on. 44 min United are a couple of minutes away from reaching half-time unscathed. They need to change something, though, because it’s been a 0-0 battering. 40 min McCabe threads a brilliant through pass to Little, who has a split-second opportunity to shoot first time but then tries to comes back inside Thorisdottir and loses the ball. That was unusually indecisive from Little. 40 min Miedema drags the ball away from Batlle on the left side of the area and chips a cross that is crucially headed clear by Mannion (I think). 38 min Hanson, on the right, curls a dangerous long pass that just evades the stretching Toone. Had she controlled that she would have been through on goal. 37 min Every time I look up, Arsenal are on the attack. If United weren’t hanging on earlier, they are now. They are desperate to get to half-time at 0-0. 34 min It wouldn’t surprise me if Marc Skinner brings on Hayley Ladd at half-time, because United are being overrun in midfield. 33 min: Good save by Earps! McCabe plays a lovely one-two with Maanum on the left and cuts the ball back from the byline. It hits a United defender and rolls across to Maritz, whose rising shot is pushed over by Earps. It wasn’t, in truth, the most convincing attempt by Maritz. 32 min The main positive for United is that, though they have been outplayed, Mary Earps hasn’t had a difficult save to make. But it does feel like an Arsenal goal is in the post. 30 min Russo plays a fine pass down the right to Hanson, whose cross is headed away bravely by Maritz. She knew she was about to be clattered from behind by Galton but kept her eye on the ball. 28 min McCabe’s floated corner is headed towards goal by Catley, under pressure from Thorisdottir, and Earps makes a comfortable save. 27 min United have lost the ball in their half a few times already, and another instance leads to Miedema winning a corner... 26 min McCabe’s hits the free-kick straight into the wall. That was, for her, an unusually tame effort. 25 min Mead is fouled just outside the area by Blundell. The free-kick is a fair way to the right of centre, which suits the left-footed Katie McCabe. 22 min Little, spotting Mead’s off-the-ball run, clips a lovely angled pass over the defence to find her on the right of the area. Mead’s cutback is half blocked by a defender, Blundell I think, and runs through to the keeper Earps. 21 min I wouldn’t quite say that United are hanging on, but there’s no doubt Arsenal look the likelier scorers. The relaxed confidence to their passing and movement really stands out. 17 min Batlle pokes a clever pass to release Toone on the right side of the area. For once she makes a mess of a decent opportunity, overhitting a cross on the turn that goes out for a throw-in on the other side of the field. 16 min Mead and McCabe have swapped wings, as is their wont. After a slow start, Arsenal look really menacing in attack. 14 min Batlle loses the ball in a dangerous area to Mead. She plays a through pass towards Miedema, but Mannion reads it and scurries across to clear. That was a vital piece of defending. 13 min Mead’s inswinging croner is headed away by Galton and United break. Blundell tries to play in Toone, who is tracked expertly by Little. 12 min Maanum’s low cross is put behind for a corner. It’s all Arsenal now. 11 min Maanum shoots over the bar from the left edge of the area. This is a very good spell for Arsenal, who have pinned United back in the last few minutes. 9 min Mead’s header from the edge of the area is easily saved by Earps. 8 min “Arsenal didn’t miss Leah Williamson much against Koge, but (Man United fans will hope) this should be a bit of a tougher test,” says Charles Antaki. “Wubben-Moy was charged with trying to bring it out of the back, but she doesn’t yet have the experience and nous of Williamson. Maybe Little will drop back a bit and do the honours?” We’ll soon see. At the moment she’s playing quite far forward. 7 min: Mead hits the bar! Arsenal almost take the lead with their first attack. McCabe played a short pass across the area to Mead, who shifted the ball away from Mannion and rattled a left-footed shot off the crossbar. The rebound came to Miedema, who couldn’t control an awkward ball and was tackled desperately by Blundell. 5 min Lots of early possession for United. Russo charges infield from the left and screws a long-range shot that is blocked. 2 min United are also playing 4-2-3-1, with Lucy Staniforth playing deeper alongside Katie Zelem. 2 min Arsenal’s formation is closer to 4-2-3-1, with Kim Little behind Vivianne Miedema. 1 min Peep peep! Arsenal, in their yellow away strip, kick off from right to left. United are in red. It’s a lovely winter’s day in Leigh - sunny, if a little brisk. Arsenal’s players emerge first, followed by the home side. I never know how much crossover there is - or should be between - women’s and men’s teams, but in case you missed it, Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has been put out of his misery by Manchester United. “Hiya Rob,” says John Burrell. “As an Aussie, I am hoping for ManU women to take the points today and then for Sam Kerr to take Chelsea-W to the top of the league. Is it possible? PS why aren’t they playing at Old Trafford?” Leigh Sports Village is their home ground at the moment, though they usually play one game a season at Old Trafford. Probable formations Manchester United (4-2-3-1) Earps; Batlle, Mannion, Thorisdottir, Blundell; Zelem, Staniforth; Hanson, Toone, Galton; Russo. Substitutes: Baggaley, Boe Risa, Ladd, F Fuso, Smith, Turner, Jones. Arsenal (4-3-3) Zinsberger; Maritz, Wubben-Moy, Beattie, Catley; Walti, Maanum, Little; Mead, Miedema, McCabe. Substitutes: Williams, Stenson, Goldie, Patten, Nobbs, Houssein, Parris, Foord. Manchester United make two changes from last weekend’s draw at Everton. Lucy Staniforth and Kirsty Hanson replace Vilde Boe Risa and the injured Martha Thomas. That probably means Staniforth starting alongside Katie Zelem in midfield, which would be a pretty aggressive selection from Marc Skinner. He might also have switched to a 4-1-4-1, with Ella Toone playing slightly deeper. We’ll find out soon enough. Arsenal rotated in the week, when they beat HB Koge in the Champions League, but there is only one change from their last WSL game at Spurs. The injured Leah Williamson is replaced in defence by Jen Beattie. Hello and welcome to live coverage of a potential humdinger at Leigh Sports Village: ambitious Manchester United (lest that phrase jar, this is the women’s team we’re talking about) against unbeaten leaders Arsenal. United start the game in fifth, with 12 points from seven games, but you should see their xG! Seriously, though - because sometimes the laughter has to stop - they have played a bit better than those bald statistics would suggest. They lost leads in their last three WSL games, draws against City, Spurs and Everton. Had they won two of those they would be in the cherished, Champions League qualification-ensuring third place. Arsenal have finished third in six of the last seven WSL seasons - but they have precisely 0.00 per cent interest in making it seven out of eight. The title - which they have won only once in the WSL era - is a realistic ambition this year. They could barely have had a better start under their new manager, Jonas Eidevall: six straight wins followed by a dramatic 1-1 draw at Spurs last weekend. This is another tough game for Arsenal, but they need three points to stay ahead of Chelsea, who will almost certainly beat struggling Birmingham this afternoon. The pace of the WSL title race is so unforgiving that any dropped points could be costly - today and, more importantly, when the engravers get to work in May. Kick off 12.15pm.In the end, as so often these days, it was all about the cards. Wales emerge from their autumn with two wins from four, a more than credible return given the players they had missing, but both wins – not for the first time in Wales’s year – were at best qualified and at worst facilitated by early red cards against the opposition. Australia were further hampered by a yellow card in that first half for a deliberate slap-down by Kurtley Beale, in whose absence Wales scored the only try of their own construction. Meanwhile, Wales’s other try was scored by Nick Tompkins in the second half after, wait for it, a deliberate slap-down. An angry Dave Rennie, the coach of Australia, described the refereeing as “horrendous”, drawing out those two incidents for particular comment. The difference was that Tompkins’s knock-down went backwards, just, but it is yet another quirk in the laws of a sport that is simply impossible to referee to everyone’s satisfaction – or even, it seems a lot of the time, anyone’s. Wales came away with another win by hook or by crook – although no one, again, was trying to argue that Rob Valetini, the latest to see red, was in any way being a crook. After he clashed heads with Adam Beard while tackling him, he left the field to the usual chorus of sympathies citing a lack of malice. Rugby remains the only sport to send players off for, at worst, failures of technique. The torturous trials of officialdom follow naturally. You make your bed … There is no doubt Wayne Pivac’s pillow is fluffier than it might be, due to those two red cards that left first Fiji and now Australia understaffed for most of the match. All three Australian tries were handsome affairs constructed on the Wallabies’ terms, the first with a full complement in the third minute, the second with 14 against 14 following Gareth Thomas’s yellow on the hour for a clear-out that on another day in the current climate might have been red, and the third, in the last 10 minutes, with Australia a man short. Wales will know that, by that measure, they were outplayed. But finding a way to win is no mean skill, whatever the circumstances. And Wales’s circumstances have been as compromised as anyone’s by a lack of experienced personnel. They have hundreds of caps’ worth sidelined with various ailments. The emergence of players such as Taine Basham and Ben Carter, the 20-year-old lock who replaced Beard, are genuine boons to Welsh hopes, as is the rehabilitation of Ellis Jenkins after his three years out with injury. “We’ve learned a lot about players each week,” said Pivac. “That’s why it’s so pleasing to get this result with the side that finished up on the field. There are so many good stories here in terms of the development side of things. The depth chart is looking a little bit better than it was at the start of this campaign.”Spotify has removed the shuffle button from album pages after Adele commented that the order tracks were placed in was supposed to “tell a story”. The singer thanked the streaming service after it made it less straightforward for users to listen to the songs of her new album, 30, in a random order. She tweeted: “We don’t create albums with so much care and thought into our track listing for no reason. Our art tells a story and our stories should be listened to as we intended. Thank you Spotify for listening.” Spotify replied: “Anything for you”. The shuffle option, signified by two crisscrossing arrows, was removed from the album play button but is still available when a user clicks to view the album tracks. Adele made her big comeback with the single Easy On Me, her first new song in six years, which is No 1 in the UK singles chart, according to the Official Charts Company. It became the most streamed song in one day on Spotify and Amazon’s Alexa device when it was released on 15 October. Other tracks from the album, including My Little Love, Oh My God, I Drink Wine and Hold On, have been praised by fans and critics for their sense of vulnerability and old-fashioned sound recalling the golden age of Hollywood. 30 was released on Friday and is her fourth studio album, which she had been reportedly working on since 2018. It details the breakdown of her marriage to the charity boss Simon Konecki, with whom she has a son, Angelo. According to Spotify, the album accrued 60.7m streams globally in the first day it was available, making it one of the most-streamed albums on its release. The record is 90.8m, set by Taylor Swift just a week earlier. The Guardian music reviewer Alexis Petridis gave it three stars, writing that the topic of divorce was “all-consuming” but nevertheless the album was “a not-unimpressive feat”. Other critics were more generous, with Rolling Stone giving it five stars and describing it as Adele’s “toughest, most powerful album yet”. The Times, Independent and Financial Times all gave it four stars. Adele’s previous album, 25, was released six years ago and was only available as a direct download or in physical form, as a CD or vinyl. It was added to streaming services in 2016.Jonas Eidevall spoke of the inevitability of Vivianne Miedema’s goalscoring after the striker broke yet another record, becoming the first player in the Women’s Super League to score against every team they have faced, as Arsenal got back to winning ways with a comfortable 2-0 defeat of Manchester United. “I don’t worry about Viv not scoring against any opponent,” the manager said. “When she hasn’t scored against any opponent, it’s just a matter of time before she will.” The 25-year-old was everywhere in Arsenal’s dominant performance against United, who have just three wins from eight league games under Marc Skinner, and Eidevall highlighted the importance of the clean sheet and his forwards’ role in it after the Gunners shrugged off the disappointment of a 1-1 draw with Tottenham last Saturday. “You see how dedicated a player like Vivianne Miedema is today in performing our match plan, from a defensive perspective,” he said. “Sometimes the contradictory thing in football [is] our defence starts with our forward players.” Manchester United had lost two of their three league games against Arsenal prior to today’s bitterly cold matchup at Leigh. Their sole win, though, came at United’s home stadium, with an 83rd-minute strike from Ella Toone – who has signed a new contract to stay at her childhood club until 2025 – the difference. Arsenal’s first dropped points, against Spurs, had implications for both teams. The Gunners’ narrow lead at the top of the WSL table was cut to one point while Spurs leapfrogged United into fourth. With an opportunity to put pressure on Tottenham before their trip to West Ham later in the day, United began brightly but quickly relinquished the midfield battle, allowing the dynamic Kim Little to pull the strings for the visitors. For Arsenal, with Chelsea hot on their heels, keeping a grasp on top spot was the prize for victory. Given Little’s all-action performance it was worrying for Arsenal fans to see the midfielder replaced by Jordan Nobbs at half-time, though Eidevall said it was a precautionary move. The nerves were quickly salved, though, as three minutes after the restart Arsenal took a deserved lead. Collecting the ball from 30 yards out, the Netherlands’ record goalscorer Miedema edged forward and fired low into the net with Mary Earps out of position. “She’s really good at finding spaces,” the United manager Skinner lamented. “She’s adapted throughout her time here, when she stands against the backline, maybe sometimes defenders will try and bump her, and try and dismantle that, but she comes in and they have a really aggressive front rotation.” Having been booked for a late challenge on United’s Kirsty Hanson, Katie McCabe was then clattered to the ground herself by the centre-back Aoife Mannion, a loud thump echoing around the ground as they collided inside the area. After a short spell of treatment, it was the Republic of Ireland international who stepped up to take the resulting penalty in the absence of Little. McCabe coolly lifted the ball over a diving Earps. Arsenal go into the international break back on track with Miedema fighting fit. United, meanwhile, have one win in their past six games and, with Spurs and Brighton flying, the pressure is on. “I remember when Chelsea didn’t have [Sam] Kerr and [Pernille] Harder. When Arsenal didn’t have Miedema and [Tobin] Heath. We want to keep investing,” Skinner said. “I’m not concerned [by the gap], I just understand where we are at. We have to be realistic. We have to add depth so by game three in a week we still have energy. We will keep investing so we can keep challenging.”For the second time this month, Saturday Night Live opens with a new segment of Judge Jeanine Pirro’s Fox News show. The rightwing pundit (Cecile Strong) invites on “fellow judge” Bruce Schroeder (Mikey Day), who defends his disgraceful handling of the Kyle Rittenhouse trial, noting that he “did not give my client an unfair advantage in any way”; two NPR hosts, one white and outraged (Chloe Fineman) over the verdict, the other black and unsurprised (Chris Redd); and finally, Donald Trump (James Austin Johnson). The ex-president goes on two 60-second free associative riffs (the second one taking the form of a word search game), rambling about everything from female Ghostbusters, Gossip Girl’s Serena v Blair feud, Chris Christie (“We love him, he’s a wonderful person, but you know what, we don’t like him very much, I think we hate him!”), Dua Lipa, Albanians and more. Anchored by Johnson’s Trump, this cold open is less scattershot than the standard politics recaps. The show clearly knows they have a winner on their hands with Johnson’s Trump, although it’s going to be hard to justify inserting him into the show every other week when the real Trump is not actually in any of the big headlines. The night’s host is Simu Liu, star of the recent Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. He talks up how he got his big break the same way every Canadian has: “by asking politely”. He also tells a story about his pre-fame job of playing a birthday party Spider-Man for spoiled children and “day drinking” parents, before declaring “I’m not Spider-Man, I’m Shang-Chi, bitch!” Karaoke Recap is a show made up of highlights from a local karaoke bar, broken into segments such as the Bad Choice awards, which include “Guy Who Was Doing Great Until the High Notes Came In” and “Woman Who’s Been Over-Served Singing Su Soopa Layla (Smooth Operator)”, and the Cringe awards, handed out to the likes of “Finance Bro Trying to Get Laid” and “Ginuwine Sung By Father and Daughter”. Like most rolling character sketches, this one feels like an excuse to toss out half-formed ideas, never earning more than a chuckle and dragging on far too long. A Target commercial advertising Thanksgiving deals has to be the millionth sketch about how insufferable it can be to spend time with family members and guests, such as annoying vegan boyfriends, dirtbag cousins, demonic energetic children and filthy-minded in-laws, but the show starts to turn things around with the next sketch, the admirably stupid Dog Head Man. The set-up is as simple as it is silly: in attempting to build a new super soldier, the Pentagon manages to put a real – and really adorable – dog’s head (and neck) on a human body. Republican or Not is a game show where contestants try to guess whether guests are Republicans. What should be a walk in the park turns out to be deceptively difficult, as said guests’ statements about hating cops, supporting Caitlyn Jenner and, in the case of the “Rachel Dolezal of the Republican party” Liz Cheney, being a registered Republican congresswoman, turn out not to be so cut and dry. A clever sketch, but it could have gone even further in exploring the nebulous ideology at the heart of modern conservative politics. A new music video from Pete Davidson and Big Wet – who teamed up earlier this season for the musical Squid Game parody – sees them singing about the former’s hometown of Staten Island, to the tune of Marc Cohn’s Walking in Memphis. In Walking in Staten, they extoll the virtues of “the land of Colin Jost and the legendary Wu-Tang”, home to “a lot of cops and a ton of pills”, the ghost of Robbert Loggia and strip clubs that used to be McDonald’s. Cohn himself gets in on the fun, as does Staten Island icon Method Man, who drops an absolute banger of a guest verse (and gets a couple of the funniest lines). This is followed by the night’s actual musical guest, Saweetie, who performs Tap In. A better-than-usual Weekend Update sees Colin Jost and Michael Che land some big laughs covering topics such as Congressman Paul Gosar (“He’s a 60-year-old man who makes his own anime. When he heard he was getting punished he was probably like, ‘Is it nipple clamps? I just hope an octopus doesn’t do anything to me!’”); a new Lethal Weapon movie in development (“If you want to see a broken-down black guy team up with a handsome racist, just watch Weekend Update!”), the $34m sale of a Frida Kahlo painting (“A price that definitely raised some eyebrow”), new black Santas at Disney parks (“Unfortunately, as part of the villains parade”), and the Queen’s “new health phase” (“You know what that means – new titties!”). Unfortunately, the segment’s respective guests – Baby Yoda (Kyle Mooney) and Mother Earth (Aidy Bryant) – make for some of the weaker moments in the entire episode, the latter grating and played out, the other too half-cooked an idea to strike the apocalyptic tone it’s going for. A new episode of Baking Championship features a collection of culinary disasters, including a ballet-inspired atrocity that tastes like mustard, a pair of sentient screaming and vomiting Thanksgiving-themed cakes that are so bad they “opened a portal to hell”, and an extra-phallic rocket-ship cake. As ever with these sketches, kudos is owed to the props department for the confectionary nightmare fuel they’ve baked up. Then, we get a digital short starring Liu and Bowen Yang. The two bond and eventually compete over being first in their respective fields – Liu the first Asian Marvel superhero, Yang the first fully Chinese American SNL cast member – as well as a variety of other mundane and ridiculous categories, such as First Asian Man to Move from Canada to America Named [Simu/Bowen], First Asian Man to Blow Up a Dragon from the Inside (although in Bowen’s case “it means something else”) and First Asian Man to Do a Cher Impression on NBC. The two have good chemistry together and it’s too bad this in their only chance to display it. Saweetie returns with a twerky performance of Icy Chain, before the show closes out with a sketch about a group of college professors who call 911 after smoking a joint during a Friendsgiving dinner (they all think they’re dead). The older academics aren’t necessarily strangers to pot, but neither were they prepared for the potency of modern strains. As Ego Nwodim’s exasperated emergency operator puts it, “old people gotta stop smoking new weed.” It’s a laid-back closer that still feels somewhat rushed. Overall, this was a roundly solid episode. There weren’t many high spots, but no real low points either. You could tell that Liu was giving it his all as host, even if he didn’t have a great deal to do. Still, it’s an improvement from last week’s episode and a good note to go out on before the holiday hiatus.When the pandemic hit and Brighton’s Theatre Royal stood empty for months, Elbow were able to use its atmospheric surroundings to record their ninth album, having started writing the songs individually in their home studios during the first lockdown. The result feels like a logical progression from 2019’s Giants of All Sizes, an album that was at odds with the prevailing, Spotify-friendly currents; one that asked listeners to approach it as a single suite of songs. A sense of space permeates throughout here, the band’s long-established love of prog evident in the gently meandering, loose-limbed arrangements, recalling at times a more earthbound Laughing Stock-era Talk Talk. With the exception of impassioned closer What Am I Without You, there is nothing on Flying Dream 1 that leaps out at the listener; instead these songs represent subtle gradations of softly articulated warmth and empathy. After the Eclipse, with its gorgeous-sounding invitation to “come out into the sun”, is lifted by Sarah Field’s clarinet flourishes; Is It a Bird is a masterclass in minimalist restraint. But really this is an album that (once again) quietly demands to be heard, and enjoyed, as an inseparable whole.Allegorizings Jan Morris Faber, £14.99, pp224 “By the time you read it I shall be gone!” declares Jan Morris, making death sound much like a conjuring trick. She was writing back in 2009, having decided that this essay collection would be published posthumously, and its pages are indeed sprinkled with magic – the literary kind that her pen brings to scenes from her long, peripatetic life. She recalls past travels, and muses on topics from nationalism and nose-picking to Diana, Princess of Wales and homemade marmalade (Morris enjoyed it with sausages). There is mischief here, too: the book’s title derives from a late-life conviction that everything – “the whole damned caboodle” – is allegory. It makes for a shrewd and characterful coda to a singular career. Chouette Claire Oshetsky Virago, £14.99, pp256 This wildly imagined debut presents a parable of maternal love unlike any other you’ll have encountered. Its heroine is Tiny, a cellist who is convinced that she’s become pregnant not by her handsome husband but by her owl lover. Sure enough, when the baby is born, she is winged and fierce, alarming doctors. For the husband, Chouette is a project – something to fix, no matter how dangerous the cure. Tiny, meanwhile, loves her as she is, becoming nocturnal and feeding her frozen mice so that she can be her authentic self. Dark wit, tenderness, music, enchantment – they’re all part of a story that remains oddly relatable despite its dazzling strangeness. Invisible Ink Patrick Modiano (translated by Mark Polizzotti) Yale University Press, £12.99, pp176 (paperback) The French Nobelist mines familiar preoccupations to mesmerising effect in his latest novel. It centres on Jean Eyben, who in his 20s worked briefly as a private detective in Paris, tasked with finding a vanished woman named Noëlle Lefebvre. Her fate became an obsession, and three decades later he resumes his search. The city of light is marvellously evoked, a metropolis dense with mystery and motif, teeming with ghosts from its often wilfully forgotten past. Tantalising hints that Lefebvre might somehow be connected to Eyben help drive an engrossing narrative in which questions of ageing and memory are central. To order Allegorizings or Chouette go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyMy father, Jim Boardman, who has died aged 97, was a career soldier who joined the army at the age of 15 and saw action from Normandy to Hamburg in the second world war. He and his regiment arrived on Juno beach in July 1944 and fought through to Germany and the war’s end the following year. One of five children, Jim was born in Withyham, East Sussex, where his parents, Gladys (nee Shed) and Harry, ran a pub. Jim attended school in Groombridge and left at 14. He joined the army on his 15th birthday in March 1939 as European peace disintegrated. Once the war began, he moved through training areas up and down the UK until the Normandy landings began in June 1944. He was wounded when his scout car hit a mine towards the end of the Normandy campaign, suffering a broken ankle and broken nose, but returned to the front in Holland during the winter of 1944. He served several times in Germany after the war, on active service in Korea in 1951-52 and in Egypt during 1953-54. He met Joan Richardson in Northumberland while he was based there in 1943. They married in 1946. They had five children and lived in 27 different army houses. Jim rose through the ranks and was commissioned in 1963. The last years of his active service were with the Army Air Corps, where he served in Cyprus during the emergency of 1964. While adjutant at the Air Corps base in Netheravon, Wiltshire, in 1965, he was the officer in command of the army unit deployed to surround the Beatles for the sequence on Salisbury Plain in their film Help!. He retired from active service with the rank of captain in 1970. He worked in a bank for a while but was then appointed the secretary of his regiment, the 5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards, a position he held for 17 years. During these years he planned and began regimental visits to the communities that they had liberated in Normandy and the Netherlands. These links and visits continue to this day. In retirement he wrote two books. Tracks in Europe (1990) is a soldier’s account of his regiment at war and Tracks in Korea (2013), is his history of the regiment during the Korean war. He and Joan lived in Cotebrook, Cheshire, until 2002 when they moved to Louth, Lincolnshire. Jim was a keen gardener and loved fishing. Joan survives him, as do four children, Janet, Bernard, Richard and me, 10 grandchildren, nine great-grandchildren and two great-great-grandchildren. His youngest son, Andrew, died in 2018.Lord Rothermere has won his battle to remove the family business from the glare of public markets after 90 years. The slimmed-down portfolio he is about to take private marks a return for the publisher of the Daily Mail to its newspaper roots, but it also raises the prospect of whether, in a quest for scale, a future tie-up with the Telegraph could be on the cards. For much of this century Daily Mail &amp; General Trust, which includes Metro and i alongside the Mail titles, embarked on a highly successful strategy to diversify away from a dependence on its publishing operation as the shift to digital began to hit the newspaper industry. In 2009, Peter Williams, then DMGT’s finance director, was dismissive of the sale of the loss-making Evening Standard, saying: “We are so much more than a newspaper company … to be honest we don’t see this as a hugely significant event.” This was true as recently as last year, when DMGT’s £1.2bn in revenues were evenly split between its consumer media operation and business-to-business portfolio. However, assuming that Rothermere can muster the shareholder support to carry out his plan, the new, slimmer DMGT will have revenues of £781m, with publishing reasserting its dominance to account for about three-quarters of income, at a market value including debt of £850m. Since his arrival as chief executive in 2016, Paul Zwillenberg, a partner at Boston Consulting Group with a longstanding and close relationship with Rothermere, has generated more than £3.6bn disposing of stakes and businesses including Zoopla, education firm Hobsons, energy data operation Genscape and, most recently, insurance risk business RMS and the listing of Cazoo. “DMGT is at an inflection point,” the company’s board told investors, most of whom it acknowledged would not want to stay on board a low-growth, media-focused operation. “Significant acquisitions of media businesses would change the profile of the group and might be inconsistent with the investment objectives of a significant proportion of DMGT shareholders.” However, Rothermere is facing opposition to his plan: two top 10 shareholders – Majedie Asset Management and JO Hambro Capital Management, which combines control or advise on shares accounting for 10.2% of DMGT – argue that the buyout offer woefully undervalues the assets. Rothermere is seeking backing from 90% of shareholders to push the deal through. However, he also has the option of changing the terms so that just 50% approval is needed to delist, with those unwilling to sell offered shares in the private company. The market is still challenging for publishers. A DMGT business outlook shared with investors revealed that newsprint supplier contract costs have hit levels not seen since 1996 and as a result job cuts loom at its 2,400-strong publishing operation. “These have started to affect the profitability of the newspaper businesses in recent months,” the company said. “DMGT is currently exploring a number of options to mitigate the impact of these cost increases, including a review of employee numbers.” The jewel in the portfolio remains the Mail brands – the Daily Mail, Mail on Sunday and MailOnline – and Rothermere has been busy with a radical restructure of its management. While the print edition of the Daily Mail last year supplanted the Sun as the UK’s bestselling newspaper, a title Rupert Murdoch’s tabloid had held since 1978, Rothermere is focusing on a digital future. Last Monday, Richard Caccappolo, a US media executive based in New York who has worked with the MailOnline editor, Martin Clarke, to build it into one of the world’s biggest news sites, was promoted to run the newspaper and publishing operation. Days later Geordie Greig, who has edited the Daily Mail for three years since Dacre stood down, was abruptly ousted in a sidelining indicative that those based on the digital side of DMGT’s media divide are in the ascendancy. Greig has been replaced by Ted Verity, editor of the Mail on Sunday, who will oversee both titles, paving the way for a cost-cutting merger or combination of resources. And finally, last month, Paul Dacre stepped down as chair and editor-in-chief, ending 42 years with the business. The pandemic has battered the sales and advertising income derived from print newspapers, and hastened the longer-term shift to digital consumption, and MailOnline’s revenue scale within Rothermere’s media portfolio has grown. MailOnline and DailyMailTV, the TV show launched in 2017 to help to drive awareness of the web operation in the US, made £170m in revenues in the year to the end of September. MailOnline is now about half the size of the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday, whose revenues shrank 2% to £348m. In pre-pandemic 2019, MailOnline was a third the scale of its print stablemates. On the advertising front the trajectory is clear. MailOnline advertising revenues grew at an underlying 16%, while the Mail titles’ print advertising revenues climbed just 1%; digital advertising now accounts for 67% of total advertising across the combined Mail businesses. Across the entire consumer media portfolio, digital revenues rose 15%, and account for 32% of all revenues, up from 28% in 2020. Rothermere has focused on targeted acquisitions to continue to build the scale necessary to continue to compete, having bought New Scientist magazine in a £70m deal in March, as well as the i newspaper in a £49.6m deal two years ago. Sources say that DMGT sketched out a scenario to take a minority stake in the Telegraph, which has refocused on digital in recent years and has more than 600,000 print and digital subscribers, as part of a takeover by a consortium, when its co-proprietor, Sir Frederick Barclay, floated the possibility of a sale two years ago. “If DMGT attempted to buy the Telegraph it would definitely trigger competition and media plurality investigations, but that wouldn’t necessarily mean it would be blocked,” says Alice Pickthall, senior analyst at Enders Analysis. “With the long-term structural decline of the newspaper market, whether a deal should be blocked is not as clearcut as it used to be.” Combining the Mail and the Telegraph would give Rothermere a 36% share of the national newspaper market, putting the business on a par with News UK, which owns the Sun and Times, as the two biggest players. However, for now, DMGT is not expected to announce a transformational deal in the near term. The company last week told investors that it sees only “some small-scale opportunities in media-related businesses”. Suitors who expressed an interest in the Telegraph never saw talks progress. But as the focus of Rothermere’s DMGT narrows to media, and scale becomes ever more important, such a combination could benefit both sides. “I can’t see them looking to buy the Telegraph in the short term,” says Pickthall. “But strategically, in the medium term, given the market, I could see it happening.”It is a cold night on a Stoke-on-Trent industrial estate and Keir Starmer is in town again. It’s at least his seventh trip here in search of redemption after Labour’s historic defeat in 2019, in a sign of how important he sees the Potteries to the party’s future. “I feel I’m getting to know Stoke quite well,” he tells me. “And we’ll keep on coming. I think it’s very, very important. The sort of discussion we want to have tonight is not a discussion we could have in London. You’ve got to have it where people live, in their place, in their town, about the issues that matter to them.” Flanked by his shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, the Labour leader has gathered a group of about 30 voters of all political stripes in a warehouse on an industrial estate in Newcastle-under-Lyme, on the outskirts of the city. There is a mix of young and old from all walks of life, sitting clustered around workbenches in a room usually used for teaching apprentice bricklayers. Only today the lesson is about rebuilding the old “red wall” of former stronghold seats across the north and Midlands, starting with Stoke at its heart. There is a danger that this could be yet another focus-grouped postmortem of the 2019 election. But there is growing frustration to build on as well, as Boris Johnson’s levelling-up promises unravel to nothing, living costs go through the roof, and the stench of cronyism clings to the Conservatives. In a show of hands orchestrated by Deborah Mattinson, Starmer’s pollster (who knows a thing or two about Stoke), just two people think Britain’s economy will be stronger in six months’ time. No one thinks things will improve for Stoke. Dawn, a secondary school teacher who has taught kids in the area for 30 years, sums up the sense of pessimism: “It’s kind of ‘Stoke’s a dump, isn’t it, Miss? I’ll have to work hard to get out, Miss?’ And you want to say, no you can generate a good living here as well.” There’s a big gap between the haves and the have nots, she says. Some of her students don’t have their own bed. “We talked about our town centre and the idea that you know, you get into Hanley, and you think, ‘This is a poverty-stricken city.’” Stoke is a place I know well, as a regular visitor for most of my life. I grew up an hour north up the M6 in Warrington, but there were regular journeys to my grandma’s in Leek, the Staffordshire town my dad is from, as well as innumerable ups (Premier League promotion), downs (too many to mention), and cold, rainy nights following him as a Stoke City supporter. Clearly there have been better days in the city of six disparate towns, where its world-famous ceramics industry once employed half the local workforce near its peak in 1938, before decades of industrial decline set in. But there are great strengths too, with the potteries still providing skilled jobs and tourism, albeit for far fewer people, at firms like Emma Bridgewater and Burleigh. Major companies like JCB, Michelin and Jaguar Land Rover are investing in the area, while the online gambling company Bet365 – started by the local Coates family, who also own Stoke City – employ thousands. Still, Stoke was hit hard by Covid-19, having entered the emergency in a weaker position after a decade of austerity. Debt problems rose sharply, while those at the Labour town hall say there are few job opportunities for young people, a lack of training provision for technical careers, little support for small businesses, and soaring living costs. It’s fertile ground for Labour. “In Stoke and across the country, there is a growing cost-of-living crisis going on at the moment,” Reeves tells me.“I think you’ll be wondering why the government are increasing taxes, reducing universal credit and allowing prices to get out of control and doing very little to fix those problems.” Inflation is at the highest level in a decade thanks to soaring energy costs, with the average family expected to lose £1,000 next year. After a decade of Tory government, households are forecast to have a disposable income barely any higher in 2025 than they did in 2008. Meanwhile petrol prices hitting a record high is disproportionately felt here, in a city where public transport is poor. Testing out their ideas for the economy, Reeves and Starmer say they would cut VAT for household energy bills, insulate homes to keep down heating costs, and put a focus on buying more British goods. It’s part of a listening exercise Starmer says will inform policies for the next election. “Your fingerprints could be on something we’ve talked about today,” he tells the audience. The plans, although fairly vague, draw a positive response. But some worry that the costs of insulating their homes will fall on ordinary people. “I struggle to heat my home and keep the mould out. Council houses aren’t warm enough,” says Tracy. “But taxes are high enough already. It’ll take food off our children.” There is a big focus on fairness, with the room united in annoyance at Amazon while countless shops are boarded up across the city. “We all buy from Amazon, let’s be honest,” says David. “But everybody says ‘Why are they paying no taxes?’” Small shops might have suffered in the city, but Stoke has seen a boom in old industrial land along the A500 converted into vast warehousing and logistics sites. Figures published this year showed the city was enjoying among the fastest jobs recoveries in Britain, a point heralded by the local Conservative council leader. Wages are rising fast in the logistics sector amid nationwide staff shortages. Still, Mark Gregory, visiting professor of business economics at Staffordshire University, which has its main campus in Stoke, says it’s hard to imagine that low-skilled warehouse jobs might drive an economic renaissance: “It seems unlikely that wage growth will outstrip inflation. The logistics piece will help a bit of the local economy but whether thats widespread seems unlikely.” With an ageing population, a higher share of public sector jobs and universal credit claimants than elsewhere, the city is being hit hard, he says. “With the cost of living, Stoke is going to be right in the firing line.” Reeves argues that the chancellor Rishi Sunak’s budget last month lacked the substance to tackle inflation hitting families hard, while the Tories cut benefits and are poised to raise national insurance taxes on workers. “People in Stoke are paying probably the highest taxes ever paid for 70 years,” she says. “And I don’t think people have ever had to pay so much and get so little in return. Because so many public services are a breaking point.” It’s a powerful argument that the Tories will not only break their levelling-up pledges, but that public funds will be spent unwisely; with high levels of tax, low growth and continuing regional inequality the only visible outcomes. The problem for Labour, so far, is that the opposition has looked like it wouldn’t do much better. However, in what was the ground zero of Labour’s 2019 defeat, Starmer is aiming to start building a message he hopes may change the narrative. “We’ve changed very much,” he says. “We’re very determined and focused on places like this, and the Conservative party in my view is going backwards.”Welsh Labour and Plaid Cymru’s ruling bodies have approved a deal for the parties to cooperate together in the Senedd. Labour’s Welsh executive committee (WEC) approved the agreement and Plaid Cymru’s equivalent is reported to have done the same, although there has been no official confirmation from either side yet. In a blogpost, Darren Williams, a member of Labour’s executive committee, said the WEC had “overwhelmingly endorsed the agreement”. He wrote: “The agreement included moves to establish rent controls; the extension of free school meals to all primary school pupils; childcare for all two-year-olds; creation of a National Care Service; limits on second-home ownership; a replacement for council tax; the creation of a publicly owned construction company and an energy company; changes to the Senedd’s size and electoral system, including a statutory guarantee of gender balance; and measures to promote the Welsh language.” At May’s election, Labour won 30 seats, one short of an absolute majority but enough to form a minority government. The two parties announced in September that they were in discussions over an agreement. Last month, the first minister, Welsh Labour leader Mark Drakeford, said the talks “can’t continue forever”. Williams wrote that Drakeford presented the options to the WEC as a choice between the deal with Plaid “which could provide political stability for the duration of the Senedd term and enable Labour to get its programme through, or ad hoc agreements with other parties on an issue-by-issue basis”. It is not a coalition agreement and Plaid members of the Senedd are not expected to be handed posts in government. But BBC Wales reported Plaid would be able to appoint special advisers to work on implementation of policies. The Welsh Conservatives, which finished as the second biggest party in May with 16 seats to Plaid’s 15, said the deal would not deliver on either party’s policies. A spokesperson said: “This is not a deal that works for Wales, it’s a deal that works for Mark Drakeford and [Plaid Cymru leader] Adam Price, a man who only back in April said another five years of Labour in power filled him with despair. “Price has now decided to inflict that despair on the rest of the nation, and this deal is remarkable for its absence of solutions to fix the NHS – currently experiencing its worst performance on record – or improve the economy in Wales.”England’s flagship test-and-trace service is still spending more than £1m a day on private consultants, official figures reveal weeks after MPs lambasted it as an “eye-watering” waste of taxpayers’ money that is failing to cut Covid infection levels. Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), who is responsible for NHS test and trace, told MPs in July there was a “very detailed ramp-down plan” to cut the number of consultants. But latest figures show that at the end of October it employed 1,230 consultants. Test and trace has average daily contractor rates of £1,100, potentially equating to £1,353,000 a day. The ratio of consultants to civil servants in NHS test and trace in September was 1:1, separate data shows, despite a target set a year ago to reduce the ratio to 60%. At the same time, new contracts worth millions of pounds are still being awarded to private consultancy firms, the Guardian has found, despite repeated pledges to curb their use. The test-and-trace system, which has a £37bn two-year budget that is equivalent to almost a fifth of the annual NHS England budget, is designed to identify Covid cases and limit their spread. UK daily reported Covid cases exceeded 50,000 last month and remain at about 40,000 a day. In November 2020, test and trace promised to cut the number of consultants it employed. At that time, they accounted for 51% of staff, a figure deemed acceptable by some because the system was in its infancy. A year on, the proportion has fallen but official figures show consultants still made up more than a third (34%) of the workforce in September. The data was published by the UKHSA and the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) in response to questions from the Guardian and a series of parliamentary written questions from the shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth. “There is no justification for continuing with these highly paid expensive consultants,” Ashworth said. “Ministers should ensure every penny piece of taxpayers’ money is spent wisely on patient care – not blown on expensive management consultants.” Separate research by the Guardian reveals that in the last month the government has quietly published details of at least seven new NHS test-and-trace deals with private contractors, together worth more than £17m. One runs until at least September 2023. The revelations come after a report by MPs concluded that test and trace had “not achieved its main objective” to enable people to return to a more normal way of life. The public accounts committee said the system’s “continued over-reliance on consultants is likely to cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of pounds”. Meg Hillier, the chair of the committee, said she was concerned the organisation was treating taxpayers like an ATM machine. Some of the private consultants have been paid rates of more than £6,000 a day. In June, a report by the National Audit Office (NAO) found that to scale up quickly, test and trace initially “relied heavily on consultancy support at its central office”, adding: “NHST&amp;T told us that this is because many of the skills required were not available from the civil service within the timeframe, and some of the skills and capacities required are on a short-term basis to support the ‘build’ of the organisation.”. Deloitte won the highest committed contract values (£298m), according to the NAO, followed by IBM (£46m), Accenture (£30m), the Boston Consulting Group (£30m), and PA Consulting Services (£30m). “Consultants are much more expensive than civil servants or temporary staff from other public services,” the NAO said. “While access to consultancies has provided NHST&amp;T with the skills and capacity needed to build up the test-and-trace capacities quickly, it may not, as NHST&amp;T recognised itself, be the best use of public money to rely on consultancies to deliver the services on an ongoing basis.” Between November 2020 and February 2021, consultants employed by the programme accounted for 51% of staff, falling slightly to 45% in April 2021. The total number of consultants employed in April (2,239) was higher than in December 2020 (2,164). UKHSA said that at the end of October this year, management consultants made up 11% of the UKHSA workforce. It also said there were a number of different consultants filling expert roles including clinical consultants. Giving evidence to MPs in July, Harries said it was not her “ambition” to rely on consultants and that “we have a very detailed ramp-down plan”. In the same evidence session, Shona Dunn, second permanent secretary at the DHSC, was asked by MPs to reassure them she was going to “wean the organisation off expensive consultants and get better value”. “This is a really sharp area of focus,” she said. “The committee can be absolutely assured that we will not take our eye off this ball.” A UKHSA spokesperson said: “Prioritising people’s health, saving lives and helping to stop the spread of Covid-19 continues to be our focus. We are working to reduce the number of consultants in a constructive and planned way without having a detrimental effect on our health protection services which we need to change over the course of the pandemic. “A number of roles require highly sought after specialisms in competitive market places and we have employed consultants to help deliver these vital services. We have significantly reduced consultant workforce in many areas while responding to the unprecedented demands created by Covid-19. We are seeking to build a strong team of expert and generalist civil servants and always recruit to the civil service wherever we can.”Asylum seekers who have spent 10 hours or more crossing the Channel in flimsy dinghies while terrified of drowning are being bussed almost 500 miles to Scotland to be processed immediately after reaching UK shores, the Guardian has learned. The asylum seekers typically arrive on the beaches of the UK’s south coast soaked, shivering and traumatised. Until recently they have been processed in Home Office short-term holding facilities (STHF) in immigration detention centres an hour or two away from where they entered the UK. But in the last few weeks dozens have been bundled on to buses and driven almost 500 miles – a journey of eight to nine hours – to an immigration detention centre called Dungavel in Strathaven, South Lanarkshire. Kate Alexander, director of Scottish Detainee Visitors, said: “When I visited Dungavel on 14 October, I learned that around 50 people who had crossed the Channel in small boats had been brought there for ‘processing’. Staff said this was the second time it had happened in a month, but not before that. “I was profoundly shocked that the Home Office is putting people traumatised from a dangerous Channel crossing on a bus journey of over 500 miles immediately on arrival.” The Home Office is known to be under pressure from small boat arrivals. A recent internal memo seen by the Guardian refers to an operational emergency after a “critical incident”, in reference to almost 1,200 people arriving in small boats on 11 November. Emma Ginn, director of the charity Medical Justice, which supports the health needs of people in detention, said: “Our clients have described terrifying journeys, often being forced into boats by smugglers when they could see that the boat was not safe and they could not swim. “Unsurprisingly, we have seen high rates of psychological trauma relating to these types of journeys, and it is very concerning that these individuals are then subjected to a further long journey resulting in immigration detention.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The British public have had enough of seeing people die in the Channel while ruthless criminal gangs profit from their misery and our new plan for immigration will fix the broken system which encourages migrants to make this lethal journey. People should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach – rather than making dangerous journeys to the UK. That is why we will have rules in place to make asylum claims inadmissible where people have travelled through or have a connection to safe countries.”If this autumn represented the point in the World Cup cycle when coaches’ thoughts moved firmly towards France 2023, Scotland are stuck between a rock and a hard place. For all the evident progress this year – ending painfully long barren spells at Twickenham and in Paris, a third successive win over Australia – the reality of the next two years is stark. Unless Scotland can find the sustained quality to make victory over either South Africa or Ireland – their Pool B opponents in France – a realistic proposition, they are likely to be heading for a second consecutive exit at the group stage. This is where Gregor Townsend and his coaches may reflect that despite three wins – against Tonga, Australia and Japan – from four over the past month, it was still something of a missed opportunity. Scotland led the Springboks at half-time but couldn’t live with the world champions when it counted, the Boks’ physical dominance ultimately forcing them to lose their discipline and shape. The news from across the Irish Sea offered little comfort either. Ireland, who thumped Scotland in their 2019 pool encounter with similarly direct fare, showed in beating New Zealand that they are hitting their stride with a more expansive approach under Andy Farrell. For all that, there remains a sense that Scotland are maturing nicely, now capable of closing out tight matches with a recognisable core of leading players entering their prime years. They finished this series against Japan with 12 of the same side which beat France in Paris in March and, defensively, they remain a growing force under Steve Tandy’s direction. Although they failed to put together a compelling 80-minute performance, their attack still produced 18 tries in four matches and 12 new players were exposed to Test rugby, adding greater depth in most areas. The likes of Duhan van der Merwe, Chris Harris and Ali Price, three of the eight Scots who toured with the Lions last summer, all appear to have an extra layer of confidence. The box-office totems of Finn Russell and captain Stuart Hogg also continue to inspire, the latter now his country’s record try-scorer after his 25th in Saturday’s 29-20 victory. Could Hogg lead the Scots to a Six Nations title? They have traditionally thrived in the years that followed a high representation on Lions tours. The 1990 triumph came on the back of nine Scots featuring in Australia in 1989, while Townsend – one of five Scots on the 1997 jaunt to South Africa – was the architect of their final Five Nations triumph 20 months later. England’s opening visit to Murrayfield on 5 February does not hold the same fears of the not-too-distant past for those of a Tartan persuasion. Scotland have won two and drawn one of their last four meetings with Eddie Jones’s side. France also visit Edinburgh, while trips to Cardiff and Dublin are no longer the home bankers of the past decade. The World Cup can wait from a Scottish perspective. Bring on the Six Nations.The technology behind everyday computers such as smartphones and laptops has revolutionised modern life, to the extent that our day-to-day lives are unimaginable without it. But an alternative method of computing is advancing rapidly, and Boris Johnson is among the people who have noticed. He will need to push the boundaries of his linguistic dexterity to explain it. Quantum computing is based on quantum physics, which looks at how the subatomic particles that make up the universe work. Last week, the prime minister promised the UK would “go big on quantum computing” by building a general-purpose quantum computer, and secure 50% of the global quantum computing market by 2040. The UK will need to get a move on though: big steps have been taken in the field this year by the technology superpowers of China and the US. Peter Leek, a lecturer and quantum computing expert at Oxford University, says “classical” computing (the common term for computing as we know it) has been an incredible 20th-century achievement, but “the way we process information in computers now still doesn’t take full advantage of the laws of physics as we know them”. Work on quantum physics, however, has given us a new and more powerful way of processing information. “If you can use the principles of quantum physics to process information then you can do a range of types of calculations that you cannot do with normal computers,” says Leek. Classical computers encode their information in bits – represented as a 0 or a 1 – that are transmitted as an electrical pulse. A text message, email or even a Netflix film streamed on your phone is a string of these bits. In quantum computers, however, the information is contained in a quantum bit, or qubit. These qubits – encased in a modestly sized chip – are particles such as electrons or photons that can be in several states at the same time, a property of quantum physics known as superposition. This means qubits can encode various combinations of 1s and 0s at the same time – and compute their way through vast numbers of different outcomes. “If you compared a piece of memory in a normal computer, it is in a unique state of ones and zeroes, ordered in a specific way. In a quantum computer that memory can be simultaneously in all possible states of ones and zeroes,” says Leek. To really harness this power requires an “entanglement” of pairs of qubits: if you double the number of qubits the computing power increases exponentially. Link these entangled qubit pairs together and you get a very powerful computer that can crunch through numbers at unprecedented speed, provided there is a quantum algorithm (the set of instructions followed by the computer) for the calculation you want to do. Jay Gambetta, a VP of quantum computing at IBM, which last week unveiled the world’s most powerful quantum processor, says: “The combined system has a computational power that is much more than the individual systems.” The computer firm’s US-made Eagle quantum processor – a type of computer chip – strings together 127 qubits compared with the 66 achieved recently by the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in Hefei. Gambetta stresses that the practical applications of quantum computers are not there yet, but theoretically they could have exciting uses like helping design new chemicals, drugs and alloys. Quantum computing could result in a much more efficient representation of chemical compounds, says Gambetta, predicting accurately what a complex molecule might do and paving the way for new drugs and materials. “It gives us a way to model nature better,” he adds. There are ways in which quantum computing could help combat global heating, too, says Gambetta, by more efficiently separating carbon dioxide into oxygen and carbon monoxide, reducing the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. Alternatively, quantum computing could help understand how we can make fertiliser by using much less energy. Last year, IBM teamed up with German carmaker Daimler, the parent of Mercedes-Benz, to use quantum computing to model new lithium batteries. Renewable energy, pharmaceuticals, electric cars, fertiliser: if these are just some of the products that can be enhanced by quantum computing, then the UK understandably wants to be at the forefront of the market. Once quantum computing reaches the 1,000 qubit level it should be able to achieve what IBM calls “quantum advantage”, where a quantum computer consistently solves problems faster than a classical computer. IBM is hoping to reach 1,000 qubits via its Condor processor in 2023. The UK’s strong university system – and long history of innovation, epitomised by Alan Turing in computing and Paul Dirac in quantum mechanics – gives the country some hope of achieving Johnson’s goal. But Gambetta’s IBM colleague Bob Sutor says that for the UK and other countries ambitious in making advances in quantum computing, educations and skills are key – at university level and below, including schools. “The more people working on it, the faster we will get there.”Ciaran Martin is what is known in Whitehall as “a safe pair of hands”. In the 23 years he spent working there he held a number of senior roles within the Cabinet Office, which included negotiating the basis of the Scottish referendum with the Scottish government and being director of security and intelligence. He was also responsible for (and I am not making this up) “spearheading the equalising of the royal succession laws between males and females in the line”. Before that, he had been private secretary to the permanent secretary at the Treasury and then principal private secretary to the cabinet secretary. When the government set up the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) in 2016 he was appointed its first director. He now basks as a professor in the luxurious environs of the Blavatnik School of Government at Oxford University. Folk with that kind of background generally don’t go in for hyperbole. And yet Martin has recently been all over the mainstream media warning that “nobody is safe from Russia’s digital pirates” (the Spectator), that the “sale of semiconductor factory to Chinese-owned firm presents a bigger UK risk than Huawei” (Daily Telegraph), that UK schools have been “held to ransom” by Russian hackers (BBC Radio 4) and so on. And now here he is in Prospect magazine under the headline “We have privatised our cyber security. The winners are the hackers”. In the piece, he tells a revealing story about what happened when the Queen officially opened the NCSC in 2017. He writes: “A senior government minister confided to me, at the margins of the festivities, their concern that the launch of this new department in GCHQ to fight digital threats represented ‘the nationalisation of cybersecurity’. But the opposite problem is emerging: we are privatising national security risk.” The case study he uses to make this point is (tactfully) drawn not from UK experience but from the US. It’s the ransomware attack on the Colonial Pipeline system that took place in May. The pipeline takes oil from Houston in Texas to the eastern US; about 45% of all fuel consumed on the east coast arrives through it. It is therefore a critical piece of the country’s infrastructure. The attack affected some of Colonial’s corporate systems, but not the computer systems that managed the pipeline. Nevertheless, Colonial halted all of the pipeline’s operations in an attempt to contain the attack. It also paid a $4.4m ransom, apparently with the assistance of the FBI. It was the largest cyber-attack to date on an American oil infrastructure target. The government issued an emergency declaration for 17 US states and Washington DC to try to keep fuel supplies running. And the FBI managed to retrieve some of the ransom using methods of which the rest of us can only dream. Martin’s point is that “it was the company, not the hackers, who shut down the pipeline, apparently because it could not run its services profitably because of the damage done to its business processes”. This was a decision it was perfectly entitled to take under current laws, but while the company did not consult the US government beforehand, it fell to the government to deal with the fallout. He writes: “Washington had to suspend safety regulations concerning the transport of fuel by road and issue guidance to citizens to prevent panic-buying and the storing of fuel in unsafe containers. It then sent the FBI after the hackers. Yet it had no involvement in any of the decisions that made such actions necessary; those were taken by the firm’s executives.” Does that remind you of anything? What it brings to mind for me is the way, in the run-up to 2008, banks were able to gorge themselves on ultra-risky derivative products that eventually came unstuck and brought the world’s financial systems to their knees. The banks reaped the profits of that investment spree, but it was national governments – and their hapless citizens – who paid the price of bailing them out. Something similar is going on in the cyber-security sphere. Virtually every company and organisation now has – indeed has to have – an online presence. But many still take only rudimentary cybersecurity precautions and are sitting ducks for hackers. For most of companies, that’s a matter for them and their boards of directors - it’s their lookout if a ransomware attack makes them insolvent. But if what they do makes them a part of the country’s critical infrastructure – water, electricity, fuel supply, communications, logistics, food supply, healthcare, schools and so on – maintaining lax cybersecurity ought to be a criminal offence. If commercial organisations want to privatise commercial risk then that’s their business. But national security is our business, not theirs: that’s why GCHQ set up the NCSC. So, reading between the lines of Martin’s obvious concern, are we learning that British firms are still not taking security seriously? What I’ve been reading Credibility gap How Does Britain Maintain Relevance in a Changing World? is a fascinating tour d’horizon by Tim Marshall. I’d say the answer is with difficulty. Fear factors A sobering Tweetstream by Michael Bang Petersen on the pandemic and the chronic erosion of trust Fuel for thought Shortage Nation: Why the UK Is Braced for a Grim Christmas is a nice explainer by Tim Harford on why economists still don’t understand why we run out of petrol at the pumps.The structure must support the manager Manchester United’s Premier League peers have achieved success through different means. Manchester City were purpose-built for Pep Guardiola, with Txiki Begiristain and Ferran Soriano in place as executives before his arrival. Jürgen Klopp is the frontman at Liverpool but works in tandem with Michael Edwards, a sporting director who has occasionally overruled the German on transfers. Edwards will be succeeded by his deputy, Julian Ward, this summer. Chelsea have embraced chaos in multiple managerial sackings while winning titles and the Champions League twice in the past decade but have the structure to withstand the turbulence, their back office run expertly by Marina Granovskaia. United’s structure beyond the manager has been amorphous since Sir Alex Ferguson retired. Each of his four successors have departed as isolated figures, with David Moyes, Louis van Gaal and José Mourinho complaining of a lack of support and self-determination. Ed Woodward has normally taken the blame, but United insiders will tell you that the co-owner Joel Glazer ultimately makes the big decisions. Woodward is set to depart in January, though it is reported he may retain a consultancy role. John Murtough was appointed in March as football director, with Darren Fletcher technical director. United sources suggest this eases the transition process for the new manager, but there are sincere questions over how much that duo can influence the bigger picture. The time sourcing a new manager must also be spent finessing the relationship between Florida and the training ground at Carrington. Overhaul the midfield Michael Carrick’s role as interim-before-the-interim manager serves as a reminder that it was 15 years ago in July that United signed him as the last player to actually improve their midfield. Marouane Fellaini, Morgan Schneiderlin and Bastian Schweinsteiger are among a rogues’ gallery of midfield misfits bought in since. Fred and Scott McTominay are targeted for mockery but it is tempting to think Ferguson might have made useful squad players of them. They are not, though, the calibre of their counterparts at Liverpool, City and Chelsea, particularly as a pairing. United, having spent heavily on the defence and attack in recent years, must source at least two high-class midfielders if they wish to be able to control matches. Too often in Solskjær’s regime they found the centre of the park dominated by purportedly lesser opponents. Cut the Ronaldo cord Cristiano Ronaldo now appears a vanity purchase, with a record of won five, drawn two and lost seven since his September return, though it might be argued that the only bright spots of United’s season have been spectacular Ronaldo goals such as those against Villarreal, Atalanta and Tottenham. If this season is written off as an extended job search, then it should be used as a victory lap for Ronaldo while another home is found for him. He will be 37 in February and few serious managers would appreciate having to shoehorn such a player into modern pressing tactics. Losing him may affect the club’s marketability and share price but a continued run of failure would be far more damaging in the long term. Ronaldo is no longer a player to build a future around but his exit can be eased, and probably milked financially too. Try to forget the past It was reported Solskjær used Eric Cantona’s “when the seagulls follow the trawler” line when speaking to Watford’s manager, Claudio Ranieri, after the defeat on Saturday. That was the latest in a long line of cringe-making references to golden days long lost at United, and Solskjær is by no means the only one trying to relive history. Ferguson’s influence has regenerated in recent years. The power vacuum at the club has allowed that but Ferguson will be 80 on New Year’s Eve and even he would recognise that his United regime succeeded only once it stepped out of the shadow of Sir Matt Busby. Liverpool’s recent successes came once the club modernised and decided to treat past glories as happy memories rather than a blueprint. Focus on football At the heart of United’s problems lie the sense that the club is less focused on football than acting as a content provider and marketing tool. When Phil Lynch, the club’s CEO of media, spoke last month of “fan sentiment graphs” to gauge social media reactions to players it gave the impression of an institution lost in show business rather than the football business. Woodward has repeatedly stated the club’s focus is on football but the club’s activities have suggested the opposite.Twenty races into a gruelling Formula One season, Lewis Hamilton remains relentless and unbowed in his determination to take the title fight to the wire. With his dominant victory over rival Max Verstappen at the debut Qatar Grand Prix, the world champion has ensured this gripping and finely poised battle hangs in the balance. Hamilton is clearly pumped up for it and rightly so on this evidence from the Losail circuit, where his Mercedes team may have delivered the car to make the difference at a vital moment. Hamilton won with a consummate, controlled run from pole to flag, inch‑perfect with pace that Verstappen could not challenge. He has cut the lead to the Dutchman from 14 points to eight, with 52 available from the final two races, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. A visibly energised Hamilton, enjoying back-to-back wins after victory at the last round in Brazil, was relishing the challenge and it was impossible not to sense the momentum had shifted behind his attempt to take a record eighth title. “I’m loving it,” he said. “I love the close battle, and the pressure, and the demands it puts on you, and the whole team. I thoroughly enjoyed it, we’ll be bringing our triple-A game for the last two races. I feel great, the car is better than ever, I am looking forward to the battle.” Verstappen’s Red Bull simply could not match the pace of the Mercedes but he did at least stay close to Hamilton all race while they left the field far in their wake. The Dutchman counted his second as a very good recovery having started from seventh after he was given a grid penalty shortly before the race for failing to slow for waved yellow flags in qualifying. Alpine’s Fernando Alonso secured a superb third, his first podium for 104 races, the last being at Hungary in 2014. Mercedes and Hamilton delivered at Losail with the flawless execution they know will be required to take the title but, crucially, with fearsome pace. Their car, the team principal Toto Wolff confirmed when asked, was better now than it had been all season with his driver in menacing form after his recovery from penalties in Brazil. “Yes, definitely,” he said. “The car is quick on the straight and good in the corners. Lewis is totally in the zone, the lion got woken up at Interlagos. Saudi Arabia should be a good track for us. If everybody finishes the race, [the battle] is going to go to Abu Dhabi.” Notably both are night races in conditions very similar to Qatar where Mercedes found the car’s sweet spot with alacrity. Verstappen acknowledged there was nothing he could do. “We just didn’t have the pace to match them,” he said. “But there are two races to go and a lot of things can happen.” After the race Red Bull’s team principal Christian Horner, who had endured a trying weekend, found no respite when he was summoned to the stewards for potentially bringing the sport into disrepute after his critical comments regarding the marshalling on Verstappen’s penalty. He was given a warning, but of greater concern will be Red Bull’s deficit to Mercedes. After Verstappen’s win in Mexico, Horner had said they should throw away the form book in anticipating who might have the edge at these final meetings. Yet with Hamilton’s back to back wins that form seems to have swung ominously in Mercedes’ favour at a pivotal time. Hamilton was four-tenths up in qualifying and enjoyed a definitive advantage in race pace. Red Bull are still questioning the legality of the Mercedes’ rear wing and the straightline speed it is conferring on their car and, after a weekend dominated by fractious politicking between the teams, this off-track battle likely to be staged in the steward’s room will only intensify. In Qatar, where the higher downforce version of the wing is preferred, Red Bull believed no advantage was being gained but they may yet protest it at the next round. Mercedes remain convinced of its legality and regardless, after ending up comprehensively on top here, will be confident going into the deciding races. The race was Hamilton’s from the off, especially after Verstappen’s penalty meant he could not challenge for the lead going into the first corner. Hamilton did what was required with a strong start, holding his lead through turn one while Verstappen was also off like a bullet. He climbed from seventh to fourth as he exited the first corner. Trailing Alonso and Pierre Gasly, he had passed both by lap five to take second but, from there, the front two positions were set. They duly exchanged the tit-for-tat slugfest of lap times that has become familiar this season as they swapped fastest laps, but Hamilton held the gap at five seconds as they left the field behind. By lap 13, however, Hamilton began to show the pace he had demonstrated in qualifying, putting over six seconds on his rival while both maintained a ferocious pace, already 30 seconds up the road from Alonso in third. They matched each other across the two pit stops and Verstappen recognised he could not challenge. “Let’s have a bit of fun, we’re going to be second anyway”, he said and the team duly gave him the OK to hammer his tyres, but still he could make no impression on the seven-second lead. Verstappen took a late stop to secure the fastest lap for the extra point but, with a 10 second lead in the final third, the world champion had done enough to seal a comfortable win. It was a somewhat unremarkable one in the pantheon of Hamilton’s 102 victories, but inescapably significant for the championship. Red Bull’s Sergio Pérez was in fourth and Alpine’s Esteban Ocon in fifth. Lance Stroll and Sebastian Vettel were in sixth and 10th for Aston Martin, Carlos Sainz and Charles Leclerc in seventh and eighth for Ferrari and Lando Norris in ninth for McLaren.In the days since Azeem Rafiq gave evidence recounting the racism he faced within the Yorkshire County Cricket Club, people of colour across Britain have been moved to share their own accounts. But there is something distinct about Rafiq’s testimony, which reveals how Yorkshire sits in the national imagination and how Yorkshire’s south Asian Muslims have been historically positioned as outsiders. When Rafiq spoke about being physically pinned down and having red wine poured down his throat at age 15, I thought about the ways that action replicated the logic of a whole range of top-down policies and processes that have violently been imposed on people of colour. For instance, in response to the arrival of Commonwealth migrants after the second world war, 11 local councils adopted a policy of “bussing” immigrant children to attend schools elsewhere in order that they made up no more than 30% of the classroom. Three of the 11 councils that adopted this policy – Bradford, Huddersfield and Halifax – were in Yorkshire. Paraded as an “integration” project, the buses were soon termed “Paki buses” by local people, and children were taught in segregated sections of buildings. This exemplifies the paradoxical message that haunts us to this day: while we order you to integrate, we will continue to label you and punish you as outsiders. At the time, the “problem” was immigrants not speaking English. Later, in 1988, the problem would be rearticulated as one of cultural backwardness linked specifically to Islam, in light of images of Asian Yorkshiremen burning Salman Rushdie’s Satanic Verses. By 2001, news media would invoke such images again when they spoke of riots in Bradford. The government review would explain the unrest as the result of “parallel lives” – suggesting that south Asians lived “apart from” the “rest of society”, rather than considering police brutality and fascist violence, or decades of deindustrialisation and unemployment, or racist labour and housing markets. After 7/7, in 2005, the narrative about Yorkshire’s Asian Muslim population (both terms conflated since the war on terror began) would be solidified when three of the bombers were found to be from my hometown, Leeds. After so many decades of positioning Yorkshire’s Asians as a menace to the nation, the locale would be deemed explanation enough for their violence. Multiculturalism was declared a failure, and south Asian Muslims were seen to require surveillance at every level – now blatant through the Prevent strategy and counter-extremism, which criminalise our identities in every public institution. Entire Yorkshire towns would go on to be castigated through Islamophobic and racist stereotypes. Think of Rotherham and you think of “grooming gangs”; think of Bradford and you think of documentaries like Make Bradford British. To fully understand this racism, we need to look deeper into the social and economic forces that shaped Yorkshire’s Asian population. British colonialism, working-class exploitation and racist border legislation can all shed light on the distinct manifestation of racism that Rafiq, and all of us, well know. Yorkshire’s textiles mills and iron foundries were first built during rapid industrialisation in the 1800s, by merchants whose money came from the slave trade, in which they exchanged goods pillaged from elsewhere for human beings at the west African coast. Profits made from enslaved labour were invested into new technologies, such as locomotives, which were then exported to help pillage other colonies (trains from Leeds were sent to Sierra Leone) or raw materials that were turned into cloth, which colonised countries were forced to buy. In 1832, Indian weavers petitioned parliament to complain that British cloth imports, alongside exploitatively high taxation on Indian cloth exports, were undermining their industry, pushing many to leave their jobs and, eventually, to simply export raw cotton that Britain would spin and sell back to them. The industrialisation of places such as Yorkshire was built through the deindustrialisation of India. These very processes provided the conditions that led to my grandad being in search of work in rural Punjab in the 1960s. When he migrated to Bradford, as many people did, my grandfather worked in the mills that had contributed to the impoverishment of his homeland. As with others, he worked the most undesirable shifts – Pakistani men sometimes made up the entirety of night shifts in wool-combing, for example. Many were given whitewashed names by bosses who could not be bothered to grant them individuality – our family had its own Uncles “Tony” and “Peter”. Hearing Rafiq mention the names “Steve” and “Kevin” given to cricketers of colour demonstrates the continuation of this legacy of dehumanisation. Our communities didn’t create ‘parallel lives’: instead we were always excluded as cheap labour to be kept out of sight. Ironically, the long-term settlement of families in Yorkshire is the outcome of racism itself. The 1962 Commonwealth Immigration Act aimed to close Britain to Black and brown migrants by introducing the need for “work vouchers”, which made it harder for them to migrate despite being Commonwealth citizens. Instead, it was often easier for dependants to permanently join family members already here because they were forced to choose between this or long-term separation. In addition, construction of the Mangla dam in the Mirpur region, in 1966, created a reservoir that drowned 288 villages, displacing 111,000 people. The British government latched on to this displacement as a source of more cheap labour, offering people work permits for factories in the Midlands and Yorkshire. Seventy percent of Britain’s Pakistani community today trace their roots to the region. South Asians are here because of exploitation, racist border controls and colonisation. It is no surprise that the cricket world is reeling from Rafiq’s testimony. Taken as part of the wider historical context, Yorkshire County Cricket Club has done nothing but hold the fort. But that is a fort of white supremacy and empire. And while Yorkshire may have a specific history, it is no anomaly in a nation built by colonised people’s resources, labour, migration and lives. But there is another lesson we can take from racism in Yorkshire, and that is the legacy of resistance – through Asian Youth Movements in the 1970s, the self-defence of the Bradford 12 in the 1980s and anti-racist protests against fascists. These movements of working-class people of colour independently mobilising and building solidarities to fight imperialism and racism remind us that true change has never come from waiting or relying on the powers that be. Repainting the boundary lines on a pitch built by empire and racism is not enough. We must upturn the entire grounds. • This article was amended on 21 November 2021 to remove Blackburn from a list of Yorkshire councils. Suhaiymah Manzoor-Khan is a writer, spoken-word poet and educatorThe deal to secure the release of the detained Sudanese prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, signed by Hamdok and Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, who seized power in a military coup on 25 October, leaves Sudan in a continuing crisis. While the agreement satisfies some of the immediate demands of the international community and mediators from the US and UN – not least securing the release of Hamdok and other political detainees – it leaves many of the country’s most serious issues in its political transition unresolved. At the heart of Sudan’s problems since the fall of its longtime authoritarian ruler Omar al-Bashir in 2019 has been the role of the military and security forces, accountability for the crimes committed during Bashir’s rule, and the question of how to build a comprehensive and inclusive political settlement that can incorporate the demands of the country’s rebel movements. While the arrangement following the ousting of Bashir removed him from the scene, it also fudged many of those issues, leaving the military in a dominant position, not least at the head of the transitional sovereign council. A major driver of the current and extended crisis in recent weeks and months has been the post-Bashir transitional timetable, which should have seen civilians take the driving seat on the sovereign council, and led to concerns in senior military circles that their long-lasting political and economic interests would be undermined. Worse still was the military’s anxiety that senior figures – Burhan included – might be held responsible for the killings of protesters that occurred in 2019 at the end of Bashir’s time in power, and other crimes committed during the Bashir period. Sunday’s deal appears to answer few of those issues. It reaffirms the constitutional arrangement and 2020 Juba peace agreement, initially signed with a number (but not all) of the country’s warring groups, leaving a route to a democratic transition still unclear. While Hamdok has agreed to an arrangement that satisfies the military in one respect – delivering a less fractious and more compliant technocratic cabinet with himself at its head – it will leave many in the pro-democracy camp, who want the military to retreat from politics entirely, highly suspicious of the generals’ future ambitions. For all sides it remains a highly risky undertaking. For the military it suggests that their position is perhaps not as strong as they would have liked to suggest, not least in the face of continuing protests, even with their use of deadly force. On the civilian side, Hamdok’s agreement to the new interim arrangement has the potential to undermine the already fractious camp. The main civilian bloc that spearheaded the anti-Bashir protests and signed a 2019 power-sharing deal with the military was swift to reject Sunday’s agreement, and protests over the deal continued in a number of cities. “We affirm our clear and previously declared position that there is no negotiation, no partnership, no legitimacy for the coup,” the mainstream faction of the Forces for Freedom and Change coalition said in a statement. With little clarity and all sides still jostling for advantage, there seems little prospect that Sudan’s problems are over.The Morrison government has been accused of delaying legislation until “five minutes to midnight” as it tries to end the parliamentary year delivering on key election promises. With parliament scheduled to resume sittings on Monday for the final fortnight before the summer break, the government is set to release legislation for a religious discrimination act and a bill to establish a commonwealth integrity commission. Both were key commitments before the 2019 election, but stalled during the pandemic, and the government has been criticised after releasing initial draft legislation for each measure. Labor’s climate change spokesperson Chris Bowen accused the government of “fiddling” for the past three years, and only reviving the legislation now an election was in sight. “If this was important to Scott Morrison, he could have done it at any time over the last three years,” Bowen told Sky News on Sunday. “Let’s not accept any of these excuses about he had other things to do. He could have done an Icac, he could have done religious freedom. He doesn’t believe in either. “He’s been fiddling. He’s done nothing. And now as the election approaches, all of a sudden he finds a religious freedom bill in the top drawer, which has been gathering dust for three years.” The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has been consulting on the revised religious discrimination bill, with the Coalition party room expected to consider the legislation on Tuesday. Moderate MPs are reserving their right to cross the floor over the bill, concerned about a statement of belief clause that overrides other state anti-discrimination laws and a positive discrimination right for faith-based institutions. MPs are yet to see the legislation, but the employment minister Stuart Robert said he did not expect everyone to be happy with the scaled-back bill. “No one gets everything they all want in public policy, I think that’s a given on all sides of debate,” Robert told Sky News. Bowen said that if the government wanted “constructive engagement” with Labor on the bill – whose support may be necessary for it to pass into law – then it needed to resolve divisions on its own side first. “They promised it before the last election, and here we are at five minutes to midnight, fiddling,” Bowen said. “So before it even gets to what the Labor party does, they need to get their own house in order.” ‘Weak watchdog worse than none’ Negotiations are also continuing on the new federal integrity commission, which has also divided government MPs, with many wanting the bill to allow for public hearings and for its remit to be broadened. Ahead of the anticipated release of the bill, the Centre for Public Integrity put forward an “integrity test” for any revised legislation, outlining five principles it would need to include to be effective. These include a broad jurisdiction, strong royal commission powers, public hearings and reports, own motion powers and no evidence of criminal offence required in order to begin investigations. “A weak watchdog is worse than none at all. It allows corruption to continue behind the veil of secrecy,” said Anthony Whealy, chair of the Centre for Public Integrity. On Friday, the independent MP Helen Haines accused the government of effectively abandoning its pre-election commitment, saying there was not enough time to legislate the anti-corruption body before the next election. But Robert said he expected the election to be held in May and the government was continuing to negotiate on the integrity commission model. “The election is still a good six months way, so there is plenty of time for us to move forward on what we took to the Australian people three years ago,” Robert said. Packed legislative agenda Robert also said the Indigenous affairs minister, Ken Wyatt, was pushing ahead with plans for an Indigenous voice to parliament, but the government wanted this to be a bipartisan commitment. “We want something that all Australians can embrace and Ken Wyatt is doing an extraordinary job, working with 51 Indigenous Australian peak bodies to try and bring something to the table that we can all agree with,” Robert said. Wyatt is expected to take the final report from the co-design panel to cabinet as early as this week, with its release “imminent”, but there are mixed views about the merits of pushing ahead with legislation without fulfilling a pledge for constitutional recognition. As the government seeks to “clear the barnacles” before the end of the year, it is also determined to try to pass controversial voter ID laws that have been criticised as likely to suppress the vote, particularly among Indigenous Australians. The packed legislative agenda is unlikely to be smooth sailing for the government, with at least two of its own senators vowing to withhold support from the Coalition unless Morrison meets a range of demands, mostly around vaccine mandates. One Nation’s Pauline Hanson has also promised to cause “so much mayhem” over the issue, and has suggested she could vote against the voter ID laws, despite previously claiming credit for the Coalition’s policy. Ahead of parliament’s return, Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers goaded the government into a fight on the economy, pointing to rising petrol prices and flatlining wages. “If he (Morrison) wants to have an election on the fact that petrol prices have gone up on average over the last year something like $900 for an average family with an average car, at the same time as real wages have gone backwards $700 over the last year, then we say bring it on,” Chalmers told ABC’s Insiders program. “I think that should be central to an election about the economy, about living standards, and about the prime minister’s failures on economic management.”It ended in glorious failure, but the Wallabies’ ill-fated tour of Britain may yet serve them well – if they are prepared to learn from mistakes. Having already lost to Scotland 15-13 and England 32-15, Sunday morning’s soul-destroying 29-28 defeat to Wales confirmed Australia’s first winless European tour since 1976. It is difficult to recall a braver performance from the Wallabies, who played with 14 men for most of the match, and even 13 for a period, only to have victory snatched away in the 82nd minute. They improved markedly in their attack from the previous two Tests, only for ill-discipline to let them down – a recurring problem which must be addressed. If discipline matched courage, Dave Rennie’s side would be one of the best in the world. And yet the Wallabies conceded 13 penalties to Wales’ nine, with Scottish referee Mike Adamson making some highly contentious calls. They sparked a diatribe from Rennie, who described the officiating as “horrendous”. But it begs the question: why do Australia always seem to be on the wrong side of the officiating? The Wallabies began the game brightly with winger Andrew Kellaway scoring in the second minute after chasing a grubber kick by inside-centre Hunter Paisami into the in-goal. But the red-carding of Rob Valetini in the 15th minute, for a high tackle on Welsh second-rower Adam Beard, changed the course of the game. It looked a tough decision because there was an accidental head clash but, in the context of World Rugby’s concerns over player welfare, it was the correct call. Adamson explained to Wallabies captain James Slipper that Valetini had been upright in the tackle, coming at Beard from distance and at speed. The No 8 had clearly attempted to prevent Beard from off-loading the ball. But if a player takes that risk in defence he cannot complain about the consequences of any contact with the head, which is now a no-go zone of the body. The sin-binning of full-back Kurtley Beale in the 22nd minute for a deliberate knock-down was also the result of a change to the interpretation of the rule. In the past, that offence was only a penalty; now it’s a yellow card. What really upset the Wallabies was the 47th-minute try to Welsh outside-centre Nick Tompkins after he seemingly committed the same offence as Beale. When Tompkins knocked down a Wallabies pass almost every player on the field stopped, waiting for the penalty, but Adamson ruled the ball bounced backwards, not forwards, and allowed play to continue. After initially hesitating, Tompkins raced away to score a decisive try. There will not be any apology because the call was correct. One of the first things you learn as a child is play to the whistle. Instead of getting angry about the refereeing, Australia must learn to adapt or continue to lose. Compared to the previous Tests, the Wallabies were far more inventive in attack and their ball-handling much better, out-scoring Wales three tries to two, which was three times as many tries as they scored against the Scots and English combined. Winger Filipo Daugunu’s try in the 70th minute followed a great midfield break by Paisami. Then replacement flanker Lachie Swinton, No 6 Rob Leota and winger Tom Wright transferred the ball from right to left to Daugunu with simple catch-and-pass skills. When Beale landed a long-distance penalty goal in the 77th minute to put the Wallabies in front 28-26, it looked as though a famous, against-the-odds victory was on the cards. But from the re-start Beale was ankle-tapped while attempting to kick the ball downfield and it squirted off the side of his boot, giving Wales one last attacking opportunity. Replacement five-eighth Rhys Priestland duly obliged, kicking a penalty goal to give the Welsh their third straight win against the Wallabies. It is always the little things that matter in the end. In an up-and-down year, the Wallabies produced a 7-7 win-loss record, including two wins against the world-champion Springboks and three losses to the All Blacks. Where they go from here will depend largely on who is deemed eligible to represent their country after Rugby Australia determines the future selection policy of overseas-based Australian players. Rennie was criticised in some quarters for making so many exemptions to the so-called Giteau Law, which saw Japan-based Quade Cooper, Samu Kerevi and Sean McMahon play in the Rugby Championship, and France-based Rory Arnold, Will Skelton, Tolu Latu and Beale participate in the British tour. He did, however, need to assess those offshore players to work out whether they were required for the 2023 World Cup in France. Significantly, we are yet to see the best Wallabies team play together in a Test. It would be counter-productive for RA, under pressure from Super Rugby franchises, to exclude potentially required players by tightening the eligibility rules again. In the gloom of the British autumn lies a glimmer of hope. If the Wallabies select their best players, maintain their discipline and look after the ball, they are capable of producing winning rugby – but hard lessons must be heeded first.Last week, the Australian Fashion Council received a $1m grant to start working with industry to reduce the country’s mountain of textile waste. It’s a sum that pales in comparison with the money on offer for recycling other products, however, and it has left some in the industry feeling underwhelmed. Julie Boulton and Aleasha McCallion are project managers at the Monash Sustainable Development Institute and co-authors of a report about a circular T-shirt that was released in March this year. McCallion says the $1m grant, when compared to other waste streams, is further evidence that the fashion industry is “consistently overlooked and underestimated, both on economic value and on how the system touches every single person”. The grant, which will help establish the country’s first national product stewardship scheme for textiles, is part of a $1bn plan to transform Australia’s waste and recycling that was announced last year. At the time, $190m was earmarked for new infrastructure to recycle plastic, paper, tyres and glass, a figure that dwarfs the amount granted to fashion waste so far. Kellie Hush, the acting CEO of the fashion council, says there is “a long way to go obviously, but it’s a great start to have the federal government on board and taking notice of the issue”. The issue being the 23kg of clothing the average Australian dumps in landfill each year – putting Australians in the unenviable position of being the second highest textile consumers in the world, per capita, behind the US. While it is possible to recycle clothing in Australia, the sector has very low rates of uptake thanks to a lack of infrastructure to collect, sort and recycle textiles. The council will use the grant money to collaborate with industry stakeholders – including designers, retailers, manufacturers, charities and textile recyclers – to create three reports by March 2023. The first will look at data and material flow. The second will analyse global initiatives, policies and technologies promoting circularity in textiles. The third will make recommendations for how to move forward, including a roadmap to 2030 in line with National Waste Policy Action Plan targets. Hush says the first stage is about collaborating with industry to investigate what’s realistic. She says once the reports are written, “we’ll have recommendations and I can assure you that some of those, or most of those, will require investment with the federal government and private enterprise to help us fund those programs”. Alice Payne is an associate professor in fashion design at Queensland University of Technology and one of the experts who will shape the scheme. She says: “This is just the beginning of what will actually be a longer journey … this amount of funds is a way of bringing stakeholders together.” She says they will build on existing work in scholarly literature and reports from around the world and tailor them to “the Australian context in consultation with Australian stakeholders”. These conversations will explore changes in design and manufacturing for durability, as well as charitable recycling and second-hand business models, the need for innovation and investment in recycling technology, and consumer education. For now, the focus is on industry and not on policy or legislative change. The principles of a circular fashion industry are well established, but have recently been popularised by international non-profits like the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, which produces significant research and reports on circularity in fashion. According to the foundation, a circular fashion industry is one where clothes are designed to be recyclable and durable, so they can be worn more and repaired, and shared and resold until their end of life, when they are collected to be recycled or returned to the earth. McCallion and Boulton drew on the work of the foundation to write their report on a circular t-shirt. “We should be looking to retrofit great examples from overseas to the Australian context and working together to advance the agenda as fast as possible,” says McCallion. “We aren’t reinventing the wheel.” They say there is evidence overseas that circularity works when you have industry collaboration alongside legislation and policy change. Boulton says: “We are five to 10 years behind what’s been going on in the EU, France, the Netherlands, Germany. They’re currently having these debates on labelling and banning textile waste … that’s what we should be doing. It’s silly to focus on locally made products, it’s such a tiny part. We need to go further than product stewardship and we need government regulation to look at what is coming in and stop the bad stuff.” The European Union is currently working on legislation to manage and control textile waste. From 2023 all clothes and shoes sold in the EU will have colour-coded labels informing customers of the product’s environmental impact. Under the European Commission’s waste framework directive, member states will have to set up separate collections for textiles by 2025. Payne says whether or not this model is followed will be determined by “conversations with councils as well as with state governments and the like. It might be part of it but it’s something that will have to be determined in the group.” Adrian Jones is the co-founder of BlockTexx, a technology company building Australia’s first large scale textile recycling facility in Logan, Queensland. He also believes the government needs to set a legislative framework, because under voluntary codes businesses don’t change. “We’ve only seen significant change in France, the Netherlands and Denmark because governments have said we are moving towards an export ban, or a producer pay scheme or a consumer pay scheme, or a combination of all of the above. Then we’ve seen significant growth of onshore chemical recycling.” The BlockTexx plant uses chemical recycling technology, which is preferred over mechanical as it produces a higher quality material that can be recycled again. In three years the plant should be processing 10,000 tonnes of textile waste annually. Jones says: “If you’re going to solve the problem of textile waste, you have to do it at volume, you can’t be artisanal.” He says the infrastructure required for large-scale recycling would cost “tens of millions of dollars” but it doesn’t all need to come from government. To fund their new plant, BlockTexx raised $5.5m: $1m from the federal government, $1m from the Queensland government and $3.5m from private investment. Even so, he’s glad the $1m grant has been awarded to the fashion council. “I just hope it’s well spent and doesn’t produce a whole lot of research that says ‘wouldn’t it be good if we did something about textile waste?’ We kind of know that.”The English are celebrating the prospect of an Australian cricket team in disarray with little more than a fortnight until the opening Ashes Test begins in Brisbane. It is indisputable the scandal associated with Tim Paine’s resignation as Test captain on Friday is divisive. It is a significant distraction, and it may cause a reshuffle in the team. But will it ultimately detract from Australia’s performance? Given the uncertainty surrounding Paine’s fitness and form, an argument can be made the host nation may actually emerge from the scandal stronger for the series. The fallout from the saga continued on Sunday when former Cricket Australia chairman David Peever responded to criticism from current chair Richard Freudenstein. The latter has stated his administration would have removed Paine as skipper when the harassment incident was investigated in 2018 had it been in charge. In a statement to News Corp, Peever responded by saying the wicketkeeper deserved Cricket Australia’s loyalty and should not be “abandoned at this time”. “Cricket Australia’s decision seems knee jerk and unfortunately shows double standards,” Peever said. “The issue has been doing the rounds in cricket circles for some years now. The current chairman has been on the board for two years and it is implausible he didn’t know about it. “If he and the board felt so strongly about it, why wait until now to act?” Former Victorian captain Darren Berry, a keeper of renown in his career, believes Paine should retain his position in the Test side. Former Australian opener Ed Cowan disagrees. The contrasting views of the past and current Cricket Australia chairs, and those of former players, are indicative of a broader discussion. Among the questions Cricket Australia and the selectors are considering is who will captain the Test side and whether Paine should hold the gloves for the Brisbane Test. They must weigh whether the negative publicity and associated pressure caused by the scandal will affect the form of a player who has averaged 32.63 in 35 Tests. Last summer, Paine averaged 40.8 against India in a series Australia lost on home soil. It was a valuable contribution, despite the overall failure, and one that merits selection. But the incumbent turns 37 on the first day of the Ashes. His age adds to his current vulnerability, based on the history of some of Australia’s most decorated wicketkeepers. Brad Haddin was 37 when he was replaced by Peter Nevill after missing the second Test of the 2015 Ashes. Adam Gilchrist retired at a similar age in 2008. Ian Healy was 35. Rod Marsh was also 37 when his career ended. That the Tasmanian has not played a first-class match since April and underwent surgery on a bulging disk that caused considerable neck and shoulder pain scarcely helps his cause. He was due to return to the crease for the University of Tasmania on Saturday until rain hit. Paine’s chances to demonstrate he retains a surety with the gloves and bat will be in a four-day game for Tasmania’s second XI and an Australia A match in Brisbane starting 1 December. Freudenstein said Paine is available for selection. He is the only wicketkeeper named in the squad for the Ashes. But given the circumstances, a late change would not surprise. Alex Carey, at 30, shapes as the leading candidate should a change be made. He has a first-class average of 35.66 and has taken 156 catches, with four stumpings, in 44 matches. Both Carey and Josh Inglis, another potential candidate aged 26 who averages 34.03 in first-class cricket, are also in the Australia A squad for Brisbane. The respective batting averages of the incumbent and the hopefuls suggest not a lot will be lost should a change occur. But it is harder to gauge what the loss of Paine’s leadership and experience would mean. As to who should be Australia’s next captain, Pat Cummins is clearly the leading candidate ahead of Steve Smith, whose presence will provide experience and a sounding board. He carries the endorsement of Steve Waugh and Dennis Lillee, who declared him born to lead, and is regarded as a considered man who is clearly at the peak of his powers. The 28-year-old would create history, at least in this century, for Australia has not had a fast bowler as captain since Ray Lindwall stood in for a Test against India in 1956. Any notion that fast bowlers cannot excel as captains is ludicrous. Bob Willis, Courtney Walsh and Shaun Pollock are among those to lead their nations with distinction. Cummins has also demonstrated himself more than capable of fielding inside the ring. This positions him close to the action, enabling him an ease of communication with his teammates and also the proximity to be guided by the nuances of the action unfolding. Cummins shaped as a pivotal player in the Ashes. His role is now critical. It is a rare day when he has not delivered for his country. That may be enough to temper, to a degree, the enthusiasm of the English about this scandal.The Broken Back Range has always loomed large in Sally Scarborough’s life. She grew up in Cessnock in its foothills, amid wine country and the Great Dividing Range of the New South Wales Hunter Valley. But beyond the state forest lay rural farmland – and coalmines. Now the national sales and marketing manager at Scarborough Wine Co, just north of Pokolbin, she fears her small oasis in the Lower Hunter is under threat from the further expansion of mining. The Chinese-owned coal producer Yancoal has lodged an assessment lease for sites between Pokolbin and Broke-Fordwich, in the heart of wine country. It’s now before the NSW government. Scarborough and a string of local wine producers and tourism operators see it as a call for action. They are fighting back against industrial development in the region, and are lobbying the NSW government to pass legislation to form a protective ring around the area – as has been done for the wine-producing Barossa Valley in South Australia and Margaret River in Western Australia. “We are not going to take this lying down,” Scarborough says. “This is my home. We don’t want to come up against this in 10 years’ time when there’s another exploration licence around … we want to stop its renewal so we don’t go through this process again and again.” The Hunter Valley Protection Alliance launched its #NoMinesInOurVines campaign this month, arguing any future coalmines would destroy the $550m industry. Scarborough has never aligned herself with “diehard conservationists”, but says people visiting the Hunter won’t see it as a beautiful, pristine area if there is mining “literally smack bang in the middle” of it. “There’s no way viticulture and mining can cohabitate and work successfully together, there are too many divergences,” she says. “One is an industry which is giving back to the natural environment and caring for it, producing product which holds a special place in people’s memories and hearts … that is at odds with mining.” ‘This would never happen in Champagne’ Yancoal is one of the largest export coalminers in Australia, operating 11 sites across NSW, Western Australia and Queensland. Five are in the Hunter Valley. It acquired its first mine, Austar, in 2004. At the time, Austar was the only mine producing coal in the broader Cessnock area. It began transitioning to closure last year. Since 2004, Yancoal has bought Hunter Valley Operations, Mount Thorley Warkworth, Ashton and Donaldson, all in the Hunter. Donaldson has also moved to a “care and maintenance” phase of operations. The company’s major shareholder is Yanzhou Coal Mining Company Limited, which is majority owned by Yankuang Group, the fourth-largest coalmining state-owned enterprise in China. Yancoal currently has interests in “several” early stage coal exploration and assessment sites in Australia, including drilling programs and geophysical surveys. The company holds two exploration licences issued by the NSW government in the Cessnock area, and has applied for an assessment lease over the same footprint. “The application process … requires several steps to be completed before it could actually be granted and this is likely to take several years,” a spokesperson said. “An assessment lease, once granted, allows a works program that focuses on the assessment and study of a potential resource. “If [an assessment lease] was granted it would not guarantee … a mining lease in the future. Should the potential for future mining ever arise, any mine proposal would have to undergo a rigorous assessment process … with significant public consultation.” But Sasha Degen, owner of accommodation business Hunter Valley Stays, says even the prospect of mining in the region is “inconceivable”. “I really can’t imagine any other wine region in the world would have this on the table, this would never happen in Champagne, the Napa Valley,” she says. “People would be aghast to know there’s a mine in the middle of wine country … you don’t want to visit and drive straight into a mining truck.” A report by the Australia Institute found coalmines in the Upper Hunter were running at 62% of their approved capacity last year, producing nearly 100m tonnes less than they were granted by the NSW government. Institute research director Rod Campbell has said there is “absolutely no need” for any new coalmines in the Hunter. “Existing approvals can easily meet existing and likely future demand,” he says. “The NSW government’s own data shows that Hunter coal sales peaked in 2014. The world has been telling us for years … it intends to use less coal in the future, but NSW governments haven’t been listening.” A spokesperson for the department of regional NSW said two exploration licences for coal in the Cessnock region were originally granted in 2003 and 2010. “Applications have been submitted to renew those existing licences and are pending determination,” the spokesperson said. “If the proponent was to … consider mining, they would need to make a separate application, which would be considered through the state’s robust planning framework.” ‘We want to protect it for the next generation’ Degen says people use the term resilient “fluidly”, but points out that the Lower Hunter has just been through severe drought, fires, floods and Covid, “and now this”. “We hear this loud and clearly when making reservations … guests are seeking world class food and wine, accommodation in a spectacular landscape. Noise, vibration and dust just isn’t part of the experience.” In 2028 the Hunter Valley will celebrate 200 years as a wine-growing region. Degen says you “couldn’t reverse the damage that would be done” if the assessment lease receives the green light. Chris Tyrrell’s family have grown vines on their property for 160 years – “about the same time as the mining industry”. Looking out of his window, Chris sees state forest on one side, and on the other a block of vines his great-great-grandfather planted in 1879. “Part of being here that long is we’re not anti-coalmining as such, we’re just opposed to any new mines in the area. We’ve had lots of staff who’ve worked in both industries,” he says. “But if they’re not running at full capacity now, it doesn’t make sense to open more.” Tyrell says if the proposed site – on the main tourist route – were to be developed, it would “more or less mean the end of tourism”. “As alarmist as that sounds … we get about two million people a year – having a coalmine and all the infrastructure on the main road would put an end to it.” It’s not just about tourism. “Sometimes you take it for granted, but we have some of the oldest vine resources in the world,” Tyrrell says. “You can’t replace that. That’s what we’re looking after here, we want to protect it for the next generation.”Sydney-based mother of two Fiona* was stressed about the effects of lockdown on her 10-year-old son’s learning. “When the lockdown happened everything went haywire,” she says, and they could barely cope with schoolwork. So she and her husband decided to “take a [financial] hit” and book their son in for four hours a week of coaching, all on the one day, at a cost of $800 per term. Fiona is a recent migrant to Australia, and scarred by a comment made by a stranger about public schools “scraping the bottom of the barrel” in terms of student success rates. She is determined to do right by her child, whose motivation dived during lockdown. She hopes that tutoring will reinforce the expectations around school work that were a little more solid before the pandemic began. When students returned to school this term after months of lockdown, some also returned to tutoring centres, spurred on by parent concerns over reports about student learning loss. Worldwide, some have predicted a boom in the tutoring industry post pandemic. In Australia the tutoring sector already currently engages one in seven children and is a billion-dollar industry. The Australian Tutoring Association reported a drop in tutoring during lockdown, due to the difficulties associated with the end of face-to-face teaching, but is expecting a rebound. Some tutoring companies, like Global Education Academy, have leaned in to pandemic anxiety with taglines such as “we’re here to help you during lockdown”, while others, like Cluey Learning, have reported signing up 1,000 families a month after 2020 lockdowns. The federal government’s Job Outlook reports show that the “strong growth” in the sector is on track to continue, with the number of tutors in Australia expected to rise from 44,300 to 48,900 by 2025. But the push toward private tutoring comes with a number of considerations and concerns, namely the further entrenchment of learning inequalities, a lack of regulation, and the effect of all this extra study on a child’s mental health. According to Prof Pasi Sahlberg, from the Gonski Institute for Education at the University of New South Wales, what parents decide to do with or for their children is their decision, particularly if their child has a particular need that ought to be addressed, but warns parents to discern the reasons for tutoring and the options they choose for their kids. He says that “pedagogically-poor tutoring”, which focuses on rote learning and routine drilling, can do more damage to a child’s cognitive development in the long term, when they are expected to master deeper learning and independent thinking at school, and to their interest and engagement in learning in general. “Training kids to succeed in knowledge tests is a very different process than teaching them to understand the world and become curious about learning more,” he explains. “Teaching today aims at far deeper and broader goals [like] conceptual understanding, critical thinking, [and] practical application, [rather] than those typically found in private tutoring – memorising, recalling and routine skills.” Sahlberg says that there are, however, a number of one-on-one private tutors who are pedagogically very skilled and can help children overcome the issues that have impeded their progress at school. Catherine, who has been tutoring kids one-on-one for over a decade, believes she is one of those tutors. She argues that the problem isn’t tutoring, but a deficiency in the classroom setting which fails to recognise the uniqueness of each student’s approach to learning. “Tutoring centres are almost like a repeat of the classroom setting, which is the problem many kids face,” she explains. “Students don’t need another distanced smart person who doesn’t understand their personal, individual style of learning and being. I’m sensitive to my students’ personal lives as much as I am to their school performance because kids aren’t one-dimensional beings who focus on school with nothing else in their lives. Tutors have a way of making subjects relevant to the student because we make the subject about our subject, the student.” Mohan Dhall, the CEO of the Australian Tutoring Association, says that good tutors can go a long way in remediating learning loss – which he “absolutely emphatically” believes has occurred – provided they are held accountable for what they do. “Private tutoring does not work if it simply mirrors mainstream education, focuses on outcomes and is non-accountable,” he says. “Parents should ask tutors: What are your evidenced-based strategies to improve my child’s learning? What professional training have you had in education to understand what my child’s needs are and how they can best be catered for?” Dhall expresses concerns that tutoring companies, some of which are listed on the ASX, emphasise financial returns rather than student gains and educational benefits. The fact that the industry is largely unregulated (cash-in-hand payments for tutors mean it is hard to confirm its prevalence) only adds to this concern. ‘A big inequity issue’ Another issue is equity, he says, because the cost of tutoring excludes most already-disadvantaged students. “Private tutoring can absolutely and unequivocally further entrench learning inequalities,” Dhall says. “I worked at a private school where I also ran a tutoring centre, and some students were coming to tutoring for all six of their HSC or IB [International Baccalaureate] subjects. So, in addition to parents paying private school fees, they were also paying tutoring on top of that, meaning those students do not just have the most enriched education that money can buy, but tutoring too.” The consequences of this uptake could reverberate throughout the classroom, according to Misty Adoniou, an adjunct professor of education at the University of Canberra. She says that a reliance on tutoring as a fallback could mean that teachers would eventually shift their own classroom approach, further alienating the already-marginalised, who not only don’t have the means to partake in tutoring, but who may already suffer due to a lack of access to technology, or equipment, or to someone at home who can help them. “We really run the risk of us relying on what happens after school to determine what happens in school,” she says. “It’s not a good road to be going down, the whole tutoring market. The more uptake we have of it, the more that [it could inform] teachers’ understanding of their work. So, we cater to the people doing private tutoring instead of the kids who are not.” Sahlberg says that Australians spend a disproportionate amount of money on education compared to other OECD countries. In Sydney, he says, around 30% of students participate in tutoring, but rates can be higher in some suburbs. “Private tutoring, because it is more accessible to those who can pay for it, is a big inequity issue,” he says. “According to international organisations like the OECD, inequity is one of Australia’s biggest educational challenges. Prevalent private tutoring does not help to make our education more equal, or in other words, to give all our children a fair go.” Fiona says there’s a “huge class issue” at the heart of Australian schooling, and that one of her primary reasons for seeking coaching is to remedy it for her own child, who she fears might be at a disadvantage because he is getting a public education rather than a private or independent one. But Adoniou stresses that there’s “nothing insufficient about the quality of education we have in Australia”, and says that parents should consider their child’s mental health before seeking tutoring for them. “Some tutoring services run a different curriculum, so students are spending all this time working at school, and then doing a whole program during after-school hours,” she explains. “I don’t see why in a country like Australia why we need a parallel education system.” With state governments now allocating funding to in-class tutors, Adoniou urges educators to “think really carefully” about how they use funds, advocating for tutors to be used for the mainstream student who don’t need help, freeing up qualified classroom teachers to support the kids trailing behind. “We shouldn’t use untrained tutors, who are often undergraduates doing prac or learning support assistants, for our most needy kids,” she says. “The system should be flipped on its head, where the teacher does all the planning, and where the untrained tutor helps the rest of the class while the trained teacher helps those who are falling behind.” Sahlberg says that funding for remedial support and individual help should have been part of our system well before the pandemic began, and says that now is the time to be investing in preventative tutoring in all schools, “so that the wide achievement gap that existed long before the pandemic could be narrowed”. He also recommends schools pay more attention to outdoor play and physical activity, or activities like music or art, to make learning more holistic for students, and urges parents considering coaching to see their child “as a whole person with multiple abilities and interests”. “Statistics show that schooling is a big factor behind issues with [youth] mental health and happiness,” Sahlberg explains. “In times like this, adults should remove elements in children’s lives that may cause additional anxiety, toxic stress, or depression. Additional tutoring is one of those elements. “Help your child find what [they’re] really interested in and curious about,” he says. “Being good in school subjects is important but finding your true passion positively affects [performance] in school overall.” *Name changed for privacyMelissa McCarthy stars in the criminally underrated 2015 action-comedy Spy, playing desk-bound CIA analyst Susan Cooper. The meek and mild Cooper is perfectly content with monitoring high-tech surveillance and being the spy equivalent of a guardian angel GPS, feeding vital information via a hidden earpiece to her partner in the field, super-agent Bradley Fine (Jude Law). Despite the Bond-sounding musical score and flourishing opening credits, a comical mishap quickly lets the audience know this is not your typical spy film. While tracking the sale of a nuclear weapon, the CIA becomes compromised and the secret identities of their active agents exposed. Realising Cooper’s anonymity is her greatest asset, she is vaulted from the bat-infested basement into a world of undercover espionage. McCarthy gets to showcase the breadth of her comic abilities as she assumes different aliases and becomes embroiled in the high-stakes world of global assassins, private jets and double-crosses. While Cooper is polite, anxious and reserved, her spy alter ego evolves into someone cunning, agile and ruthless. McCarthy elicits the biggest laughs from her physical comedy, including some less-than-perfectly-executed stunts. McCarthy shines in an ensemble cast that includes Miranda Hart and Allison Janney, with each collaborator bringing their comedic big guns to the armoury. Jude Law has way too much fun as a suave American super spy, leaning into every stereotype with a knowing glint in his eyes. Reuniting with McCarthy is her Bridesmaids co-star Rose Byrne, who plays the deliciously deviant arms dealer Rayna Boyanov. With her posh demeanour and a permanent look of disdain, Byrne’s villain is quick with an insult and a withering glance, her savage commentary making her the perfect sparring partner for Cooper and her profanity-laden insults. But the big surprise packet is the comedic turn by tough guy Jason Statham as rogue agent Rick Ford. Poking fun at his macho, action-hero persona, Statham lands some of the biggest laughs in the film. Ford is thoroughly unimpressed by the inexperienced Cooper taking on the undercover assignment, and gruffly decides to shadow her mission. Together they end up trading feisty barbs like an old married couple. Ford brags constantly about his methods for surviving treacherous feats, each tale getting more and more outlandish. Writer/director Paul Feig does a tremendous job of flipping the chauvinistic tropes of the spy genre in a playful yet deliberate way, delivering strong female leads, daggy spy gadgets and authentic chemistry between compatriots and enemies alike. Some of the language in Spy can be jarring if you’re not accustomed to McCarthy and Feig’s previous cinematic partnerships (Bridesmaids; The Heat). And despite Spy’s fun and frivolous tone (and the fact it’s streaming on Disney+), you might find yourself feeling squeamish at a couple of visceral, graphic death scenes and visual gags, cementing the fact this movie is definitely not one for the kids. Spy is a cheeky, engaging and wildly entertaining ride. Feig delivers likeable (if unlikely) action heroes in a convincing espionage plot, complete with high-octane action sequences, surprising twists and exotic locales which all serve as impressive counterpoints to the salty dialogue and boundless humour.Almost every day someone will enter my office and ask, “Am I an alcoholic?” or, “Do you think I have a problem with alcohol?” and sometimes, “My partner says I drink too much.” Alcohol is a drug that has its claws deep in Australian life. If you’re happy, sad, bored, have won a promotion, lost a family member, bought a house or graduated from university, these can all be seen as reasons to drink. Drinking is so common that if a person says they don’t, this lends itself to usually negative and intrusive comments. The lines become blurred when it comes to deciding if a person has a problem with alcohol and whether they have developed an alcohol use disorder (formerly known as alcohol dependence). This is colloquially known as being an alcoholic – a term we avoid in addiction psychiatry. It’s not surprising to hear that people with AUD are told their drinking is a problem by family, partners or work colleagues. Depending on your upbringing, cultural background and exposure to alcohol, you may believe that drinking a six-pack of beer most days is “normal” and that problem drinking is when you start drinking litres of cask wine daily. AUD is a term from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder. It’s defined as a problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of 11 criteria within a 12-month period. Some of the criteria are: alcohol taken in larger amounts than intended; having a strong desire to use alcohol; increased time spent obtaining alcohol; tolerance – increasing amounts of alcohol are used to achieve intoxication; and experiencing withdrawal symptoms when alcohol is ceased. Most people are best served by arranging an appointment with their general practitioner for a formal assessment. For example, Sarah* is a 35-year-old woman who presented to my office because her fiance, Ibrahim, believes she drinks too much and this is affecting their relationship. Sarah is a lawyer and noticed that she increased her drinking amid work stress and wedding planning. Her drinking increased from one glass of wine to a bottle of wine every night. A critical event was becoming intoxicated at dinner with her friends while out celebrating her engagement, which resulting in her getting into a verbal altercation with a stranger and having to be escorted out of the restaurant. Sarah only sought help when her fiance threatened to call off the engagement. She had tried to quit “cold turkey” but went into acute withdrawals, experiencing insomnia, increased tremors, poor concentration, low mood, nausea and intense cravings for alcohol which led to a relapse. Sarah is quick to tell me that she does not believe she has a problem with alcohol but is willing to attend sessions if it gets Ibrahim off her back. Furthermore, she claims to only have been drinking heavily for less than 12 months. Unfortunately, her liver ultrasound shows she has a fatty liver (early sign of liver damage) and has probably been drinking heavily for a longer period of time. Sarah tells me she is surprised by this, but does mention moderate drinking in her mid-20s, suggesting a 10-year period of heavy drinking. In addition, her father was a heavy drinker, suggesting a genetic and behavioural component. The first intervention to consider is a medical detoxification and whether this can be undertaken at home or in a hospital. During this time, withdrawal symptoms are managed with diazepam (valium) and thiamine (vitamin B1). This allows for a period of abstinence from alcohol and allows much-needed supports to be put in place. Unfortunately, many people believe that detox is the beginning and end of treatment, with several clients disengaging from treatment afterwards and high relapse rates. Most people aren’t aware of the various medications we have for AUD such as Naltrexone, Acamprosate and Disulfiram. Naltrexone works by blocking the mu-opioid receptor, which is responsible for the pleasurable effects gained from drinking alcohol. Acamprosate reduces cravings by modifying responses between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters. Disulfiram (an aversive agent) discourages drinking indirectly by causing unpleasant effects such as sweating, headache, palpitations, nausea and vomiting if a person drinks alcohol while taking it. These anti-craving medications are most effective when combined with psychosocial interventions, ranging from brief interventions (usually delivered by GPs), motivational interviewing, cognitive behavioural therapy, case management and residential rehabilitation programs. In addition, there are self-help groups such as Alcoholic Anonymous, Al-Anon (a support group for friends and family of people who have alcohol dependence) and self-management and recovery training, also known as Smart Recovery. This has roots in cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and is an alternative for people who are uncomfortable with the religious aspects of AA. Sarah refuses a medical detox but agrees to Naltrexone and is referred to a psychotherapist with experience in alcohol dependence. Unfortunately, she relapses twice, and her fiance calls off their engagement. At this stage, she agrees to embark on a seven-day detox and is started on Disulfiram, with supervised dosing through her local pharmacy. One month after detox, she has managed to remain sober and her relationship with Ibrahim is in a better place. After six months of being sober and in active treatment, she is able to come to terms with the fact that she does have AUD. She asks: “Does this mean I’ll have a problem with alcohol forever?” Sarah has realised that, at 35, she’s contemplating her life without alcohol. I reply that I am unsure if she can ever attain controlled drinking. Downcast, and visibly disappointed, she leaves my office but agrees to see me in three months. She never returns for that appointment and does not return phone calls. I often wonder if she managed to remain sober. • Dr Xavier Mulenga is an addiction psychiatrist based in Sydney * Names have been changed to protect identitiesAn MP who accused the prime minister’s father of inappropriately touching her has said journalists scoured through her past sex life to find “some sort of defence” for the alleged assault. Caroline Nokes, the Conservative MP for Romsey and Southampton North and chair of the Commons women and equalities committee, said Stanley Johnson smacked her on the bottom at the Conservative party conference in 2003. Since the allegation came to light last week, Nokes said some sections of the media had “warped logic” in labelling her “the sort of woman that it’s OK to sexually harass”. She told Times Radio: “That’s just horrific because how does a perpetrator know what kind of life their victim has led? We are literally in a culture that is trying to turn it on the woman, make it her fault, blame her, accuse her of making it a political vendetta.” Asked why she did not report the assault at the time, Nokes said: “If anyone said in 2003 that I should report it, my first question would be to who? How? What processes are there for me to make a complaint to the Conservative party about a fellow candidate? And I just didn’t know that there were any and I think I would struggle to identify who to complain to now, to be brutally honest. “But I, like so many women, had that response of: how will this impact upon me? How will talking about this have a negative impact on me? And even 18 years later you can see people trying to turn it back on me, victim-blaming and shaming.” Nokes said she does not regard herself as a victim and refused to be painted as one. She added: “I really do think it’s incumbent upon all of us to work together to call it out and to make sure that men who are behaving in this way understand that it’s inappropriate.” Johnson maintained he did not remember the incident and did not know who Nokes was. But the allegation prompted a second woman to come forward, Ailbhe Rea, a journalist for the New Statesman, who alleged he “groped” her at the Tory conference in 2019. Stanley Johnson told the Sun: “I have no recollection of Caroline Nokes, and no idea what she was talking about. Had I been asked about the allegation made by the journalist of the New Statesman, I would have said the same thing.” On Thursday, the prime minister refused to say whether the Conservatives would launch an investigation. Boris Johnson told reporters: “First of all, it’s absolutely right that everybody, women in particular, should be able, should have the confidence, to come forward and make complaints. “There are proper procedures available for people to make their complaints, to make known what has happened and for those to be properly investigated. But I’m obviously not going to comment on individual cases.”So, the 102nd race victory of Lewis Hamilton’s incredible career means that there are now just eight points between him in second and the drivers’ championship leader Max Verstappen. There is no doubt that Red Bull are feeling the heat now – just a couple of weeks ago, it looked as if they were easing their way to the drivers’ and constructors’ titles, but back-to-back victories for Hamilton in Brazil, and now in Qatar, have blown everything open again. Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi are the races remaining on the calendar, and they should be fascinating and thrilling, rather a peculiar feeling for a sport that has often failed to fire the imagination in recent years. See you soon for more. Lando Norris of McLaren has a chat: “It was decent, it could have been a little bit better, we didn’t judge it too well as a team. I couldn’t push as much as I wanted to, but the puncture ruined everything ... we should have had a lot of points today, but we didn’t, because the tyre broke ... I’m proud of what we did ... it wasn’t our fault that we ended P9, we should have been P4, P5 ... let’s hope it doesn’t happen again.” I missed Horner’s earlier interview with Sky about the Verstappen incident in qualifying which led to the penalty, but it seems he said it was down to a ‘rogue marshall’ and that it was down to a ‘screw up’ between the FIA and the marshalls. Red Bull’s Christian Horner, having emerged from his dressing-down by race stewards, speaks to Sky Sports: “Some comments were made in our interview earlier, when you asked me about the marshalling ... I’d like to make it clear that they do a wonderful job and they are volunteers ... My frustration wasn’t at marshalls, it was at a circumstance, and if any offence was taken by any individual, I apologise for that. “It was a phenomenal recovery by Max and the team today. The grid penalty was frustrating but I think we’ve been fairly good with our emotions ... I’m straight: if I think you’re being an arse, I’ll tell you you’re being an arse. “I’ve spoken to the FIA, I’ve apologised ... my frustration wasn’t with an individual marshall, it was the situation ... [in the incident that led to Verstappen’s grid penalty] one car had driven through, one car gets a single yellow, one car gets a double yellow ... I think we can learn from this as a sport. “All the marshalls out there, we need you, we think you do a wonderful job, and apologies for any offence that was taken. “It was a big day. We are sort of back to where we were in Austin ... I think Max’s recovery on the first lap was stunning ... Mercedes had a quicker car than us today ... but we were able to come back at them a bit, the car started to come alive [later in the race]. “Our straight line speed was competitive ... the fact Max was able to get the fastest lap before bolting on that set of softs was also really encouraging ... Max got out there on one lap and he had a little bit of damage to an end plate, but he carried that very well. “There’s everything to play for, we’re going to go home, work hard for a couple of weeks, see if we can improve the car ass much as we can for the next circuit, come back and do it all again.” Read Giles Richards’s race report right here: Alonso has a chat in the paddock: “It was great, it was fun ... it was about managing the tyres.” Where does this rank in his career? “The win is the win, so you cannot rank it too high, but finally. We were very close [to a podium] on a few occasions, and I was wondering if I would get another podium again in my career, or not ... let’s see if we can keep the momentum now for next year. “Still a long way to go for us. It will be fantastic to be fighting with them [Hamilton and Verstappen]. I feel happy to share the podium with them ... no disrespect to the drivers [involved] but in the last couple of years, there have been some strange podiums, because something has happened in the race and they’ve ended up on the podium. Today, I think it was well deserved, and let’s see next year.” Max Verstappen is asked if he was unhappy about the five-place grid penalty: “No surprises there, I knew even last night that I never get presents from them ... when I knew I was starting [in position] seven, I was just motivated to move ahead ... I was determined to keep the gap small the whole race, which we did.” Verstappen is asked again about the penalty: “I don’t want to talk about it too much ... I don’t want to give anyone the pleasure to talk about it more. It’s of course not great. “We just need to try and stay focused, there are a two races to go, and a lot of things can happen, even in qualifying.” Finally, he is asked about the fact that Red Bull chief Christian Horner has been summoned by race stewards post-race, apparently for a breach of the international sporting code: “I don’t even know what it’s about, so no clue ... Racing is not complicated ... there’s a break pedal, an accelerator and a steering wheel.” Hamilton speaks to Sky Sports again: “It’s been fantastic the last two weeks, just amazing. There’s no time for celebrations, I’ll be back with the team next week, back in training, just stay on it, head down ... it’s amazing to be able to close back so many points in these last two races ... they [Red Bull] are still really fast as you saw today, with the fastest lap, and how they got past the other cars ...” Is he enjoying the battle? “I’m loving it. I love the close battle, and the pressure, and the demands it puts on you, and the whole team ... we’ll be bringing our ‘triple A’ game for the last two races.” Toto Wolff speaks: “Lewis was great ... that one point [Verstappen’s for fastest lap] is a bit annoying, but it’s good he won the race. The car is really fast ... Lewis controlled the race from the front, and that’s a good indication for what’s to come, in Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi.” On the Bottas puncture: “It came out of nowhere. There was literally no indication [in the data] ... unfortunately for him, he was the first one to pick up the puncture. “Saudi Arabia should be a good track for us, but we know, it can turn the other way around ... it’s a long straight, we’ll get our ‘spicy’ equipment out ... If everybody finishes the race, [the championship battle] is going to go to Abu Dhabi.” Wolff is asked if the Mercedes car is performing at its best level of the season: “Yes, definitely. The car is quick on the straight and good in the corners. And Lewis is totally in the zone ... the lion got woken up, at Interlagos on that Saturday. “If you would have told us, it’s going to go to Saudi Arabia or the last race, we would have taken that ... whoever wins the championship, merits to win the championship ... we would come back strong [if we lose to Red Bull and Verstappen] but I’m not pre-empting anything. “It’s good fun, when it’s so tough, that’s exactly why are in this sport, and I enjoy every minute. I think we’ve got to push maximum attack [in the final two races] ... we’ve got to push, we’ve got points to make up.” Reaction from Toto Wolff and probably Christian Horner should be coming up shortly ... With eight points now in it for the drivers’ title, the concern for Red Bull is that Mercedes have shown so much pace in the last two races. And of course, Hamilton has been here so many times before, in comparison to his younger rival. The British driver is looking very relaxed as the pressure comes on more and more. Having said that, it was a stunning drive from Verstappen too, especially to fight his way up to second place, from seventh, having been hit with that five-place grid penalty before the race. With two races remaining, Red Bull’s Verstappen nows leads the drivers’ championship by eight points. All to play for. On the podium, Alonso and Verstappen have a chat, while Hamilton and Verstappen seem to carefully ignore each other. A beaming Fernando Alonso reacts to his third place: “Unbelievable ... seven years [since his previous podium finish]. Finally, we got it. We were close a couple of races, Sochi was the last opportunity ... honestly I thought I could be leading after lap one, on those tyres ... it was a good Sunday. “We planned one stop from the beginning, but we never knew how the [tyre] wear would be ... the team was great, the car was superb ... Fuck, I was waiting so long for this.” The customary apology follows from Sky Sports for Alonso’s language, but it only goes to show how much that result means to the two-times world champion, a rare podium finisher in F1 at the age of 40 or over. Brundle then reminisces about a 1994 podium when it was him, Nigel Mansell and Gerhard Berger! Old school. Max Verstappen talks to Sky Sports: “Luckily we had a really good start ... at the end of the day, to get that fastest lap was very nice ... it’s going to be very difficult to the end, but it keeps it exciting. It was good, this track is a lot of fun to drive, it’s really quick. Yeah, it was cool ... “I feel good. It’s going to be a tight battle to the end.” Lewis Hamilton talks to Jenson Button: “I always like to give a thanks to all the people that came out today ... thank you all for coming ... it was pretty straightforward, it was pretty lonely at the front ... it was a solid job from the team ... I’m really grateful for these points, it’s been a hell of a year ... back to back wins is amazing. “The feeling’s good. I feel fit, fitter than ever ... recovery’s been great ... so yeah, bring on the next two.” Final standings: 1 Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) (2 stops) 2 Max Verstappen (Red Bull) +25.743 3 3 Fernando Alonso (Alpine) +59.457 1 4 Sergio Perez (Red Bull) +62.306 2 5 Esteban Ocon (Alpine) +80.570 1 6 Lance Stroll (Aston Martin) +81.274 1 7 Carlos Sainz (Ferrari) +81.911 1 8 Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) +83.126 1 9 Lando Norris (McLaren) 1 L 2 10 Sebastian Vettel (Aston Martin) 1 L 1 11 Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) 1 L 2 12 Daniel Ricciardo (Mclaren) 1 L 1 13 Yuki Tsunoda (AlphaTauri) 1 L 2 14 Kimi Räikkönen (Alfa Romeo Racing) 1 L 2 15 Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo Racing) 1 L 2 16 Mick Schumacher (Haas F1 Team) 1 L 1 17 George Russell (Williams) 2 L 2 18 Nikita Mazepin (Haas F1 Team) 2 L 1 19 Nicholas Latifi (Williams)— 1 20 Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes)— 2 Red Bull speak to Verstappen on the radio: “Max, we’ll take that, that was damage limitation, a fantastic first lap.” Lewis Hamilton speaks to his team on race radio: “Fantastic job guys, fantastic ... let’s keep pushing, we can do this.” “Fantastic Lewis,” says Toto Wolff ... “Now let’s go to Saudi Arabia.” Verstappen finishes second and takes the point for fastest lap ... and Fernando Alonso of Alpine comes home third, for his 98th podium in F1!! The one-stop strategy pays off for Alpine, a superb result for the team and for the Spaniard. Lap 57/57: A phenomenal drive from Hamilton and a brilliant performance from his Mercedes team, too, cranking up the heat in the title race! Lap 56/57: Looks like Hamilton is going to miss out on a chance to go for the fastest lap, thanks to the virtual safety car. Lap 55/57: It’s a virtual safety car, with Nicholas Latifi’s Williams being recovered from the track after he failed to make it to the pits with that puncture ... Lap 55/57: Verstappen scorches to another fastest lap! 1.24sec ... Can Hamilton respond? Further back, Perez is charging, trying to grab the podium place from Alonso ... Lap 54/57: Alonso, on a one-stop strategy, is holding on to his podium place as it stands ... this would be a massive result for him and for Alpine, but they must be worried about those tyres ... Lap 53/57: Hamilton leads Verstappen by 9.9secs. Four laps to go! Four laps until victory for the British driver and for Mercedes! Lap 52/57: Nicholas Latifi (Williams) punctures his front-left tyre, just like Bottas did, the third tyre failure of the race. As Lando Norris pits, with David Beckham on hand in the pits to witness it (“Wow”, he says), Valtteri Bottas retires from the race. That takes away the possibility of Hamilton’s teammate going for the fastest lap and denying Verstappen. As it stands, Red Bull, and specifically the Dutchman, will take the point for fastest lap. (I’m not sure why the yellow flags came out, and neither are the commentators, but it wasn’t anything to do with Bottas retiring.) Lap 50/57: Hamilton, the world champion and race leader, leads Verstappen by 8.366secs. Lap 48/57: Perez overtakes Ocon, and his team are pictured applauding from the pitlane. He’s up to fifth, seven seconds or so behind Norris in the McLaren. Up front, almost needless to say, Hamilton powers towards another race victory, one that will tighten up the battle for the drivers’ championship to within six or so points (depending on where that point for fastest lap ends up ...) Lap 47/57: Perez and his Red Bull team fancy moving up from seventh to the podium, given he’s on fresher tyres. Verstappen, meanwhile, takes the fastest lap! Lap 46/57 - latest standings 1 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes (2 stops) 2 Max Verstappen Red Bull Racing +9.283 2 3 Fernando Alonso Alpine +46.163 1 4 Lando Norris Mclaren +52.906 1 5 Esteban Ocon Alpine +61.038 1 6 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +62.572 1 7 Sergio Perez Red Bull Racing +63.484 2 8 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +67.933 1 9 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +69.707 1 10 Sebastian Vettel Aston Martin +78.176 1 11 Pierre Gasly AlphaTauri +80.462 2 12 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes1 L 1 13 Daniel Ricciardo Mclaren1 L 1 14 George Russell Williams1 L 2 15 Yuki Tsunoda AlphaTauri1 L 1 16 Kimi Räikkönen Alfa Romeo Racing L 2 17 Nicholas Latifi Williams1 L 1 18 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing L 2 19 Mick Schumacher Haas F1 Team L 1 20 Nikita Mazepin Haas F1 Team L 1 Lap 44/57: Perez sets the fastest lap. The battle for that solitary point looks set to be fierce in the final few laps ... Lap 42/57: Verstappen pits! Hamilton pits! It’s a smooth stop for both drivers and teams, and Hamilton comes back out on to track with a lead of 8.7secs. Alonso is now in third place, 35secs down. Lap 42/57: As it stands, Hamilton will narrow the gap in the drivers’ championship to just six points. Truly, it’s going to be squeaky bum time in the final two races of the season: Saudi Arabia on 5 December and Abu Dhabi on 12 December. Lap 41/57: Hamilton leads Verstappen by 9.1secs. Perez is 54secs back in third. Lap 39/57: Brundle says he thinks today’s fastest lap point could prove crucial in the title race. Also, the commentators are speculating about whether Mercedes will keep Hamilton out on these hard tyres, or bring him in for another stop ... and also, given Verstappen has so much gap to third place, Red Bull can afford to get creative with their tyre strategy, and perhaps give him a nice set of soft tyres to go for that fastest lap at the end. Lap 38/57: Ted Kravitz, on commentary for Sky Sports, says that Hamilton has raced at 34 different F1 tracks, and has won on his first visit to 11 of them. Good stattage. Lap 36/57: In the live constructors’ championships standings, Mercedes lead Red Bull by just three points. Up front, Hamilton leads by 8.1secs. Sergio Perez of Red Bull, in third place, is 50secs down. The Mercedes man – yet to pit – limps off the track and is trying to make it to the pits for some fresh tyres! They pushed it a bit too far with this set of tyres, clearly ... Bottas rolls into the pitlane, and gets a new nose, and new tyres, and the stop takes 11.4secs. Bottas had done 33 laps on the medium compound tyre, and apparently the guidance from Pirelli is that around 30 laps is the maximum. Anyway, Bottas comes back into the race now in 14th place. “Becks”, right, and the world champion Lewis Hamilton before the race. Lap 31/57: Latest standings 1 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes (1 pitstop) 2 Max Verstappen Red Bull +6.879 1 3 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes +31.420 4 Sergio Perez Red Bull +51.511 1 5 Fernando Alonso Alpine +53.717 1 6 Pierre Gasly AlphaTauri +61.267 1 7 Lando Norris McLaren +66.967 1 8 Esteban Ocon Alpine +68.369 1 9 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +70.513 1 10 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +73.709 1 11 Yuki Tsunoda AlphaTauri +76.886 1 12 Kimi Räikkönen Alfa Romeo Racing +83.471 1 13 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +84.010 1 14 Sebastian Vettel Aston Martin +85.323 1 15 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing +87.098 1 16 Daniel Ricciardo McLaren L 1 17 George Russell Williams L 1 18 Nicholas Latifi Williams L 1 19 Nikita Mazepin Haas F1 Team1 L 20 Mick Schumacher Haas F1 Team1 L 1 Lap 29/57: Hamilton clocks another fastest lap. His lead squeezes under seven seconds, though with Verstappen throwing everything at the chase from second position. Lap 28/57: Sainz, of Ferrari, now pits and drops down to 10th position when he re-emerges on to the track. Up front, Hamilton’s lead is 7.168secs over Verstappen. Lap 27/57: Bottas is third, Sainz fourth, Leclerc fifth, Alonso sixth ... no, Alonso fifth after Leclerc veers off track. Perez is seventh. Lap 25/57: Hamilton’s lead over Verstappen is 7.757secs. Both drivers and both cars – the Mercedes and the Red Bull – are giving it their all. It’s one of those drives from Hamilton where everything is so smooth and apparently effortless, it’s easy to forget how impressive it is. Lap 24/57: Alonso pits, and comes back out on hard compound tyres, in eighth place, emerging from the pitlane just in front of Ricciardo’s McLaren. Lap 22/57: Third-placed Alonso of Alpine, who hasn’t pitted, is 14.3secs behind second-placed Verstappen. Hamilton, up front, produces a fastest lap. Bottas moves up to fourth now, taking Lando Norris. Lap 21/57: Verstappen’s left front wing looks like it did indeed take a bit of a whack, and that has cost him a little bit of pace. Mind you, at the moment, he is matching the speed of Hamilton and Mercedes – the gap is staying at 8.5secs. Lap 20/57: If nothing else, Red Bull’s decision to pit so early on the medium tyres has irritated Hamilton slightly, but that looks to be the extent of the damage. He is still out in front by 8.5secs. Lap 18/57: Mercedes react immediately, Hamilton pits and goes to the hard tyres. It’s a smooth stop, and Hamilton comes out still with a comfortable lead. “It’s definitely way too early to stop,” says Hamilton on the radio, clearly not impressed with the decision. But he is still nine seconds clear of Verstappen and well set for victory. Lap 18/57: Verstappen pits for Red Bull! He goes from the medium tyres to the hard tyres and emerges from the pitlane just ahead of Alonso. “They may as well do that,” Brundle says on commentary ... “They couldn’t match the pace of the Mercedes.” Lap 17/57: Hamilton is now more than nine seconds clear of Verstappen, and is about to start lapping people. Brundle, incredulous, repeats that Hamilton is two seconds faster than the rest of the field. Lap 15/57: Alonso of Alpine, in third, is now 30 seconds behind Verstappen (Red Bull) in second. Hamilton of Mercedes has produced a masterful drive so far, and unless there is some bizarre occurrence with the pitstops, or some other mishap, he is scorching away to a resounding victory. Lap 14/57 – live standings 1 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes 2 Max Verstappen Red Bull Racing +6.624secs 3 Fernando Alonso Alpine +26.789 4 Lando Norris Mclaren +29.649 5 Pierre Gasly AlphaTauri +30.808 6 Sergio Perez Red Bull Racing +33.565 7 Esteban Ocon Alpine +34.368 8 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +35.273 9 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes +35.681 10 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +36.647 11 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +38.763 12 Daniel Ricciardo Mclaren +41.564 13 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing +47.103 14 George Russell Williams +49.320 - - 15 Sebastian Vettel Aston Martin +49.863 16 Nicholas Latifi Williams +51.006 17 Mick Schumacher Haas F1 Team +52.888 18 Nikita Mazepin Haas F1 Team +55.424 19 Yuki Tsunoda AlphaTauri +65.707 1 20 Kimi Räikkönen Alfa Romeo Racing +66.944 1 Lap 12/57: Bottas’s struggles to move up the field are ammunition for those who don’t rate his driving ability, although it’s possible his Mercedes is not operating as well as Hamilton’s, having said that. Lap 11/57: A couple of minutes ago, Bottas’s Mercedes team were on the radio, urging him to try and make some headway through the field. He is now up to ninth. Hamilton leads, Verstappen second now nearly six seconds down, Alonso third, 21 seconds further back. Lap 10/57: The leaders are more than two seconds faster than everyone else on track, observes Brundle on commentary, so this is very much a two-way tussle for victory in the inaugural Qatar GP. Lap 9/57: Verstappen went off track slightly through a bend and there is speculation that he may have sustained a bit of damage to his car. Hamilton is currently leading by 4.9secs so the gap has stretched out ... Looking good for Hamilton and Mercedes right now. Standings on Lap 7/57 1 Lewis Hamilton Mercedes 2 Max Verstappen Red Bull Racing +4.684 3 Fernando Alonso Alpine +11.380 4 Pierre Gasly AlphaTauri +13.125 5 Lando Norris Mclaren +14.093 6 Esteban Ocon Alpine +15.339 7 Carlos Sainz Ferrari +16.525 8 Sergio Perez Red Bull Racing +17.227 9 Yuki Tsunoda AlphaTauri +21.208 10 Lance Stroll Aston Martin +21.795 11 Valtteri Bottas Mercedes +22.245 12 Charles Leclerc Ferrari +23.239 13 Kimi Räikkönen Alfa Romeo Racing +24.004 14 Antonio Giovinazzi Alfa Romeo Racing +25.406 15 George Russell Williams +26.106 16 Daniel Ricciardo Mclaren +27.454 17 Sebastian Vettel Aston Martin +27.743 18 Nicholas Latifi Williams +28.759 19 Mick Schumacher Haas F1 Team +30.216 20 Nikita Mazepin Haas F1 Team +32.709 Lap 6/57: Verstappen is now catching Hamilton! He narrows the gap to 3.7secs, but then it seems to go out again, to 4.1secs. Hamilton and Verstappen are turning this into a two-horse race, with Alonso in third place nearly 10 seconds down on Verstappen now. Lap 5/57: Verstappen overtakes Alonso! He is up to second, and Hamilton leads by 4.1secs ... Hamilton has apparently been on the radio to ask where Bottas is. The answer is he is 11th, having had a poor start, certainly in comparison to Verstappen, who has made light work of his five-place grid penalty. Lap 4/57: Making use of DRS, and the fact that Gasly went wide going into the home straight, Verstappen of Red Bull overtakes and is up to third place, having started the race in seventh. Brundle reckons the best Red Bull can hope for, from here, is second place and fastest lap to limit the damage. Lap 3/57: Hamilton had a perfect start from pole, with Verstappen flying up the inside into turn 1, but then being forced off the track slightly when Alonso slammed the door. Hamilton’s lead has stretched to 2.5secs, while Verstappen is fourth, and goes on the radio to say “I’m a little bit stuck here,” saying he can’t get past Gasly. Lap 1/57: Hamilton leads by 1.8secs. Alonso moved up to second with a good start, Gasly is third, Verstappen is fourth. The first Qatar grand prix has begun! Hamilton gets a great start and leads into turn 1! Verstappen also gets a good start, he goes off track in the second or third bend, but has made up a few places straight away! A yellow flag briefly appeared during the formation lap. Brundle, on commentary, isn’t clear as to why. But we seem to be back to normal now ... Yes, Red Bull may feel they need to get busy, tactics-wise ... but they can’t start to panic, or start to rush things, either. The formation lap has begun, and the teams are clearly concerned about the ‘dirty side’ of the track, veering over to the left-hand side of the start/finish straight as they set off. This being the first Qatar GP, teams are in the dark regarding what may be the best strategy. Maybe Red Bull will have to roll the dice in terms of their tyres? And what is going to happen at turn 1, and in the first few laps, with the faster cars of Verstappen and Bottas trying to make up the places they have lost with those grid penalties? Qatar is the 33rd sovereign nation to host a grand prix, we are told by the helpful people at Sky Sports. More from Giles Richards on the battle between Mercedes and Red Bull, Hamilton and Verstappen, Wolff and Horner: Under 10 minutes to lights out: what are your predictions for the race? Email me or tweet @lukemclaughlin! Gasly and his Alpha Tauri colleagues are having a team photo to mark their unexpected appearance in P2 on the grid ... and why not? Lando Norris has a word with Sky Sports, anticipating his start from fourth on the grid behind Hamilton, Gasly and Alonso: “We’ll see ... we’ve got some quick cars behind us ... maybe an opportunity to score a few more points. I don’t know how the overtaking is going to be, so that’s going to play a big part.” We’ve just had a rendition of the Qatar national anthem. The Fifa World Cup trophy (the real thing, or a replica?) is placed on a pedestal on the track, with a year to go until the World Cup starts. On which note: The former Manchester United goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel, who is on the grid and ready to watch the race, speaks to Sky Sports’ Martin Brundle: “I’ve always liked Lewis Hamilton ... obviously he’s proven he’s the best driver over so many years ... but I’ve just been to the Red Bull pit, and of course the only Dane [involved in the title battle] is his mechanic, Max Verstappen’s ... more than anything I’m just looking to the battle between those two [Hamilton and Verstappen]. Brundle asks him about Ole Gunnar Solskær’s departure from Manchester United: “It’s really sad, I am seriously really sad, on Ole’s behalf, on the football club’s behalf, on the fan’s behalf ... it’s too many managers we’ve had to dismiss in to short a period of time ... I just feel for Ole, he’s done everything he could, but in this modern day, football’s modern day, it’s been deemed not to be enough.” Alonso speaks after his promotion to P3 on the grid: “We were happy with P5 ... P3 is another 16 metres, we take it, and let’s see in turn 1 if we can attack the leaders ... it’s a lovely track, long corners, you can lean on the car, on the tyres ... it’s nice to drive ....” Read Giles Richards’ report from qualifying: Martin Brundle has now spent two minutes lurking by Fernando Alonso, who studiously ignores him. “Crashing and burning here a bit today,” Brundle says. “How’s your roast lunch at home?” Meanwhile, here’s a photo of Sir David of Beckham: Brundle also tries to grab a word with Max Verstappen, who is presumably pretty angry about his penalty, but Verstappen doesn’t want to talk. Now he’s trying to grab a word with David Beckham but he’s struggling ... “I’ve been on this grid 35, 36 years and I’ve never seen anything like this,” says Martin Brundle on his grid walk, referring to the confusion that reigns with the late decision to punish Verstappen and Bottas for failing to observe those yellow flags in qualifying. The provisional order was obviously changed late, so some of the teams were in the wrong positions on the grid, and had to shuffle around. Breaking news: Max Verstappen, the drivers’ championship leader, has been hit with a five-place grid penalty for ‘failing to slow for double waved yellow flags’ in qualifying for the Qatar Grand Prix, meaning the Red Bull driver will be starting from seventh when the lights go out at 2pm UK time. It’s another dramatic twist in the title race, and will be controversial too, with stewards saying they had “sympathy” with Verstappen due to the “lack of display of the yellow light panels, no dash warning lights and no audio signal to the driver” to alert him of the situation when Pierre Gasly went off track at turn 15 and lost his front wing. The stewards argue that ultimately it was Verstappen’s job to observe the flags. Valtteri Bottas, Lewis Hamilton’s Mercedes teammate, has also been punished with a three-place penalty for the same reason. Hamilton is on pole, a superb run in qualifying following his stunning victory in Brazil a week ago, with Gasly of Alpha Tauri second despite qualifying fourth. Fernando Alonso (Alpine) is third on the grid and Lando Norris (McLaren) is fourth. Regardless of the technicalities of the decision to punish Verstappen and Bottas, Hamilton now looks well set to turn the heat up even further in the drivers’ title race. Verstappen leads the charge for the title with 332.5 points, Hamilton is 14 points back on 318.5. Pre-race reading and more coming up ...There was an era when managerial changes in Manchester were confined to the blue half, but on the day Pep Guardiola saw off Ole Gunnar Solskjær, he also claimed the scalp of a rather more decorated coach. Rafael Benítez is the Champions League winner who has now gone six games without a victory. Instead, the Spaniard with the most to celebrate was Rodri, who delivered a stunning strike, and the Liverpool alumnus with much to savour was Raheem Sterling, who was lured to Anfield by the current Everton manager. Only Lionel Messi and Sergio Agüero have ever scored more for Guardiola than Sterling but City goals had become rarities for the England forward in a 2021 when he has often been out of form and favour. After two in 30 games, though, he has two in as many outings. Guardiola has some way to go to catch Sir Alex Ferguson, who remained in situ while 14 managers on the other side of the Mancunian divide departed, but at least he leapfrogged Jürgen Klopp to reclaim second place in the Premier League table. The calibre of City’s first two goals – Bernardo Silva’s third was less memorable – meant he did so in style. Messi, Kylian Mbappé and Neymar beckon on Wednesday but even they should admire City’s strikes. “The quality of the players we have made the difference,” said Guardiola. “The last times we play against Rafa Benítez at Newcastle, always we struggle a lot.” He encountered a familiar gameplan. “We were well organised and we defended with intensity,” said Benítez. City responded with class. “The first goal changes everything and the second, even worse,” lamented the Everton manager. Rodri was the passer turned finisher. In the first half, he completed more passes than all of Everton’s midfielders and forwards did between them. In the second, he showed another side to his game, unleashing an unstoppable shot from 25 yards after meeting Allan’s misdirected ball. There was no false modesty from the scorer. “The goal was a beauty,” he said. Sterling had supplied the sublime finish before then with a half-volley that flew past his England teammate Jordan Pickford. It came from João Cancelo’s flighted pass, giving him a fifth assist in three matches. They are freakish figures for a left-back, but plenty of playmakers would be unable to supply a ball of that deftness and delicacy. “He is in incredible top form,” said Guardiola. The same might not have been said of Sterling. An unused substitute in the Manchester derby, he might not have played until injury sidelined Jack Grealish and Covid waylaid Kevin De Bruyne, but he enjoyed his opportunity. “He has to perform like he performed today,” said Guardiola. “He did a great job.” Returning to his old beat on the right flank, Sterling crossed for Foden, who returned the favour, though neither could direct his header on target. But for a point-blank save from Pickford, Sterling would have scored a late second. He had also been initially awarded a penalty. There was some dispute if Michael Keane’s challenge was in the box; upon seeing the incident again, the referee, Stuart Attwell, decided it was not even a foul. Everton, who were denied a penalty after a VAR intervention against Tottenham a fortnight earlier, could sense that technology was a great leveller. City needed neither a spot-kick nor their sidelined superstars. As Guardiola reshaped his forward line, Cole Palmer was granted a first Premier League start in the manager’s beloved position, as a false nine. He showed an aptitude for it. “A good performance,” said Guardiola. It featured a low shot Pickford clawed away. Still more auspicious was the moment when he dropped off and provided a defence-splitting pass for Silva to scurry into the gap he had created. Pickford came off his line to block the shot but the ball looped up to Ilkay Gündogan. He lifted his header over Pickford, but it flicked the bar. It was a further sign of Palmer’s influence that his deflected effort fell for Silva to add the third. “He is an incredible investment for the future,” Guardiola said. Palmer was replaced by a second 19-year-old, with James McAtee’s top-flight debut coming in a cameo. “We have exceptional players in the academy,” Guardiola said. “We have a good generation of four, five or six players and I am not shy to use them.” If options abound for him, they are narrowing for a beleaguered Benítez as Everton’s injury problems worsened and Richarlison picked up a caution that rules him out of Sunday’s trip to Brentford. They lost their most dynamic winger and a flagship success of Benítez’s bargain-basement buying when Demarai Gray limped off. “We will have to deal with that,” said his manager.And here’s our report from the Etihad. That’s all from me. Thanks for reading! Ban this filth: Next up it’s Tottenham v Leeds – AKA Conte’s home debut – which you can follow here: And that’s that. As expected, Everton were simply not in the contest once City went ahead, and in the end the three-goal margin was just about reflective. City was a class apart today – epitomised by the first two goals, both resplendent in their own way. City climb to second, a point above Liverpool. Everton are now winless in six – with a Merseyside derby looming. 93 mins: McAtee escapes down the left and rifles a rising shot into the side netting. He looks a confident boy. 91 mins: Rodri, today’s man of the match, choreographs a spell of keep-ball between City’s midfield and defence. Everton give halfhearted chase; they want the final whistle. 88 mins: McAtee is involved immediately, backheeling to Silva then showing good feet in the box while looking to get a shot away, but in the end there are too many Everton bodies in his way. 87 mins: Guardiola sends on 19-year-old James McAtee comes on for his debut. Gundogan carries the ball forward, as far as the edge of the box, then lays the ball to Palmer who looks to cut inside and go for goal. His shot is half-blocked but the ball runs to Silva, who tucks a simple finish under Pickford from close range. 77 mins: City respond by zooming down the other end, Mahrez squaring to Sterling, who looks set to tap home at the back post, but Pickford scrambles across his goal to smother. 76 mins: Change for City: Ake on for Laporte. Then half a chance for Everton, who work the ball down the right through Townsend, Rondon and Iwobi, and all of a sudden Coleman is scampering into the box with the ball at his feet. He tries to lift the ball over Ederson but in the end he is too close to the keeper, who gathers. 74 mins: Everton are finally out of their shell. Townsend feeds Gordon, who can’t make it past his marker on the left. City break and Palmer goes for the 30-yarder, but he is evidently no Rodri and the shot is wild. 70 mins: Mahrez rattled a free-kick straight at Pickford, who holds well and send Everton down the other end, where Iwobi dinks in a cross from the right. The ball floats invitingly to Richarlison, who winds up the acrobatic volley … and shins the ball away from goal. This should really be a Joy of Seven after Cancelo’s pass today: 62 mins: Mahrez is involved again, this time pleading for a penalty after he’s brought down by Digne. But Attwell is not convinced by his theatrics – the left-back got the ball. Rondon comes on for Delph. 60 mins: A chance for Mahrez, who has come on for Foden. Palmer drifts forward, spins on a sixpence and picks out Cancelo - in the centre-forward position - who rolls the ball to the winger on the right, but his first-time shot is scuffed into the ground. 58 mins: And that, you’d have to think, is that. Whether by accident or design, Everton are still playing with 11 men behind the ball, and so City are still monopolising possession. If the first goal was a work of artistic subtlety, this is the complete opposite – and every bit as good. City attack down the left via Foden, whose cross is flicked clear by Allan. And onto the loose ball steam Rodri, who absolutely wallops the ball into the top corner from 25 yards. Matthew Dony writes: “On outside-of-the-boot stuff, I am torn. On the one hand, it is arguably the most aesthetically pleasing way to strike a football. It takes skill, confidence, and a certain amount of swagger. On the other hand, it’s often done because a player won’t use their ‘wrong’ foot. It can be a result of professional footballers having a massive gap in their technique. If you’re paid that kind of money, and your whole job is to be good at football, there’s really no excuse not to be two-footed.” True – and apparently while at Real Madrid, Benitez irked Luka Modric by telling him to use his left foot instead of the outside of his right. But as far as we spectators are concerned, there’s no debate is there? It’s a joy. 50 mins: Another Everton air shot, this time from Allan, who gives away a corner in the process. Pickford punches clear and as the ball is launched back into the box, Gundogan wants a penalty for being bundled to the ground by Iwobi. Didn’t look a foul to me. 47 mins: Townsend sends the ball into the box but, after an air shot from Delph, the danger is snuffed out by City. 46 mins: We’re back underway, and Everton already look more ambitious, Iwobi burrowing forward and then Coleman winning a free-kick on the overlap. Richard Hirst gives his thoughts on the vacancy at Old Trafford: “With Man Utd having put Solksjaer out of his misery and Cardiff having dispensed with the services of Mick McCarthy, the answer to Utd’s managerial problems is obvious: Solksjaer goes back to Cardiff where he enjoyed such success and McCarthy goes to Man Utd. In order to meet the apparent requirement of having a ‘Utd legend’ involved, Roy Keane could come in as his assistant. Pre-season training in Saipan?” I’d tune in for that. Some half-time reading from across town: Townsend takes and goes for goal from a tight angle, but the shot is straight down Ederson’s throat. And that’s that for now. 47 mins: It was a good finish from Sterling, actually, who opened up his body to slot home on the half-volley. But it was the pass that made it – Quaresmaesque. Townsend wins a free-kick on the right, Laporte booked for the foul. Mary Waltz wastes no time writing in: “Noble effort by my boys but this is a mismatch and my hope is the thrashing won’t be too severe.” That’s the spirit. A glorious goal. Man City attack down the left vila Silva, but Keane launches the ball clear. Joao Cancelo saunters forward from left-back to pick up the loose ball, then bisects the Everton defence with an outside-of-the-boot through-ball - perfection - which invites the onrushing Sterling to tap home. 41 mins: Everton mount a rare attack with Iwobi carrying the ball well and eventually being sent clear by Richarlison down the left. For a split second it looks like he might be in on goal, but Kyle Walker turn on his engine and bursts back to clean up. That’s what he’s there for. 39 mins: City continue to turn the screw, this time with a flurry of corners. None of them come to anything, but it increasingly feels like there’s only so long Everton can hold fort here. They need half-time. VAR recommends Attwell have a look at the replay – presumably to check where exactly contact was made – and the referee deems it to have been a fair challenge after all! If you say so Stuart. Sterling, who’s been the best player on the pitch this half, skitters forward from a central position and is fouled by Keane just inside the box. Or was it…? 31 mins: Richarlison picks up a booking for a wild lunge on Kyle Walker after Townsend had been denied a free kick. He’ll miss next week’s game against Brentford as that’s already his fifth booking of the season – a good effort. 28 mins: Palmer picks up the ball on the edge of the box and slips a great ball to Silva, who is clean through. He goes for the dink, but Pickford stands tall to repel it. The ball loops up as far as the onrushing Gundogan, whose header beats the keeper but lands on top of the crossbar. Best chance so far. 27 mins: Iwobi’s first involvement is to waste a rare chance to start a counterattack with a sloppy pass. Foden bends in a cross from the left and it’s met by Sterling, who is leaning back and sends his header wildly over. “A good day for the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham,” writes Richard Hirst. “With Bournemouth losing, teams from the borough are top of both the Premier League and the Championship.” I guess we all get our kicks where we can. 21 mins: Sterling drives down the right again and wins a corner, which is eventually belted clear, and City come again. Everton can’t get out of their half. 18 mins: Sterling is seeing lots of the ball and seems to have to beating of Digne on that flank. He skitters past the Frenchman again and his low cross is belted clear. More japes from Pickford, who completely spills a deep cross. Gordon and Foden chase the loose ball and fall over each other. Honk. 16 mins: Gray is injured – and that’s a blow for Everton. He limps down the tunnel and on comes Alex Iwobi, the big-money signing who has something to prove having fallen out of favour of late. 13 mins: Gundogan spins on the edge of the box and tries to slide a lovely reverse ball through to Palmer, but an alert Godfrey cuts out the pass and Everton break. City get numbers back and snuff out the danger. Gray looks injured. 11 mins: Sterling skips past Digne and chips a nice cross to the back post where Foden, jumping backwards and twisting, can only direct his header wide – but not by much. 8 mins: City are hogging the ball now but Everton are defending resolutely and showing tenacity in the tackle, too. It’s doesn’t look like Richarlison will be getting many touches today. 6 mins: Walker hares forward and puts in a low cross, which is half-cleared as far as Cancelo but he scuffs his shot wide. 4 mins: The game has settled into the expected rhythm now, with Everton sitting deep and City seeing plenty of the ball. We’re treated to some early comedy from a pair of England internationals, as Pickford slices a clearance into the upper tier and Kyle Walker lets a simple pass run under his foot and out for a throw. 2 mins: City steam up the other end and win a free-kick on the right when Sterling draws a foul. Foden floats it in nicely but his cross doesn’t get a touch. Goal kick. 1 min: And we’re away. City kick off, gives the ball away immediately, and Everton go on the attack with Townsend and Gordon, whose shot is blocked. As kickoff nears the teams march out of the tunnel, with much rabble-rousing clapping from Everton players, who are wearing funny button-up black warmup tops. Very odd. Stuart Attwell is the referee. Gary Naylor writes: “Interesting to consider what my fellow Blues would consider a success for Rafa today. I’d say he’s already ticked one box in selecting Anthony Gordon. Next I want to see coherent defending at set pieces. Finally not shipping three or more goals.” And Jonathan Wilson’s column this weekend was on yet another promising young midfielder – the best of the lot, in fact. Remember when England didn’t produce playmakers? It’s worth nothing that Everton have a promising young midfielder of their own. Anthony Gordon has been one of their brightest players through their recent spell of iffy form – and scored twice for England U21s last week – and he keeps his place from last week’s draw against Spurs, with Allan and Fabian Delph likely to be doing the midfield dirty work. Andros Townsend, meanwhile, will have a lot of thankless running to do today if the free-roaming Joao Cancelo is to be kept quiet. Some pre-match reading from our Merseyside correspondent on the various problems at Everton, which run all the way from bootroom to boardroom: You may have heard there is another football story unfolding today. More on that here. (And here, and here) So then. Phil Foden has been passed fit and he starts for Guardiola’s strikerless wonders, while Raheem Sterling also gets the chance to play himself back into favour. But the real surprise is the inclusion of 19-year-old Cole Palmer, who makes his first Premier League start. Palmer is highly thought of and got his first senior goal in the win a Club Bruges this season. He made his debut against Burnley in October … and scored a hat-trick for the club’s under-23 team that night. Not bad eh? Man City: Ederson, Walker, Stones, Laporte, Cancelo, Rodrigo, Gundogan (C), Bernardo, Palmer, Sterling, Foden. Subs: Steffen, Carson, Dias, Ake, Jesus, Zinchenko, Fernandinho, Mahrez, McAtee Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Keane, Godfrey, Digne, Delph, Allan, Townsend, Gordon, Gray, Richarlison. Subs: Begovic, Kenny, Iwobi, Tosin, Gbamin, Branthwaite, Rondon, Simms, Onyango Six months into Rafael Benitez’s Everton reign, the team’s progress under his stewardship has been unsteady. He has coaxed great form from unlikely sources (Andros Townsend, Demarai Gray) but failed thus far to get the best from his most talented attackers (Richarlison, Dominic Calvert-Lewin). A good start has given way to a severe recent wobble, and although a run of three defeats was ended last week in the only way Benitez knows how – a gruelling big-game 0-0 – he’ll need more than creditable draws in the long run. Benitez’s resources have been severely limited (the club that spent £100m on Theo Walcott, Alex Iwobi and Gylfi Sigurdsson gave him just £1.7m in the summer) and so far the Goodison crowd has given their old nemesis their backing. But with the team winless in five and the Merseyside derby a fortnight away, patience may soon run begin to thin. Meanwhile it’s hard times for Manchester City, who come into today’s game without their best player, their record signing and – maybe – their hottest youngster. Whether those absences will be much felt is another matter, though, given the middling form of Kevin De Bruyne and Jack Grealish this season, and the fact that Phil Foden can be replaced by one of many fleet-footed creators at Pep Guardiola’s disposal. City enjoyed themselves last week during their walking-pace victory in the Manchester derby but their shock 2-0 loss at the hands of Crystal Palace the week before offered proof that Guardiola’s team are eminently beatable, so long as you’re organised, resilient and capable of spring the odd lightning counterattack. Which just so happens to be the very battle-plan Benitez has spent his entire career perfecting. Stay tuned – this one could be good.The US government’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci warned on Sunday that time was running short to prevent a “dangerous” new surge of Covid-19 infections from overwhelming the upcoming holiday season. Coronavirus cases across the US are rising again for the first time in weeks, and approaching 100,000 a day. Experts fear that this week’s Thanksgiving holiday, for which tens of millions of Americans will travel for indoor celebrations with family and friends, will fuel a further surge. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said it was not too late to avoid a significant worsening of Covid-19 rates leading up to Christmas and New Year if the public acted now on new measures to subdue the virus, such as Friday’s approval of booster shots for adults and the recent opening up of vaccinations to children aged five to 11. “We still have about 60 million people in this country who are eligible to be vaccinated who have not been, and that results in the dynamic of virus in the community that not only is dangerous and makes people who are unvaccinated vulnerable, but it also spills over into the vaccinated people,” Fauci said on CNN’s State of the Union on Sunday. “We have a lot of virus circulating around. You can’t walk away from the data, and the data show that the cases are starting to go up, which is not unexpected when you get into a winter season. People start to go indoors more and we know that immunity does wane over time. “The bottom line is get vaccinated if you’re not vaccinated, and boostered if you have been vaccinated. Since we can vaccinate children from five to 11, you start vaccinating them now [and] they will be fully vaccinated by the time we get to the Christmas holidays.” The numbers of Americans traveling for Thanksgiving this year will be close to pre-pandemic levels, the federal Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has predicted, raising fears at a time when the Biden administration has struggled to get its vaccination message across. The daily average of new cases has risen 29% in the last 14 days, analysis by the New York Times shows, while fewer than 60% of those eligible are fully vaccinated. Meanwhile, the 2021 US death toll from Covid has surpassed that of 2020, according to the Wall Street Journal. Additionally, Joe Biden’s efforts to improve those figures through compulsory vaccination have stalled. The requirement for businesses of more than 100 employees remains blocked by the courts while Republican leaders in some states have kneecapped the president by enacting laws specifically outlawing such mandates. Disney, one of Florida’s biggest employers, announced on Saturday it would no longer insist cast members be vaccinated, after the governor, Ron DeSantis, signed sweeping legislation on Thursday countermanding Biden’s order. In a move that many saw as infantile, DeSantis chose the unincorporated Florida community of Brandon for the signing – “Let’s Go Brandon” has become an offensive anti-Biden rallying call of the right in recent weeks. In a later appearance Sunday on ABC’s This Week, Fauci was cautious over suggestions by vaccine manufacturers that annual boosters might be necessary to keep Covid-19 at bay. “We would hope, and this is something that we’re looking at very carefully, that that third shot with the mRNA [vaccine] not only boosts you way up, but increases the durability so that you will not necessarily need it every six months, or a year,” he said. “We’re hoping it pushes it out more. If it doesn’t and the data show we do need it more often then we’ll do it.”The global attention has dissipated, but the crisis is intensifying. The bleak year that Afghans have endured is turning to a still bleaker winter. The UN World Food Programme (WFP) predicts that almost 23 million people – more than half the population – will face crisis or emergency levels of acute food insecurity before spring: the highest rate ever recorded. On Thursday, the UN envoy to the country, Deborah Lyons, warned that it is on the brink of catastrophe. This year, the WFP’s operations in Afghanistan are expected to cost $510m; it predicts that it will need almost five times that amount in 2022. The economy shrank by 40% after the Taliban seized power again in August, on top of the devastation wrought by long-running conflict, the pandemic and a severe drought. An economy heavily dependent on aid and other foreign cash has had the tap turned off. The population is larger than before, making subsistence farming tougher; migration is harder. People are running out of things to sell. Food and fuel prices have reportedly soared by up to 75%. Women have been especially hard-hit. The problem is how to prevent the Afghan people from starving while minimising benefits to a brutal and repressive leadership who have never met the needs of those they rule. No one wishes to strengthen them, nor to embolden similar movements in the region. Yet the current alternative to Taliban rule is not a return to the status quo ante but a collapse that would also offer new opportunities to Islamic State, with repercussions far beyond Afghanistan. It is already resurgent; attacks attributed to the group have reportedly risen from 60 in 2020 to 334 this year. The first priority now must be for countries – particularly the US and its allies – to actually pay the UN the money they have promised. Humanitarian aid has resumed, with the US issuing licences to ease provision without removing sanctions. But with the implosion of the banking system, organisations are struggling to pay staff on the ground. Some argue that it is time to unfreeze the $9bn in frozen foreign exchange reserves and resume access to International Monetary Fund resources. But even putting all ethical qualms aside, that would only partially address the banking crisis; and it is far from clear that the unqualified officials chosen by the Taliban are capable of managing those funds. One option might be to establish a new humanitarian financial corridor, possibly through a private central bank. Emergency aid is not enough. Development funding is needed to get the economy off its knees. In some areas, there may be room for manoeuvre. Funders cannot support schools when girls are prevented from attending. But they could resume paying teachers in provinces where older girls are able to study. Meanwhile, those most at risk in Afghanistan must be helped to begin new lives elsewhere. Western countries that encouraged women to work in sectors such as policing are being disgracefully slow to offer them a home now their professions have put them at risk. Shamefully, the west is less likely to be stirred to action by the desperation of Afghans than by the fear that it may drive them to migrate and by domestic security concerns. When Ms Lyons warned of the dangers now facing Afghanistan, she also observed that its people feel abandoned. It is hard to disagree with their assessment.People will no longer need to be notified that they are being stripped of their citizenship, thanks to a clause smuggled into the nationality and borders bill last week. This is an unfair and draconian measure that MPs ought to be ashamed to pass into law. How can a person challenge a decision that they do not know about? It is hard to imagine that the home secretary, Priti Patel, who has agitated for the death penalty, would lose any sleep over enacting such an unjust, authoritarian measure. But she should think again. The principle of rule of law is that an individual has a right to know of a decision before their rights can be adversely affected. Currently, the Home Office has to make some effort to contact someone before depriving them of citizenship. Ministers think this legal requirement should be dropped in favour of executive discretion because of the threat, and crucially the fear, of terrorism. The new power is exceptionally broad: notice will not be needed if it would not be “reasonably practicable” to give it; or in the interests of “national security” or diplomatic relations; or for other “public interest” reasons. The home secretary can revoke British citizenship when it would be “conducive to the public good”, but would not make that person stateless. There is a wrinkle: naturalised citizens could lose their British nationality if the government has “reasonable grounds” for believing they could acquire citizenship of another country. Removing the citizenship of such persons without telling them signals a retreat from one of the law’s most fundamental values. It also sends a message to a group of Britons, especially non-white citizens and particularly Muslim ones, that despite being born and brought up in the UK and having no other home, their citizenship is far from secure. It seems the lessons from the Windrush scandal have not been learned. Citizens with links to other nations are being told they could be at risk of being deprived of their British nationality without warning and for reasons deemed so security sensitive that they may never be made public. Ministers have argued that they are ultimately democratically accountable and that this is grounds for judicial deference. But there is no or very little democratic accountability for national security decisions that are shrouded in secrecy and made with little oversight. Between 2006 and 2018, 175 people lost their citizenship on national security grounds – but 100 of those instances occurred in just one year, 2017. There seems little cause to give ministers more leeway about delaying and perhaps even denying information about deprivation of British citizenship. This policy is also potentially counterproductive – allowing the UK to dodge its international responsibilities by exiling people whom it considers security risks. Britain ought to be dealing with such people at home, not offloading them for others to handle. The increased use of deprivation powers and the expanding categories of people against whom action can be taken suggests this is the thin edge of the wedge. Citizenship may now be revoked for serious crimes, and has been used against the members of “grooming gangs”. The public may have little sympathy, but once the precedent is established then others perhaps guilty of less odious crimes could also be targeted. In a seminal House of Lords judgment on notice in 2003, Lord Steyn wisely said that “surprise is regarded as the enemy of justice”. MPs ought to reject the clause. Citizenship isn’t a privilege dependent on ministerial whim, but a status on which legal order is built.EU energy ministers are pushing to allow public funds to help build a gas pipeline to a power station in Malta co-owned by a businessman who is awaiting trial for the murder of the journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia. On Tuesday, officials and MEPs will begin deciding new rules aimed at phasing out EU subsidies for fossil fuel projects. However, on Friday EU ambassadors confirmed that Malta and Cyprus had secured exemptions for pipelines that would connect them to European gas networks. In practice, that means the €400m (£340m) Melita pipeline project, designed to transport gas from Gela in Sicily to Delimara in Malta, could be built using EU funds. Cyprus also stands to benefit from an exemption to the phaseout of EU support for fossil fuel infrastructure. The €7bn EastMed pipeline is an even bigger endeavour than the Malta-Italy link – it will join Cyprus to the European gas network along with Greece and Israel. The move was criticised by environmental campaigners because it would lock in Malta’s dependence on the Delimara gas-fired power station, which is partly owned by the man accused of having masterminded the killing of Caruana Galizia. The Maltese businessman Yorgen Fenech was previously a director of ElectroGas, the company that operates the Delimara power station, and along with his family owns a key stake in the company. He was charged this year with conspiracy in the murder of Caruana Galizia. Maltese prosecutors have recommended a life sentence, and he is due to stand trial. Fenech denies playing any part in the killing. Before his arrest, he was chief executive of his family business, the Tumas Group, which teamed up with other Maltese families to secure a one-third stake in ElectroGas. He owns shares in the venture through Tumas and through a separate company. His uncle and Tumas chair Raymond Fenech said he was unaware of the EU proposals. “Yorgen Fenech is a minority shareholder in Tumas Group holding less than 4% of the company’s shares which have devolved through inheritance,” he added. Caruana Galizia was investigating the awarding of the Delimara power station contract to ElectroGas when she died in a car bombing in 2017. Maltese police have said they believe she was killed over her reporting on the power station. Barnaby Pace, a gas campaigner at the corruption and environmental organisation Global Witness, said: “This pipeline threatens to lock Malta into using polluting fossil fuels and dealing with this fossil gas project, tied to the murder of Daphne Caruana Galizia, for decades to come. The EU needs to put the interests of Maltese and EU citizens before the profits of big polluters and refuse to be involved with yet another fossil-fuelled deal.” ElectroGas argues that the gas-fired power station marked an environmental improvement when it opened in 2017 because it replaced a plant that ran on heavy fuel oil, which is even more polluting than gas. Malta is also supplied with electricity from an interconnector linking it to Sicily. Delimara is presently powered using liquefied natural gas, which is brought in by ship. Along with the interconnector to Sicily, it meets most of the country’s power needs. Only about 7% of electricity in Malta is generated from renewable sources, one of the lowest rates in the EU. An EU official said that Malta had the support of other EU ambassadors when the exemption was secured on Friday. “Several delegations explicitly spoke in favour of maintaining the derogation,” the official said. A group of 11 countries, including Ireland, Germany and the Netherlands, had originally pushed for existing fossil fuel projects to be excluded from support. But Cyprus and Malta, supported by most eastern European delegations, were able to point to a 10-year-old European Council conclusion that “no EU member state should remain isolated from the European gas and electricity networks after 2015”.The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has announced a review into systemic racism and gender bias in medical devices in response to concerns it could contribute to poorer outcomes for women and people of colour. Writing in the Sunday Times, Javid said: “It is easy to look at a machine and assume that everyone’s getting the same experience. But technologies are created and developed by people, and so bias, however inadvertent, can be an issue here too.” We take a look at some of the gadgets used in healthcare where concerns over racial bias have been raised. Oximeters Oximeters estimate the amount of oxygen in a person’s blood, and are a crucial tool in determining which Covid patients may need hospital care – not least because some can have dangerously low levels of oxygen without realising. Concerns have been raised, however, that the devices work less well for patients with darker skin. NHS England and the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) say pulse oximeters can overestimate the amount of oxygen in the blood. Javid told the Guardian last month that the devices were designed for caucasians. “As a result, you were less likely to end up on oxygen if you were black or brown, because the reading was just wrong,” he said. Experts believe the inaccuracies could be one of the reasons why death rates have been higher among minority ethnic people, although other factors may also play a role, such as working in jobs that have greater exposure to others. Respirator masks Medical-grade respirators are crucial to help keep healthcare workers safe from Covid because they offer protection to the wearer against both large and small particles that others exhale. In order to offer the greatest protection, however, filtering face piece (FFP) masks must fit properly and research has shown they do not fit as well on people from some ethnic backgrounds. “Adequate viral protection can only be provided by respirators that properly fit the wearer’s facial characteristics. Initial fit pass rates [the rate at which they pass a test on how well they fit] vary between 40% and 90% and are especially low in female and in Asian healthcare workers,” one review published in 2020 notes. Another published in September found that studies on the fit of such PPE largely focused on Caucasian or single ethnic populations. “BAME people remain under-represented, limiting comparisons between ethnic groups,” it said. Spirometers Spirometers measure lung capacity, but experts have raised concerns that there are racial biases in the interpretation of data gathered from such gadgets. Writing in the journal Science, Dr Achuta Kadambi, an electrical engineer and computer scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles said Black or Asian people are assumed to have lower lung capacity than white people – a belief he noted may be based on inaccuracies in earlier studies. As a result, “correction” factors are applied to the interpretation of spirometer data – a situation that can affect the order in which patients are treated. “For example, before ‘correction’ a Black person’s lung capacity might be measured to be lower than the lung capacity of a white person” Kadambi writes. “After ‘correction’ to a smaller baseline lung capacity, treatment plans would prioritise the white person, because it is expected that a Black person should have lower lung capacity, and so their capacity must be much lower than that of a white person before their reduction is considered a priority.” Another area Kadambi said may be affected by racial bias is remote plethysmography, a technology in which pulse rates are measured by looking at changes in skin colour captured by video. Kadambi said such visual cues may be biased by subsurface melanin content – in other words, skin colour. Artificial intelligence systems AI is increasingly being developed for applications in healthcare, including to aid professionals in diagnosing conditions. There are concerns, however, that biases in data used to develop such systems means they risk being less accurate for people of colour. Such concerns were recently raised in relation to AI systems for diagnosing skin cancers. Researchers revealed that few freely available image databases that could be used to develop such AI are labelled with ethnicity or skin type. Of those that did have such information recorded, only a handful were of people recorded as having dark brown or black skin. It is an issue Javid has acknowledged. Announcing new funding last month for AI projects to tackle racial inequalities in healthcare, such as the detection of diabetic retinopathy, he noted that one area of focus would be the development of standards to make sure datasets used in developing AI systems are “diverse and inclusive”. “If we only train our AI using mostly data from white patients it cannot help our population as a whole. We need to make sure the data we collect is representative of our nation,” he said.Priti Patel, for so long the darling of the Conservative party’s hard right, is having a difficult weekend. Once again, she is grappling with the same issue that has dominated her tenure as home secretary – how to stop people seeking refuge by travelling to the UK in small boats. Patience in Downing Street ran out on Friday in the face of the latest figures showing that 1,185 people crossed the Channel in a single November day – a record daily number for this century. After lobbying from Conservative MPs on Thursday, Boris Johnson ordered a review of the problem. Headed by Stephen Barclay, it aims to draw together different government departments to solve an issue which is key to the voting intentions of many Conservative voters. Stung by the inquiry, sources close to Patel appear to have blamed civil servants in her own department for blocking policies and legal changes. The Mail on Sunday reported that she has become so frustrated by the obstructions of officials and legal advisers that she could yet write to the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to list her department’s failings. But Patel has also helped to force the issue to the top of the government’s agenda with 11 high-profile declarations that she will stop small boats from arriving in the UK. “I am absolutely committed to doing everything in my power to stop these dangerous Channel crossings which are putting vulnerable lives at risk,” she said in October 2019. A year later, she claimed that progress was being made. “We are already seeing fewer migrants leaving French beaches,” she said. The statistics have told a different story. More than 23,500 have crossed the Channel in small boats this year –– almost triple the 8,420 that made the journey in 2020, which was then a record, and more than 10 times as many as arrived in the year Patel became home secretary. Patel was accused of desperation last week when she told reporters in Washington that the EU’s open borders policy was to blame. “The real problem on illegal migration flows is the EU has no open border protections whatsoever,” she said. The number of people travelling to the UK by small boats has increased, but the actual number of people trying to claim asylum has decreased. There were 37,235 asylum applications in the year ending June 2021, down 4% on the previous 12 months and less than half what it was in the early 2000s. Campaigners for refugees often point out that Britain receives a fraction of the asylum applications of Germany and France and fewer per resident than the EU average. Civil servants concede that the government will have to cooperate closely with France if this issue is to be solved. So far Patel has agreed two multimillion-pound deals with the French authorities to pay for more surveillance of the 93 miles of French coastline that has been used to reach the UK. A £28m deal in November 2020 was followed up with a £54m agreement in July to fund a doubling of French police patrols on their northern coastline. The UK has also repeatedly requested that joint Border Force and French navy patrols be deployed in the Channel, but that has been rejected. But critics say that even with greater cooperation and resources, the length of the coastline and the profitability of the route – officials last week claimed that people smugglers can make £300,000 a boat – mean those wishing to enter the UK will not be put off. Campaigners for refugees have claimed that opening safe and legal routes for asylum seekers to apply to come to the UK would stop many of those seeking to enter the UK via small boats. For almost all people fleeing desperate circumstances, hoping to reunite with family members in the UK or seeking security there, there is no application form that exists and no process that can facilitate a safe and legal journey. The Home Office expects people to physically reach the UK before an asylum application can be lodged. However, government sources say such a policy would result in a rush of applications from bogus applicants and not from those fleeing persecution. The government has claimed it is ready to use a controversial policy of pushing boats back towards France once they are intercepted in UK waters. But there are no reports of it ever being used in the UK, and the government’s own internal legal advice says that if they use this tactic they are likely to be sued. The policy risks breaching international maritime law, which could have criminal implications for Border Force officers involved in both British and French courts. One union representing officers has already sought legal advice over a possible judicial review of the policy. The Nationality and Borders bill, expected to become law in the spring, will give the government powers to process asylum seekers offshore to deter illegal migration to the UK. Patel hopes to emulate the approach taken by Australia where asylum seekers are processed almost 3,000 miles away from its mainland on a remote island in the central Pacific. UK government officials have claimed they are in secret negotiations with multiple countries around the world including Albania over a deal. The Albanian prime minister has issued a categorical denial, saying this is “fake news”. The cost could also be prohibitive. Home Office sources have claimed it could cost £100,000 a person to send someone to accommodation abroad – which could cause a further, unwelcome backlash.It’s not just subtitles that are being used by people beyond the community they were designed to assist (Pass notes, 16 November). As an audio describer, I’ve met several people recently who stream a TV programme or film, then access the audio description service, allowing them to listen while cycling, running, or doing the ironing. Neville Ware New Malden, Surrey • The Environment Agency either knows what is being discharged into our rivers or it does not (Environment Agency launches major investigation into sewage, 18 November). Which is worse, and when will government accept that self-regulation does not work in the public interest? Richard Horrocks Sampford Peverell, Devon • Thanks for reintroducing “Other lives” to the Obituaries pages in the print edition on Saturday (Journal, 20 November). It is interesting to see, and important to record, the extraordinary contributions to our lives made by “ordinary” people. Timothy Treffry Sheffield • I was hugely disappointed to see the regular three pages of puzzles in Saturday’s Journal reduced to two, and Train Tracks (among other puzzles) cancelled. Did I miss something in Grant Shapps’ announcement? Heather France Leeds • Some MPs do indeed volunteer with local football teams (Letters, 18 November). A certain Mrs May is president of the Wargrave Women and Girls Football Club, a role she seems to take seriously. Dr Helen Crawley Wargrave, Berkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Violence erupted at demonstrations in Belgium and the Netherlands over the weekend as tougher Covid-19 restrictions to curb the resurgent pandemic led to angry protests in several European countries. Ten of thousands of people marched through central Brussels on Sunday to protest against reinforced restrictions imposed by the Belgian government to counter the latest rise in coronavirus cases. The march, which police estimated involved 35,000 people, began peacefully but descended into violence as several hundred people started pelting officers, smashing cars and setting rubbish bins on fire. Police responded with teargas and water cannon. “We have injuries but we cannot yet say how many,” said Ilse Vande Keere, a police spokesperson. It was also unclear how many people had been detained. Demonstrators had earlier gathered to protest against the government’s advice to get vaccinated and any possible moves to impose mandatory shots. Shouting “freedom, freedom, freedom!” and singing the anti-fascist song Bella Ciao, protesters lined up behind a huge banner saying “together for freedom” and marched to the EU headquarters. Signs among the crowd varied from far-right insignia to the rainbow flags of the LGBT community. It followed a second night of violence in the Netherlands on Saturday, when five police officers were injured and at least 40 people arrested. Dutch authorities deployed water cannon, dogs and mounted police to dispel crowds of rioting youths who lit fires and lobbed fireworks in The Hague and elsewhere, after more than 50 people were arrested in Rotterdam on Friday. There were also demonstrations in Austria, Italy, Switzerland, Denmark, Croatia and the French overseas territory of Guadeloupe as governments in various EU countries battle a fourth wave of the pandemic, imposing partial lockdowns and tighter restrictions, particularly on the unvaccinated. Police said on Sunday that 19 people had been arrested in The Hague in protests triggered by government plans to restrict a national coronavirus pass required to enter bars, restaurants and other venues to people who are fully vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19 – excluding those with a negative test. Mounted officers carried out charges and five were hurt, one seriously. One protester was detained after throwing a rock through an ambulance window. Eight people were also arrested in the former fishing village of Urk. Two matches in the country’s top professional football league being played behind closed doors under a three-week partial lockdown imposed last Saturday were briefly halted when fans forced their way into stadiums in Alkmaar and Almelo. Another 13 arrests were reported by police in two towns in the southern province of Limburg, and disturbances were also reported in the northern province of Flevoland. The protesters were also angry at a New Year’s Eve firework ban. The latest incidents in the Netherlands – where coronavirus infections have surged to record levels in recent weeks, putting hospitals under severe strain – followed what Rotterdam’s mayor, Ahmed Aboutaleb, called “an orgy of violence” on Friday night. Police opened fire on a crowd that had swelled to hundreds during the protest and three people believed to have been hit by police bullets were still being treated in hospital on Sunday, according to a statement from authorities. Thousands of people also marched peacefully through Amsterdam and the southern Dutch city of Breda earlier on Saturday in protest at the restrictions, with little or no trouble reported. In Austria, which on Friday announced a 20-day nationwide partial lockdown – the toughest in western Europe for months – and made vaccination mandatory for all from February, as many as 40,000 went out to protest in central Vienna. Responding to a call from the far-right Freedom party (FPÖ), the protesters carried banners reading “corona dictatorship” and “divided society”. Some wore yellow stars reading “not vaccinated”. The interior minister, Karl Nehammer, expressed his outrage, saying in a statement that the star “insults the millions of victims of the Nazi dictatorship and their families”. Thousands of protesters also marched in Croatia’s capital, Zagreb, while in Denmark about a thousand people protested against government plans to reinstate a measure requiring public sector workers to be vaccinated in order to access their workplaces. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, on Saturday condemned violent demonstrations in the overseas territory of Guadeloupe, where 31 people were detained by police overnight amid riots over a nightly 6pm to 5am curfew. The protesters also denounced France’s health pass, which has been required since the summer to access restaurants, cafes, cinemas and theatres, exercise in gyms, attend sporting events and take planes or long-distance trains. “The first message is that the state will stand firm,” Darmanin told reporters, adding France would send about 50 members of the GIGN and Raid elite tactical forces of the gendarmerie and police to the territory, where stores have been looted and shots fired at police. The extra forces will increase the number of police and gendarmes available in Guadeloupe to 2,250. The French prime minister, Jean Castex, is expected to meet officials from the island on Monday to discuss the deteriorating situation.A heartfelt thank-you to Charlotte Naughton for her immensely moving account of the final journey of her aunt, Ann Bruce (A trip to Switzerland in search of a good death: ‘All this instead of just doing it in Brighton’, 20 November). This resonates with many of us who have seen the long, slow decline of a loved one and would hope to avoid a similar fate and pain ourselves. It really is time for our parliamentarians, medical profession and lawyers to address this issue. As Ann’s story shows, the Dutch, Swiss and others demonstrate that the challenges are not insurmountable. Richard Madge Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex • We are fortunate in having been friends with Ann and David Bruce, and while we miss them both, we understand and fully support Ann’s decision to end her suffering on her own terms. Surely it must be an undeniable human right to choose not to continue to live in intolerable conditions? Most of us are not confronted with the certainty of a painful end to life; we just hope we’ll go quickly. God speed Ann and those brave enough to have supported her. Jeni Smith Shipton-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.How very pleasant for Simon Thompson, Royal Mail’s chief executive, to tell us that the company has “improved its efficiency” and that it did not want to “invest in services that perhaps customers no longer need” (Boost for shareholders as parcels help Royal Mail to £311m profit, 18 November). Here in Oxford in recent times postal deliveries have been sparse, often taking up to two weeks for delivery. Is this part of Mr Thompson’s efficiency drive? I am currently being treated for incurable bladder cancer, and information on appointments, including scans, usually come in the post. Time is of the essence, and late delivery could mean I miss an appointment – bad for me and wasteful of the precious time of the admirable beings who are treating me. As to whether Saturday deliveries should be disbanded by what is no longer a “state-run operation”, the answer is no, yet almost certainly this will happen as a matter of “good business practice” – and forget about something once-upon-a-time called a universal service. Well done, chaps at Royal Mail, keep drawing your enormous salaries and keep using the post. Bruce Ross-Smith Oxford • It is all very well for Royal Mail to be paying out £400m to shareholders as it capitalises on parcels from an increase in online shopping, but here in Oxford it seems unable to deliver anything much at all. Over the last couple of months deliveries have been regularly delayed for anything up to a fortnight, with little or no explanation. We have had no deliveries all week, and I’m seriously missing my Private Eye fix – the 12 November issue has yet to arrive. Perhaps the now well-remunerated shareholders could spare a little of their largesse to fund a proper delivery service that keeps to the delivery remit for so-called first- and second-class post. Anthony Cheke Oxford • It has just taken 17 days for a letter I posted second class from Holmfirth to arrive in nearby Wakefield, a distance of 18 miles. The advice to “post early for Christmas” has never been more important – Christmas 2022, that is. David Hinchliffe Holmfirth, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The government’s proposed £86,000 cap on what any individual has to spend on their care is designed for one purpose and one purpose only: to ensure that better-off people who live for a long time receiving care do not exhaust their assets in paying for it. It would be bizarre indeed if the amount paid for their care by their local authority was counted as if it was their personal contribution to care costs. Poorer people will instead get help through the now more generous means test. As usual, some of the “analysts” quoted in your story (Social care cap could expose poorer homeowners to ‘catastrophic’ costs, 17 November) shroud-wave by claiming that the government’s proposals will force poorer people to sell their homes to pay for care. They appear not to have noticed that no one now should have to do so. Those who are asked to contribute to the cost of their care can borrow the money from their local authority against the value of their house, with repayment only when they die. So the cost is not borne by older people but by those who stand to inherit their assets. There are plenty of flaws in the government’s cap proposals, but the one highlighted in your story is not one of them. David Lipsey Member of the 1999 royal commission on long-term care, House of Lords • Among people with any savings or home ownership, a wealthy citizen may access an unlimited amount of free NHS care for cancer treatment. But a poorer citizen with severe dementia currently stands to have her savings raided and, potentially, a charge placed on her home, if she needs help to get out of bed, dress, eat, have her laundry done or use the toilet. The new “cap” is an unfair gloss on this system and biased towards the better-off. The reason for the two-tier system is the notorious – legally and messily defined – dividing line between NHS care and all other care and treatment. What we need is a National Health and Disability Service. But its creation needs a completely new framework. For decades, governments have balked at this, attempting to blend joint services out of ill-matched components. But if we can wrench our way, legislatively, out of the massive complexities of Brexit, we can certainly extend our health service – with the appropriate level of investment and taxation – to include a free, seamless, comprehensive, economical and publicly owned service providing for any kind of serious disability. Sally Hughes London • In all the furore that has blown up over the government’s social care proposals, nobody has taken time to consider the implications of one of the major elements within them – the splitting-off of personal care costs from accommodation costs, lightly referred to as “bed and board” in your article (Six in 10 elderly care users in England set to lose out from change to costs cap, 18 November), that will no longer be included in the arithmetic. According to a government paper, the sum designated for personal care costs is going to be set at a “notional” amount of £200, and yet total weekly costs in a residential care home average more than £700 (more in a nursing home). Deduct £200, and £500 is presumably left as the cost of “bed and board”. The details provided by the government are shamefully – and now it would appear, deliberately – vague. Gillian Dalley London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.That’s it for our live blog. Thanks as always for your company and emails - goodnight! The thoughts of Antonio Conte “In the first half we struggled a lot – physically but also tactically. In the second half we changed something tactically and also we wanted to play with the same intensity as Leeds. Before the game I was a bit afraid… I didn’t know, after three weeks, whether they were able to play for the whole 90 minutes with the intensity of the second half. “I’m pleased because we played very well in the second half and I think we deserved to win. This is a starting point. I said this to the players: they have to understand that, if they want to [achieve something], they can. “Maybe it was good to concede just before half-time. The players showed a great desire to win the game. We knew about Leeds. I read the stats and Leeds were top for the intensity [for distance covered]. In the second half we beat them. “[What was more important, the tactical change or the increased aggression?] Both. Both. Phillips created a lot of problems in the first half, so we changed our plan and put more pressure on Leeds in the second half. Our fans have to know that we want to change – it doesn’t mean we’ll win every game, but for sure we want to fight.” A breathless Sergio Reguilon speaks “I’m the happiest person in the world - it’s my first goal in the Premier League and we got three points. The gaffer wants me to keep arriving in the box - arrive, arrive, arrive - and also defend. I’m dead but I’m so happy. “Leeds started really well. At half-time the gaffer told us to go man to man and we did. We lost the first half but we had the mentality of a big team and we got the three points... [wheezes] I’m sorry, I’m dead... “We knew we had to give more [when Spurs were booed off at half-time]. The gaffer told us we had to play with passion and two balls*. We got three points and we continue!” * I don’t think he’s talking about the official Nike-sponsored Premier League matchball. “Wow what a win!” says Yash Gupta. “ Probably I’m reacting a bit too much but I don’t effing care.” If I was a Spurs fan, I’d be outgiddying you. That was thrilling, even more so because they were so bad before their half-time audience with Antonio Conte. The most telling stat, apart from the score, might be distance covered: Spurs 112km, Leeds 108km. It’s only the second time this season that Leeds have been outrun. Look at his face! Just look at his face! Conte marched round the field, embracing every player. At one point I thought he was going to chin someone in celebration, but in the end he settled for some hand-stinging high fives. He is so much fun to watch. That was a terrific win for Spurs. They were booed off after a dismal, muted first-half performance, and then faced a private audience with an affronted Antonio Conte. Whatever he said sure worked: Spurs played with exhilarating aggression in the second half, coming from behind to win thanks to goals from Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg and Sergio Reguilon. Leeds will be fine - they played pretty well and have a lot of injuries, but things got a bit too hot after the break. The first half was Spursy, the second half was New Spurs. Antonio Conte pleads with one of the assistant referees to end the match, as if it has anything to do with him! Then the final whistle is blown, and Conte screams with delight while hugging all his coaching team. Yeah, things have changed round here. 90+4 min Phillips is booked for a foul on Son. Then Sessegnon has a goal disallowed for offside. 90+3 min Kane has a long-range shot blocked by Phillips. 90+1 min Emerson Royal is booked for a late tackle on James, who was about to break over the halfway line. 90+1 min Four minutes of added time. 89 min Conte is waving his hands in all directions, demanding that the crowd make some noise. So they do - and then he waves his hands again, demanding an even louder noise. The Premier League is such a better place when he is around. 88 min And Spurs bring on Dele Alli, who is still only 25, for the excellent Lucas Moura. 87 min Leeds replace one teenager with another - Stuart McKinstry is on for Joe Gelhardt, who made a really promising full debut. 84 min James again shoots too close to Lloris from the edge of the area. Leeds have had a lot of shots on target in the second half, though most have been comfortable saves for Lloris. 84 min If it stays like this Spurs will move up to seventh, only four points off a Champions League place. 82 min Phillips and Struijk have swapped places, with Phillips back as the spare man in defence. 80 min Now Son shoots wide from distance after a scurrying run infield. 79 min Another change for Spurs - Ryan Sessegnon, who is still only 21, replaces the goalscorer Sergio Reguilon. 78 min Moura shoots over from 25 yards. He’s had a superb second half though. 76 min Leeds have responded impressively to going behind and now they are pinning Spurs back. It’s been an unusually moody game. 74 min James shoots too close to Lloris from the left edge of the area. This second half has been relentless. 73 min Adam Forshaw is replaced by Tyler Roberts in the Leeds midfield. NO PENALTY! That’s the correct decision. 71 min A Leeds corner ricochets across the Spurs area, and then Leeds appeal for a penalty when Gelhardt’s shot on the turn hits Kane’s arm. It’s being checked by VAR but I don’t think it’ll be given - Kane’s arm was in a natural position and he was barely a yard away Gelhardt. 69 min If I was a Spurs fan, I’d be seriously excited about this second-half performance. Spurs have been sensational; more importantly, they have been a reflection of their manager. Spurs are ahead! Eric Dier’s lazy free-kick took a big deflection and hit the post, but Reguilon was first on the scene to gobble up the rebound. 68 min Spurs make a change before the free-kick is taken: Davinson Sanchez replaces Japhet Tanganga. 67 min Now Cooper is booked for fouling Lucas Moura in the D. It was another scintillating run from Moura, who has embodied Spurs’ second-half improvement. 66 min Forshaw is booked for pulling back Kane. Leeds can’t live with the intensity of Spurs, who have been quite fantastic in the second half. 64 min: Chance for Spurs! Meslier makes a terrific point-blank save from Davies. Spurs thought they should have had a penalty for a trip on Davies, who was certainly off balance as he poked the shot towards goal. 63 min Leeds have reshuffled since the substitution - Firpo at left-back, Struijk in the centre of defence and Phillips into midfield. 61 min: Great block from Struijk! Spurs, who went two and a half league games without a shot on target, now look like they could score with every attack. Hojbjerg feeds a pass into Kane, who wriggles away from Cooper in the area and forces a shot that is desperately blocked by Struijk. 61 min Emerson Royal’s cross ricohets around the Leeds area, with Reguilon just unable to get a shot away. This has been a pulsating second half. 60 min Leeds make a change: Junior Firpo is on for Mateusz Klich. Reguilon’s cross from the left hit a Leeds defender and broke for Moura near the byline. He turned, looked up and picked out Hojbjerg, whose mishit shot from the edge of the area bobbled into the far corner. Hojbjerg barely celebrated, possibly out of embarrassment at such an obvious miskick, but Antonio Conte was straight off down the touchline. Few managers in the world celebrate as well as Conte. A goal was coming at one end or another, and Spurs have got it! 57 min Gelhardt forces another save from Lloris, this time with a crisp drive from the right side of the area. 56 min Gelhardt picks up a loose ball on the left edge of the Spurs area, moves it onto his left foot and batters a shot that is punched away at the near post by Lloris. It was a comfortable save but another admirably confident bit of play from Gelhardt. 56 min Son didn’t necessarily dive, by the way. I think he just ran out of room, as he knew Dallas was coming across from the other side, and lost his balance as he lunged at the ball. I’d like to see it again though. 55 min Spurs have a big penalty appeal turned down by Andre Marriner. Kane threaded a pass through to Son, who swerved away from Phillips in the area and then went over. I’m not actually sure there was any contact, and VAR are happy with the original decision. 53 min The intensity with which Spurs have played since the break would suggest that Antonio Conte has had a hairdryer or three installed in the home dressing-room. 51 min: Llorente hits his own bar! Lucas Moura clips the ball into Son on the right side of the area. He chests it down and hammers a cross on the turn that hits Llorente and flashes off the crossbar. That would have been an own goal had it gone it. 51 min Son’s corner is headed away at the near post. 51 min Lucas Moura goes on another of his electric surges infield and finds Reguilon, whose cross is put behind for a corner. 49 min Leeds win three corners in quick succession. Make that four: James’ long-range shot has been deflected behind. 47 min: Good save from Lloris! At the other end, James almost makes it 2-0! He ran at a backpedalling defence then poked a surprise shot with the outside of the right foot that was shovelled behind by Lloris. That’s a pretty good save, not least because he must have seen it late. 46 min: Kane hits the post! Spurs almost equalise within 35 seconds of the restart. Lucas Moura surged infield and then poked the ball back outside to Kane, whose low shot was half blocked by Meslier and bounced off the outside of the near post. 46 min Peep peep! Leeds begin the second half. Half-time reading “Re: Patrick Bamford, one could almost say that Joffy Gelhardt is out of his element here,” says Bill Hargreaves, confirming that at least one of our readers is as fond of the Big Lebowski as I am. “Never mind: that James goal has drawn a line in the sand. Peep peep! Leeds deserve to be ahead. They haven’t created many chances - Dan James’ goal was the only shot on target in open play for either side - but they have been the more purposeful and progressive side. Not for the last time, Spurs were booed off at half-time. 45 min Two minutes of added time. The goal was made by Harrison, who was too strong for Emerson Royal on the left. Once he got away from him he curled a superb cross into the six-yard area, where James nipped between Davies and Reguilon to score. That’s outstanding play from Jack Harrison. Dan James puts Leeds ahead! 41 min Forshaw receives a square pass 30 yards from goal, opens his body and hits a sweet rising drive that whooshes just past the near post. Lloris was at full stretch; I’m not sure whether he would have got there had it been on target. 40 min Reguilon charges infield from the left but then fails to spot a straightforward through pass to Emerson Royal, who punches the air in disgust. That was a great chance for Spurs. Reguilon can’t have seen him. 38 min That Phillips free-kick in the second minute is the only shot on target so far. There’s loads to like about Joffy Gelhardt but Leeds do miss Patrick Bamford. He really ties the room together. 37 min “Superb man-to-man marking today from Leeds,” says Justin Kavanagh. “They’ve even put a man on Andre Marriner.” 36 min Struijk is okay to continue. 35 min Struijk is down, which means a break in play. That allows Sky to show a few replays of Kalvin Phillips flattening the referee Andre Marriner a few minutes ago. It never gets old. 32 min At the other end, Reguilon’s cross is taken away from Kane by the head of Cooper. That was probably a goal-saving interception. 31 min James hares down the right and clips a cross towards Klich, who has the ball taken off his toes by the stretching Davies. That was fine defending. 30 min Gelhardt is booked for an overzealous lunge at Eric Dier. 28 min Son’s corner is punched away unconvincingly by Meslier, which leads to an impromptu game of head tennis. Eventually Leeds break and Winks is fortunate not to be booked for a tactical foul on someone. 27 min Spurs are starting to look more dangerous, especially on the break. Winks fizzes a pass into Kane, 12 yards from goal, but he can’t make room for a shot. Moments later, the willing Emerson Royal wins a corner off Harrison. 26 min Dier’s attempted through pass to Kane is intercepted by Cooper. He did well because it bounced awkwardly, so he could easily have fallen over in a heap while ushering Kane through on goal. 25 min After a crisp one-touch move from Leeds, James’s cross is well blocked at the near post by Dier. 24 min Spurs haven’t had a shot on target in the last 205 minutes of Premier League football. 22 min: Good challenge from Phillips! Spurs almost sting Leeds on the break. Son wins the ball near the halfway line, scurries down the right and crosses low towards Kane. He takes a touch, but loses his balance in the process and is calmly dispossessed by Phillips. 21 min Spurs are starting to have a more even share of the game, though their build-up play is still a bit ponderous. 18 min The corner is half cleared and bounces up towards Reguilon on the edge of the area. He twists his body to hit a right-footed snapshot that is blocked by a Leeds defender, Phillips I think. 18 min Kane drops deep and curls a pass towards Emerson Royal on the right side of the area. He lobs it back across the area and Struijk puts it behgind for a corner. 15 min Leeds take the corner short and try to work something on the left. Eventually the ball is pulled back towards the edge of the area, where Gelhardt belts a shot into orbit. 14 min Harrison plays a neat one-two with Struijk before his cross is cleared at the near post by Dier. Then a nervous pass from Emerson Royal goes behind for a Leeds corner. 13 min For a teenager making his first Premier League start, Gelhardt is playing with a breezy confidence. Leeds have been terrific so far. 12 min Spurs’ first sustained attack ends when Son is caught offside. 9 min Leeds have had 73 per cent possession. 7 min Spurs can’t get out. Struijk robs Moura, 25 yards from the Spurs goal, and finds Dallas. He whistles a lovely drive just wide of the far post with Lloris scrambling across goal. 7 min Leeds continue to dominate possession. The teenager Gelhardt looks bright up front. 5 min Leeds have started really well, with Forshaw snapping round in midfield. It looks like they are playing with Kalvin Phillips as the spare man at the back, which is a bit of a surprise because Spurs are only playing with one up. 2 min Phillips clips the free-kick over the wall, and Lloris springs to his right to make a comfortable save. 1 min Klich wins the ball in the Spurs half and finds Gelhardt, who is fouled 25 yards from goal by Tanganga. The free-kick is a fair way to the left of centre, though it’s still a decent position for Kalvin Phillips. 1 min Peep peep! Spurs, all in white, kick off from right to left. Leeds are wearing their blue change strip. Antonio Conte walks to the Spurs dugout, rubbing his hands in the cold, then strolls back out to greet Marcelo Bielsa. One is dressed head to toe in the finest fabrics; the other is wearing a tracksuit. I’ll let you work it out. Antonio Conte’s pre-match thoughts “[Oliver] Skipp is banned so this is a good chance for [Harry] Winks to show we can count on him. He’s a good guy, he’s trained very well during the last two weeks. I’m sure he’ll play a good game. “We want to work very hard, we want to improve, we want to make our fans proud. Our supporters have to push us from the start until the end - this is an important moment for us.” Manchester City 3-0 Everton In an unsurprising development, the champions have hammered Everton at the Etihad. Read all about it with Alex Hess. Both teams make two enforced changes from their last game before the international break. Antonio Conte brings in Harry Winks and Japhet Tanganga for Oliver Skipp (suspended) and Cristian Romero (injured). Leeds are without Raphinha (ill) and Rodrigo (injured). Mateusz Klich comes into the side and the exciting teenager Joe Gelhardt - who has scored goals in industrial quantities at youth level - makes his full Premier League debut up front. Tottenham Hotspur (3-4-2-1) Lloris; Tanganga, Dier, Davies; Royal, Hojbjerg, Winks, Reguilon; Lucas Moura, Son; Kane. Substitutes: Gollini, Doherty, Sanchez, Rodon, Sessegnon, Bryan, Bergwijn, Dele, Ndombele. Leeds United (4-1-4-1) Meslier; Dallas, Llorente, Cooper, Struijk; Phillips; James, Klich, Forshaw, Harrison; Gelhardt. Substitutes: Klaesson, Firpo, Drameh, Cresswell, McCarron, McKinstry, Jenkins, Greenwood, Roberts. Referee Andre Marriner. It’s a big day in the north of London. Antonio Conte has already been introduced to the Tottenham Hotspur fans, but that was before a (theoretically) low-key Europa Conference match against Vitesse Arnhem. This feels like the real quiz home debut, an intruiging Premier League match against Leeds United. Things are about to change in N17. Conte has a comically low nonsense threshold, and if anyone can redefine the word ‘Spursy’ it’s probably him. He might not be here for a long time - his last three jobs ended after two years - but there are plenty of reasons for Spurs fans to be optimistic. One in particular: Conte is a pathological winner. Spurs’ opponents, Leeds, have been the feelgood story of English football since Marcelo Bielsa arrived in 2018. This season, though, they have lost a bit of their dopamine sheen. Injuries, particularly to Patrick Bamford, have reduced their fluidity, and they start this game in 17th place. While nobody seriously thinks Leeds are in a relegation battle, their season is in need of a jumpstart. A party-pooping win today would do the job. Kick off 4.30pm.In the last few decades, an apparently ordinary financial institution has assumed an importance that could hardly have been foreseen. It is not a finance company, a payday lender or even a crypto-currency. It is, rather, the Bank of Mum and Dad. Barely a day goes by without a media story about the struggles of young people to afford a first home, and their experience is rarely free from some kind of parental influence. Even the young grafters who have supposedly pulled themselves up by the bootstraps into homeownership often turn out to have lived rent-free with their parents or received some other kind of family support. Even more often, of course, they have simply relied on a large deposit from mum and dad. This is, in one sense, innocuous: parents want to assist their offspring financially, and have surely been doing so for as long as money has existed. But it is also insidious, because it allows some young people a significant – and completely unfair – advantage over others. And because those who can help their children into homeownership are themselves more likely to be homeowners, it ensures that advantage and disadvantage are passed down the generations. The economist Shamubeel Eaqub, with his eye for a well-turned phrase, calls this “the return of the landed gentry”. This is just one sign among many that, contrary to the idea of a classless New Zealand, we live in a country with entrenched social differences. It also calls on us to take a closer look at our history, because for all the traditional talk of fairness, plenty of other forces have been at work. During the postwar period, the landowner Charles Prendergast Knight, faced with a Labour government that was raising taxes, strengthening the welfare state and attacking inherited wealth, wrote defiantly to his friend Maurice Le Cren, “well, dear fellow, we still have our breeding!” This scene, which could have come straight out of snobbish Britain, sits oddly with the New Zealand myth that has always proclaimed this an egalitarian country. At certain times, for certain groups, and looked at under certain lights, it has been that country. But it also has been, and is, deeply unequal. The word “breeding” brings this home to us: a signifier of superior bloodlines or upbringing, it bespeaks hierarchy. And while Knight’s belief in it may have been extreme, it was not unique. Although New Zealand is at last coming to grips with the legacy of colonisation, it has been slower to recognise a deep seam of intense economic and social differences – including among Pākehā (European New Zealanders) – that runs right through its history. In the 1890s, for instance, the wealthiest 1 per cent owned fully two-thirds of the country’s assets. Things are more equal today, but even so, roughly that share of assets is still commanded by the wealthiest tenth. The pursuit of economic wealth is, by itself, unsurprising. People crave the security it provides: the stability, the reserves to draw down, the stake in the future. But it becomes destructive when the imbalance of wealth goes far beyond what is fair or healthy. At present, someone in the wealthiest 1 per cent of adults – a 40,000-strong club – has a net worth sixty-eight times that of the typical (median) New Zealander. Can we really say that someone, no matter how talented or hard-working, is worth nearly seventy times the typical Kiwi? Dwelling on upper-end privilege can often be discomforting to New Zealanders. Raised on a diet of egalitarian ideas, many feel uncomfortable talking about wealth; such discussion is often dismissed as the politics of envy. Poverty, though still controversial, is a safer subject. But we cannot understand deprivation unless we understand affluence. On the wealth spectrum, everyone is connected; everyone’s actions affect everyone else. The more profits go to company owners, the less there is left for frontline workers. An excess at one end makes a deficit at the other. While we can seek to raise living standards for all – subject to environmental limits – we can never generate so much wealth that we can forget about its distribution. Think, too, about what accumulates around wealth. An unequal wealth distribution creates, and is created by, inequalities in many of the other “goods” that make for fulfilling lives: health, housing, schooling, income and political power, to name a few. Wealth opens up opportunities to live in certain areas, get one’s children into certain kinds of school, make certain kinds of social connection, exert certain kinds of power. Those things in turn make it easier to accumulate wealth. And wealth itself generates wealth, through interest, rents and dividends. It is as if people have stepped on an up escalator and, whatever their initial merits, been borne upwards by a mechanism that relies little on their own effort. In contrast, those with minimal wealth are kept on a down escalator by factors – forced reliance on loan sharks, lack of decent jobs or the skills to fill them, damp and mouldy housing, discrimination – that are also largely beyond their control. These disadvantages and advantages get passed along the generations. The most prestigious university courses recruit disproportionately from the wealthiest schools, entrance to which in turn relies on the purchase of the most expensive “in-zone” properties. University entrants more generally tend to be those with university-educated parents. People with serious wealth, in short, can concentrate opportunities and goods around themselves, and pass them on to their children. They can do this using mechanisms not available to other families – mechanisms that, in fact, exclude the children of other families. New Zealand is not yet the US, with its extraordinary wealth inequalities and pipeline of opportunity running from high-stakes kindergarten entry through exclusive prep schools to elite, inordinately expensive Ivy League universities. But there are signs – especially in the growing segregation of secondary schools – that we have for some time been heading in that direction. Since the 1980s, economic inequality in New Zealand has risen dramatically, exacerbating other disparities and concentrating opportunities at the top. Our wealthy families may have become, as the Americans have it, “opportunity hoarders”. Max Rashbrooke is a senior associate at New Zealand’s Institute for Governance and Policy Studies. This is an edited extract from his new book Too Much Money: How Wealth Disparities Are Unbalancing Aotearoa New Zealand (Bridget Williams Books, $39)Tiger Woods posted a short video showing him hitting golf balls on a driving range on Sunday, nine months after the 15-time major champion suffered serious leg injuries in a car crash. “Making progress,” Woods wrote in the caption to his Twitter post, which marked the first time he has been seen swinging a club since the February crash in southern California. In the video, Woods wore a compression sleeve on his right leg, which sustained open fractures in the crash. The video will boost hopes that the 45-year-old can return to competitive golf after the accident raised doubts about whether he could make another comeback. He previously had to take time out from the sport following a series of injury setbacks, including surgery on his back five times. Woods eventually overcame those injuries to win the 2019 Masters. There, a rejuvenated Woods won his first major championship since 2008 at a time when many believed he was a spent force. “We LOVE to see it!,” the US Ryder Cup Team official Twitter account said in response to Sunday’s video. “Keep going @TigerWoods, we’re all cheering for you.” This month, fellow golfer Justin Thomas said he believed Woods would attempt to return to competition. “I know that he’s going to try,” Thomas said on the No Laying Up podcast. “I don’t see him ever playing if he can’t play well. He doesn’t strike me as a guy who’s played at home and he’s shooting a bunch of 75s and 76s and he’s like, ‘OK, I’m gonna give Augusta a try this year.’ That’s not really gonna be him, at least from my understanding, what I know of him.” In May, Los Angeles county sheriff Alex Villanueva said that Woods will not receive a citation over February’s crash and blamed the incident on Woods’s excessive speed and loss of control of his vehicle. The sheriff’s department added that drugs and alcohol were not factors in the crash and Woods appeared to be sober when officers arrived on the scene.Antonio Conte sensed a lull around a stadium that, from the start of the second half, had pulsated to the rhythm of a relentless Tottenham performance. There had been scant threat of a Leeds equaliser but the volume had tailed off and, with a few minutes left, any drop in energy could prove costly. Looking up to the stands, he waved his arms furiously until the faithful had summoned a noise to his liking; it did the trick, because Spurs heaved themselves over the line and bred a sense that the handover between eras started right here. That is what Conte brings: an intensity, drama and insistence that sweep others along with him. Natural charisma like that does not grow on trees and, whether you are a player or a fan, it comes with demands. Meeting them tends to be worth it and, if evenings like this become the norm here, Spurs may discover that soon enough. They looked like a team in their head coach’s image after the interval, undoing the harm caused during a horribly laboured first half and setting a standard Conte will demand they match. What a turnaround this was given the fact that, at half-time, Spurs were booed off by a crowd who had witnessed a continuation of the worst traits they displayed under Nuno Espírito Santo and José Mourinho. “Our fans weren’t satisfied with the football we played and I agreed with them,” Conte said. Bad habits cannot be erased overnight and this was a reminder: Dan James’s opener for Leeds, prodded in just before the interval, was entirely deserved because the only initiative on show had come from Marcelo Bielsa’s markedly improved visitors. Conte had 15 minutes to cajole a reaction and the ferocity of Tottenham’s response was underlined by the statistics. They ran 3.7km further than Leeds, who had been a version of their fizzing best, in the second half and it gave their extra quality a platform. Within six minutes of re-emerging they hit the woodwork twice, Harry Kane’s effort squeezing on to a post via Illan Meslier and Son Heung-min’s cross-shot pinballing off Diego Llorente on to the bar; they did not let up and their goals, while not in contention for any end-of-season awards, were well signposted. The first was created by Lucas Moura, who teed up those earlier efforts and was unplayable once Spurs had cleared their heads. He reached a loose ball ahead of Meslier before checking back and finding Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, whose finish was ugly but did the job. Conte urged his charges back towards the halfway line; they kept coming and, soon enough, found the lead. Ben Davies was denied by Meslier but, shortly after , Liam Cooper crudely halted Moura’s latest exhilarating burst inside the ‘D’. Eric Dier’s free-kick flicked off Pascal Struijk in the wall, wrongfooting Meslier and bouncing off his left upright. A gleeful Sergio Reguilón was first to the rebound; he raced off towards the corner flag to enjoy breaking his Spurs duck and Conte, launching into one of his full-octane celebrations, could both feed and savour the roars. “We played two different games,” he said. “In the first half we conceded possession. In the second half we changed the plan tactically and started to put pressure in every area of the pitch. We changed totally and I’m pleased for the players. They played well, they played with personality, they ran and put pressure on.” They needed to, because Leeds had begun like a whirlwind despite adding Raphinha and Rodrigo to their list of important absentees. Kalvin Phillips tested Hugo Lloris with an early free-kick before Stuart Dallas and Adam Forshaw shot narrowly wide; Spurs had not got going by the time Jack Harrison beat Emerson Royal and crossed beautifully to let James convert his first goal since joining from Manchester United. Tottenham offered virtually nothing in attack before Conte got his teeth into them. Japhet Tanganga and Harry Winks, recalled to the league action for the first time since horror shows at Arsenal and Crystal Palace, looked jittery and the instinct throughout was to opt for safety first. They looked truly secure only once Reguilón had pounced; for all their second-half verve, Lloris still had to make smart saves from Joe Gelhardt and the impressive James early on. “In the second half it was difficult for us not to be dominated,” Marcelo Bielsa said. His depleted side had contributed fully but Spurs, channelling their leader’s best facets, merited the victory through the sheer force of their recovery. “A good win, and it’s right to celebrate with passion,” said Conte, who yelled into the night sky at full-time before hurling himself into the bosoms of everyone in sight. “I have a great passion and I want to transfer my passion into all of this environment.” This arena’s regulars may be both exhausted and exhilarated come May.Wow – what an incredible slice of Doctor Who served up by Chris Chibnall and Maxine Alderton, with a jaw-dropping conclusion. It gave us plenty of jump scares, but, like the reveal that the cursed Devon village had been quantum-extracted into space, it also had more than one unexpected turn along the way. “Division uses everything and everyone. Every species. Every world. Every moment. They are everywhere. Present and unseen. Division is unstoppable.” The Rogue Angel gave us a grave warning about what the Doctor was about to find out about herself, and what she was up against. But even as Jodie Whittaker was being captured and recalled, I caught my breath in shock as the wings appeared on her back and the Division imprisoned the Time Lord herself as an Angel. It wasn’t just the central story of the Angels and the Division that shone, though. It was desperately sad that Peggy returned to her village after 66 years and was treated like a pariah for trying to warn everyone about what happened there when she was 10. And the chilling reaction of Poppy Polivnick’s young Peggy at the deaths of her elderly carers Gerald (Vincent Brimble) and Jean (Jemma Churchill) back in 1901 was one of the darkest moments of the series so far. The supporting cast were exemplary, especially Annabel Scholey as Claire. The interplay between her, the psychic, and Prof Eustacius Jericho (Kevin McNally), the scientist and war veteran, echoed Matt Smith’s 2013 haunted house episode Hide, only without the romantic undertow brought by Dougray Scott and Jessica Raine. Claire’s premonitions must have meant she recognised the Doctor, which was why she seemed so intriguingly knowledgable about Weeping Angels in chapter one. I hope her tale is not done – she was absolutely compelling, and still remains stranded. If I had to find one flaw, the VFX or direction didn’t work particularly well when Azure and Passenger turned up to give their sermon on the mount in front of Bel (Thaddea Graham) and Namaca (Blake Harrison). But it seems churlish to pick a fault. What a stunning episode. Sum it up in one sentence? Weeping Angels besiege an English village with a missing young girl in 1967, with catastrophic consequences for the Doctor. Life aboard the Tardis Yaz (Mandip Gill) and Dan (John Bishop) got to do a two-hander without the Doctor, mostly in 1901. Yaz showed off her modern police search-and-rescue skills, while Dan got all the best lines. They did a good job, when confronted by the Angels, of conveying that they were putting on a brave face for young Peggy, and failing. Elsewhere, Vinder (Jacob Anderson) found out Bel is still alive – even if she was too disorganised to blurt out her coordinates immediately on a limited time holo-recording. Fear factor Not so much “base under seige” as “basement under seige”, we got a greatest hits of the Weeping Angels here. They used nearly every trick we’ve seen before – dust in the eye, hiding in images, pursuing quarry through tunnels where they grow out of the very walls – with a couple of new moves thrown in. The sequence in which Claire’s sketch reassembled itself and started to project an Angel, then the Doctor set the paper alight – morphing the Angel into a fire Angel and making the situation far more dangerous – was a great twist. Jericho’s EEG printing out another Angel was an original moment, and Claire hallucinating she had wings was a disturbingly surreal scene. But they were at their creepiest when they used Prof Jericho’s voice against him – when they played on his insecurities, making him sound like some 1960s incel who explored the paranormal as a way of shutting himself off from the rejections of the real world. Mysteries and questions From revelations in The Timeless Children, I imagined the Division being some historical secret Time Lord organisation interfering in the galaxy that was long done and dusted. This episode made it clear that the Division was still an active threat in the universe, which put paid to my previous theories. I still think Tecteun will turn out to be a pre-mind wipe Master, the exploitative relationship between her and the Timeless Child setting the blueprint for the loving antagonism between Master and Doctor. This was the first Flux chapter where we didn’t see Joseph Williamson or his tunnels, and there was no sign of Barbara Flynn’s mysterious White Guardian Awsok either. Or Swarm. Boo. Lots of people on social media are suggesting that the identity of Bel and Vinder’s unborn child may be somebody we already know. But who? Or should that be – but Who? Something has been bugging me. We saw last week that the Fugitive Doctor and Karnavista were two of the Division operatives who took part in the battle of Atropos. But who were Yaz and Vinder there to represent? They surely weren’t at the events themselves. Who were the other two people on the Ruth Doctor’s team? Deeper into the vortex The Weeping Angels first appeared in one of the most highly regarded Doctor Who episodes of all time – Blink in 2007. That was an adaptation of a short story titled What I Did in My Christmas Holidays – By Sally Sparrow that Steven Moffat originally penned for the 2006 Doctor Who annual. Read it online here. It is the first time they have been titular monsters since The Angels Take Manhattan in 2011, although they have made several cameos since, including in Matt Smith’s final episode The Time of the Doctor in 2013. I yelled out “She said the thing!” when Whittaker said “Reverse the polarity of the neutron flow”, regarded as Jon Pertwee’s definitive third Doctor catchphrase, even though he only actually said it twice. Here’s a supercut video of every time the Doctor has reversed a technobabble thingamajig since 1963. When Gerald asked who was in charge, and Yaz said it was a very flat team structure, she wasn’t just echoing the Doctor’s words, but also Graham, who in 2018’s The Witchfinders dealt with King James refusing to accept a woman could be in charge by saying “It’s a very flat team structure. We all have our area of expertise.” The people of the village disappeared on 21 November 1967. If they had landed the Tardis three days earlier, they could all have sat down and watched the now-lost second episode of Patrick Troughton story The Ice Warriors, which was broadcast on 18 November 1967. If you can get to London, the immersive Doctor Who theatre experience Time Fracture is taking bookings again after being closed due to flooding for months. Next time Survivors of the Flux, you have me at a disadvantage. I must confess I didn’t watch the next time trailer because I was still rocking in shock at the Doctor being recalled by the Division and turned into a Weeping Angel.Pressure is growing on Boris Johnson to toughen his stance towards Beijing amid fears over the wellbeing of the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, with senior MPs claiming a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Beijing Olympics is now inevitable. The pressure did not appear to be dissipating after the International Olympic Committee said its president had held a 30-minute video call with Peng. The episode was dismissed by the Conservative MP Tim Loughton, of the influential Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China as “straight out of the Chinese Communist party playbook”, with the group adding: “The video cannot be considered proof that she is either well or safe.” Loughton said: “The IOC call does nothing to prove Peng Shuai is safe and well, as anybody who has been paying attention to the CCP’s tactics would know. Xi’s regime disappears people all the time. But incredibly, the IOC is bending over backwards to legitimise these hostage tactics. The IOC should take a leaf out of the WTA’s book, [which] has stood up fearlessly, and should be applauded. “If people as high profile as Peng Shuai can be disappeared, then goodness knows how many others have fallen foul of the Chinese paranoia. Against this background, lending our stamp of approval to the Beijing Olympics is simply unthinkable.” Oliver Dowden, the chair of the Conservative party, described the situation as very worrying, adding he welcomed the pressure from the Foreign Office, which over the weekend urged Beijing to offer “verifiable evidence” of Peng’s whereabouts and safety. The Labour frontbench has tabled written questions asking what representations the Foreign Office has made to the Chinese authorities. Ministers in the Lords on Thursday will be asked to comment formally by Lord Alton on reports that Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, regards the attack on Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang as genocide. Alton is one of the five signatories in a letter calling for a ban on any official UK diplomatic representation at the Winter Olympics, which starts in less than three months. The letter was signed by Tom Tugendhat, the Tory chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, Sir Iain Duncan Smith, a former Conservative party leader, and former ministers Tim Loughton and Nusrat Ghani. Labour in June called for a boycott if by 14 September – the date of the UN general assembly – the Chinese government had not provided the UN proper access to mount an investigation into the treatment of the Uyghur people. Labour MPs said: “The UK government should not send ministers, royal family members or senior representatives to participate in any official duties or ceremonies at the Beijing Olympics.” “A political boycott by the UK and other states would send a strong signal of the deep global concern with the plight of the Uyghurs and prevent the Games being a PR exercise for the Chinese authorities,” they added. The British government has taken a firm line opposing all-out sport boycotts, but, after reports that the US will mount a diplomatic boycott, the pressure on the UK to follow suit is growing. Overseas spectators have already been banned by China. Truss has taken a tough line on China but is meeting resistance from No 10 and the Cabinet Office. Speaking over the weekend, the national security adviser, Sir Stephen Lovegrove, said: “China’s rise is the central geopolitical fact of the 21st century and we have absolutely no desire whatsoever to see that checked at all. Its economic growth is important for us all and important for everybody who lives in China. “But, equally, I think what we would like to do is to see accommodation and balance asserted within the established rules that act in everybody’s benefit, not just in the benefit of the established hegemons.” On the issue of the Uyghurs, the UK has repeatedly said that only the international courts can make a determination of genocide. The UK parliament has by contrast voted to describe the repression in Xinjiang as genocide.The Republican party’s vilification of members of Congress who have criticized Donald Trump or supported bipartisan legislation is “ruining America”, New Hampshire’s governor, Chris Sununu, said on Sunday, adding another tacit voice to the small but growing internal opposition to the former president. Sununu, seen as a rising star of the post-Trump right, attacked his colleagues in an interview on CNN, insisting that House Republicans “have their priorities screwed up” for seeking retaliation against 13 members who voted for Joe Biden’s $1.2tn infrastructure bill. Sununu was scathing when asked about the call for those members to be stripped of their committee assignments in the same week that only two Republicans – vocal Trump critics Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger – voted to censure their colleague Paul Gosar for tweeting a video showing him murdering the Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. “That’s kind of that social media mob mentality that’s built up in this country where we don’t agree with one issue so we’re going to attack them, we’re going to vilify one person or one individual. We’ve got to get beyond that, because culturally, it’s really, really ruining America,” he said. “Politics in its entirety on both sides of the aisle in Washington is screwed up. They got their priorities all wrong, they focus on the wrong things. They don’t talk about balancing budgets, fixing healthcare, immigration reform, social security and Medicare … instead we spend all of our time focusing on these nitpicky things.” He defended Cheney, who was ousted from her leadership role earlier this year by House Republicans after she challenged Trump’s lie that his election defeat by Joe Biden was fraudulent. Regarding Republicans’ failure to speak out against Gosar, a Trump loyalist, Sununu added: “When a congressman says those things, of course they have to be censured … We’re talking about kicking people off committees because they don’t like one vote or the other? Again, I just think they have their priorities screwed up.” Sununu is among a small number of senior, elected Republicans with the confidence to begin pushing back (although not directly) against Trump’s domination of the party. Glenn Youngkin won a surprise victory earlier this month in Virginia’s governor’s race after a campaign during which he deliberately kept Trump at arm’s length, yet did tacitly echo the former president’s talking points. Some saw his win as a new Republican playbook for navigating future elections minus the specter of Trump. Meanwhile, Chris Christie, a former governor of New Jersey and one-time Trump adviser, has told party members they needed to “renounce the conspiracy theories and truth deniers, the ones who know better and the ones who are just plain nuts”. Trump, who is considering another presidential run in 2024, attacked Christie while attempting to seek credit for Youngkin’s victory. Friction has also been reported in Trump’s relationship with his protege Ron DeSantis, the Florida governor touted in Republican circles as the former president’s heir apparent and tipped for a likely 2024 White House run of his own. Trump is increasingly irritated by DeSantis’ soaring popularity, according to CNN, and has become “obsessed” with receiving credit for his rise. A report in the Atlantic published on Sunday suggested that Trump’s once iron-clad grip on the Republican party might finally be slipping, arguing that the recent series of developments “point to the early stirrings of a Republican party in which Trump is sidelined”. However, Trump continues to raise millions of dollars for an as yet undeclared presidential candidacy, and sends out regular endorsements of state and national candidates he believes embody the principles of Trumpism. Until recently, Sununu was believed to be among them, but he reportedly upset Republican colleagues earlier this month with his announcement that he was not interested in pursuing a seat in the US Senate. According to Politico, both the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, and Rick Scott, chair of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, considered him the perfect candidate to help wrest chamber control from Democratic hands in the 2022 midterm elections, but were blindsided by his decision. “You just get so much more done as governor,” Sununu told CNN on Sunday. “Governors are the ones that have to implement and design programs, create opportunities, and we as governors have the best opportunity to offset some of the negative things coming out of Washington. The Senate and House really don’t have any power to do that.”It is an intriguing thought. If the Red Roses can rack up four straight autumn international wins with consummate ease, what might they be capable of at next year’s World Cup in New Zealand? Simon Middleton’s side reduced USA to rubble in front of a lively Worcester crowd of 7,515, capping a perfect end to 2021 and equalling the men’s team’s record of 18 successive Test victories. It means England Women have scored 37 tries and 239 points during autumn wins over New Zealand, twice, Canada and USA, enhancing their status as the world’s No 1 ranked side as they bid to become world champions in less than a year’s time. They breached their opponents’ defence 15 times here, running amok on a day when positives emerged everywhere for Middleton. The Red Roses’ head coach said: “We had high hopes for this series but I just said to the girls in the circle that we haven’t just improved our game, we’ve improved the women’s game. We’ve shown what’s possible when you back the girls and you’re given the resources and you put them in the right environment. They’re just fantastic players so full credit to them. “It’s taken some time to build this so what we’ve got to do is make sure we continue to do so. We’re definitely heading in the right direction.” There will be greater challenges for England. There has to be. It cannot be this easy. But there is an energy and a self-belief about this team and Middleton spoke endlessly after the game about their desire in attack and defence. Certainly from the moment the Harlequins prop Vickii Cornborough powered over the line from another expertly executed lineout, a feature of England’s displays this autumn, in the second minute, this was one-way traffic. After Cornborough’s opener, Sixways had its breath taken away courtesy of a stunning individual score from the full-back Abby Dow. The Wasps player collected possession and showed remarkable pace to saunter past a clutch of leaden-footed USA defenders on a diagonal left-hand run which took her all the way over the visitors’ line. Last Monday, Dow was nominated for the International Rugby Players’ Women’s try of the year for her scintillating effort against France in April. This was another collector’s item. When England’s third try arrived it was a moment to savour for the Worcester wing Lydia Thompson. Quick hands following a well-worked scrum for England saw them stretch the USA defence, before Dow showed intelligence to send Thompson over in the right corner on her 50th appearance for the Red Roses. The try was rapturously received by Thompson’s home crowd, but USA finally steadied themselves and began to match England’s physicality at the breakdown. Crucially, however, they lacked the quality to unlock England’s defence. The hosts lost their rhythm when they conceded a handful of penalties and spurned another try-scoring opportunity when Thompson dropped Dow’s pass on the edge of USA’s 22-metre line, but Lark Davies and Leanne Infante added further scores to make it 29-0 at the break. The procession increased in the second half as Helena Rowland raced inside the left channel before sending Lagi Tuima clear to score after just 42 seconds. Zoe Aldcroft, the captain, nipped through a gap for an opportunistic score and Heather Cowell went over before Sarah Bern, the impressive replacement prop, scored twice. Davies and Thompson also crossed the line again and Connie Powell capped her debut with a try. Holly Aitchison, the Saracens centre, also got her name on the scoresheet on a day where positives emerged everywhere for Middleton. The competition for places within his squad is fierce and a number of players missed out here, giving much cause for optimism as England seek to retain their Women’s Six Nations title before attention turns to the rescheduled World Cup. Dow, who was the player of the match after an outstanding display, said: “We rarely play four games in a row so to be able to go out there and perform like that and to keep the tempo that we wanted is just incredible. It’s been a long process but all the training we’ve been doing is clearly paying off.”The Queen attended a christening at Windsor on Sunday after nearly a month’s absence from public duties amid health precautions. The monarch, 95, attended the joint baptism of the sons of Princess Eugenie and Zara Tindall at the Royal Lodge in Windsor Great Park, Berkshire. After straining her back earlier this month, the Queen pulled out of her duties at the Remembrance Sunday service at the Cenotaph on 11 November. She returned to official engagements on Wednesday with a face-to-face audience with Gen Sir Nick Carter, the outgoing head of the armed forces. She hosted a reception for business leaders at Windsor on 19 October before the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. The Queen’s absence sparked fears her health was declining less than a year after the death of her husband, Prince Philip, at 99. “She’s all right, thank you very much,” Prince Charles said on Wednesday, in response to a question about his mother’s health from Sky News. “Once you get to 95, it’s not quite as easy as it used to be. It’s bad enough at 73.” During Sunday’s ceremony Eugenie’s son, August, and Tindall’s son, Lucas Philip, were christened, with other royals including Prince Andrew and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge also in attendance. Meanwhile, the Queen was reported by the Mail on Sunday to be upset with a new BBC documentary, presented by media editor Amol Rajan, over expectations it would report William and his brother, Prince Harry, had briefed the media against one other. The newspaper cited an unnamed royal source who attacked The Princes and the Press as “tittle-tattle”, expressing anger over the BBC’s refusal to allow the palace an advance viewing. The source added that Buckingham Palace would refuse to cooperate on future projects unless it is given a right to respond. Stories of “briefing wars” and wider internal discord within the royal family will probably whip up further culture war antagonism over the monarchy less than two years after the high-profile departure of Harry and his wife, Meghan, who told Oprah Winfrey she experienced suicidal thoughts as a working royal.Good morning. Winemakers in NSW are fighting to keep mines out of their vines. The federal government has been accused of twiddling its thumbs by not acting on key election promises until the eleventh hour. And the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has told the IOC she is '“safe and well”. Hunter Valley winemakers are fighting to protect the region from industrial development after the Chinese-owned coal producer Yancoal lodged an assessment lease for sites in the heart of wine country. They are lobbying the NSW government to pass legislation to form a protective ring around the area – as has been done for the wine-producing Barossa Valley in South Australia and Margaret River in Western Australia. “We don’t want to come up against this in 10 years’ time when there’s another exploration licence around … we want to stop its renewal so we don’t go through this process again and again,” says one winemaker, Sally Scarborough. The federal government has been accused of delaying legislation until “five minutes to midnight” as it tries to end the parliamentary year delivering on key election promises. Labor’s climate change spokesperson, Chris Bowen, has accused Scott Morrison of “fiddling” for the past three years, and only acting on legislation for a religious discrimination act and a bill to establish a commonwealth integrity commission now there is an election in sight. “Let’s not accept any of these excuses about he had other things to do,” he says. “He could have done an Icac, he could have done religious freedom. He doesn’t believe in either. He’s been fiddling. He’s done nothing. And now as the election approaches, all of a sudden he finds a religious freedom bill in the top drawer, which has been gathering dust for three years.” New videos and photos of the missing tennis star Peng Shuai released by Chinese state media have done little to ease international demands for assurances that she is free and not under threat. Peng, 35, had not been seen or heard from in more than two weeks since she accused the country’s former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexually assaulting her. A Women’s Tennis Association spokesperson said the latest footage was “insufficient” and did not address the its concerns about her wellbeing as there are no signs of her being able to speak freely and some clips appeared staged. Australia The Australian Fashion Council has received a $1m grant to start working with industry to reduce the country’s mountain of textile waste. It’s a sum that pales in comparison with the money on offer for recycling other products, however, and it has left some in the industry feeling underwhelmed. The Australia Tutoring Association is expecting an increase in parents seeking private tutors for their students post-lockdown but experts say it risks exacerbating learning inequalities and extra study can impact a child’s mental health. Some Pacific countries will take years to vaccinate just 50% of their adult population, according to new modelling. While some smaller nations have already achieved more than 90% vaccination rates, misinformation has led to vaccine hesitancy in places like Papua New Guinea, which has just 3% of its population fully vaccinated. Police have found a piece of fabric in the search for William Tyrrell, as the search continued on the NSW mid-north coast despite severe weather warnings. The world Sudan’s military coup leader has announced the release of the detained civilian prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, and other political prisoners. Hopes for a resolution to the almost month-long crisis were undermined as security forces fired teargas at demonstrators suspicious of the military’s continuing ambitions. The Italian island of Vulcano has ordered a partial evacuation due to increased volcanic activity and gases in the area. Meta is delaying plans to encrypt Facebook and Instagram users’ messages until 2023 amid warnings from child safety campaigners that its proposals would shield abusers from detection. Recommended reads Melissa McCarthy showcase the breadth of her comic abilities as she assumes different aliases in the criminally underrated 2015 action comedy Spy, playing desk-bound CIA analyst Susan Cooper, writes Vanessa Cryer. “While Cooper is polite, anxious and reserved, her spy alter ego evolves into someone cunning, agile and ruthless. McCarthy elicits the biggest laughs from her physical comedy, including some less-than-perfectly executed stunts.” Alcohol is a drug that has its claws deep in Australian life. If you’re happy, sad, bored, have won a promotion, lost a family member, bought a house or graduated from university, these can all be seen as reasons to drink. Depending on your upbringing, cultural background and exposure to alcohol, you may believe that drinking a six-pack of beer most days is “normal” and that problem drinking is when you start drinking litres of cask wine daily. But how do you know when it’s become a problem? Addiction psychiatrist Dr Xavier Mulenga says people should speak to their doctor, and be open to treatments that go beyond a detox. Listen Is Donald Trump plotting to steal the 2024 election? In today’s Full Story, Guardian US’s chief reporter, Ed Pilkington, speaks with Michael Safi about what Trump has been up to since his 2020 election defeat, including touring the US and rallying his supporters with speeches pushing the conspiracy theory that he was the rightful winner. And while he’s been doing this, his supporters have been busy at state and local level challenging incumbents in elected roles who oversee state election counts – the very people Trump tried and failed to convince last time around to endorse his claim to victory. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport The Wallabies’ soul-destroying 29-28 defeat to Wales at the weekend confirmed Australia’s first winless European tour since 1976. But the team’s ill-fated tour of Britain may yet serve them well – if they are prepared to learn from mistakes, writes Bret Harris. The scandal associated with Tim Paine’s resignation as Test captain is a significant distraction ahead of the Ashes and it may cause a reshuffle in the team. But given the uncertainty surrounding Paine’s fitness and form, the host nation may actually emerge from the scandal stronger for the series, writes Courtney Walsh. Manchester United have confirmed the departure of Ole Gunnar Solskjær and said they are looking to appoint an interim manager to the end of the season. Solskjær’s fate was sealed at an emergency board meeting on Saturday night after the team’s 4-1 defeat at Watford. Media roundup People entering Queensland will need to fork out for an expensive PCR Covid test, after the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, refused to allow rapid-antigen as they are less sensitive, reports the Courier-Mail. Areas with the toughest lockdowns emerge with the highest unemployment, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. Coming up FedEx workers begin stoppages. Climate and environmental protesters are expected to converge on the CO2CRC AGM. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Tom and Amy take to the floor for the final time, to ‘We Go Together’ from Grease. And that’s IT for another Strictly week! Only four more to go – after a very draggy start it feels like the series is flying by now. I’ll be back next week at 6.55pm for the shortest show of the series (barely an hour!), so please join me then. Thank you for reading and getting busy in the comment box – you are all excellent. Have a lovely week! Tom and Amy say lovely things about each other, including a sobbing Amy saying ‘I’m telling you now, the Fletchers are not getting rid of Amy,’ which sounds vaguely sinister. But they’ve clearly had a great time and Tom has loved learning to dance – he never quite reached the dizzy heights of bandmate Harry Judd, but I guess there’s a reason Tom does the singing and Harry’s in charge of rhythm. All the judges vote to save Rhys and Nancy, which means TOM AND AMY are leaving Strictly. Oh hang on, Shirley would have saved Tom and Amy, not that her vote matters. When Shirley does this, I never know if she’s purposely throwing shade at the safe couple or trying to make the departing couple feel better. I suspect she thinks it’s the latter, but somehow it always comes across as the former. Or maybe I’m overthinking this. Rhys is up first - it’s still frenetic and the timing is still off the beat for the second half, but I don’t think there was mistake this time. Good work, Rhys. And now it’s Tom and Amy. I can feel Tom trying to emote, and I salute the effort. Probably should have done that yesterday, however. In other news, John and Johannes doing an Argentine Tango next week. HELL YES. So Dan’s local curry house in Sheffield has named a curry after him. ‘I think it’s called a Dan Sack,’ says Dan. That’s a Dhansak, Dan, and I regret to inform you it’s always been on the menu. They saw you coming, mate. And yes, I know this was the joke, but by the time Dan got to the punchline I’d lost the will to live. So, as predicted last night, it’s Rhys vs. Tom. If last night’s performance is anything to go by, it should be Tom leaving tonight. But they both have huge room for improvement – Rhys can get back on top of his timing and not make any mistakes, and Tom can start emoting. I don’t think this is a done deal by any means. So who is joining Rhys and Nancy in the dance off? Rose and Giovanni are safe, along with Dan and Nadiya and John and Johannes. Which means TOM AND AMY in the bottom two. Is the string vest making a comeback? Aston was wearing a white one at the JLS gig I went to on Friday, and now this guy’s wearing one too. Are they sexy now? Time for a musical (and, in fact, Musical) interlude, courtesy of Max Harwood and The Feeling, who are singing ‘Out Of The Darkness (A Place Where We Belong)’ from the musical Everybody’s Talking About Jamie. I’ve never seen this musical but I’ve heard very good things. This is, as the kids say, a BOP. Kai’s doing impressions. Don’t give up the day job, my love. So who’s safely through to the final six? Tilly and Nikita are safe, along with AJ and Kai. First couple in the dance off - RHYS AND NANCY. Can’t say I’m shocked, but who will he be up against? Tom? Dan? Must be one of those two. Highlights: Cynthia Erivo being an excellent supply teacher/judge – get well soon CR-H. AJ and Captain Von Kai giving us swoon-worthy romance, Motsi’s magnificent hairdo, which has now been given listed status by Historic England, the whole Cabaret opening dance, all the couples giving it their all. Lowlights: Confusing scoring, Couple’s Choice oddness, the usual movie week/musicals week nonsense, bingo crying. Tess in vast hot pink trousers, like last night’s dress has headed south for winter. Also some kind of neck bandage. Claudia in a haunted nightie. And we’re off! Tonight’s pro dance has a Wicked theme, with Luba as Elphaba the wicked witch and Katya as Glinda the good witch. I’ve somehow never seen this musical, but I’ve listened to Defying Gravity so many times it feels like I have. Incidentally, Cynthia Erivo is going to play Elphaba in the upcoming movie of the show, with Ariana Grande as Glinda. Does this mean we can have Ariana as guest judge next week? Just glanced up at Doctor Who and thought Bez from the Happy Mondays was in it, but turns out that’s John Bishop. Even with the sound off this looks terrifying. Talking of liking different things, I noticed someone in the comment box asking me (very politely, for which I thank you) to stop ‘pettifogging’ about the whole Movie Week/Musicals Week thing. Firstly thank you for bringing the word ‘pettifogging’ into this liveblog; I’m a big fan. But secondly, pettifogging is what I DO. If I let you take away my pettifogging, you’ll come for my gentle fun-poking and rubbish puns. Then you’ll abolish my archive of alliteration and make me hand over the keys to the Box of Strictlified Metaphors. It’s the thin end of the glittery wedge. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Results Show! Musicals Week is always one of the better feem weeks, and I actually really enjoyed last night’s show. There were a few dances that didn’t tickle my personal fancy, but judging by the comments we all like different things. Which is, of course, how it should be. Tonight we’ll say farewell to another Strictly couple, and last night I predicted a Tom/Rhys dance-off. Dan and Tom were both joint bottom, but Dan has a big fanbase and actually danced pretty well last night. Rhys was joint second from the bottom with John, who I think the public will save over Rhys. So that’s my prediction, but we’ll see what happens – kick off is at 7.15pm! Really enjoyed that show, it was fun. I’ll be back tomorrow from 7.15pm for the Results Show, so please join me here then. Thank you so much for joining in, is always a pleasure and never a chore. Enjoy the rest of your Saturday! That’s it for tonight’s dancing, goodness that went quickly. Tilly and Nikita are at the top of the leaderboard, with Tom and Amy and Dan and Nadiya down the bottom. I think the public will save Dan, and it wouldn’t surprise me if they also save John and Johannes (third from the bottom) too, which puts Rhys in danger. Who are you voting for this week, and what’s your prediction for the bottom two? I’m going to say Tom vs. Rhys, but it’s really tough to call this week. We’re very much at the sharp end now. Scores: 7,7,9,8 - a total of 31 for Dan and Nadiya. Cynthia enjoyed it, but Dan needs to finish his lines. Motsi loved how Dan was pushing out of his comfort zone but his weight needed to be further forward. Shirley loved how Dan is progressing through the contest and it was Dan’s best dance. Anton thought it was joyous and Dan has had the best journey so far*. *I’m available to go on BBC Breakfast to argue this point VIGOROUSLY. Dan looks very dapper as Gene Kelly, and I’m loving Nadiya’s pink fringing. Some nice characterisation from Dan and his footwork really is pretty decent, albeit it needs a little more finish. I think this might be my favourite dance of theirs, I actually really enjoyed that. This week they’re dancing Charleston to ‘Good Morning’ from Singin’ In The Rain. This was absolutely a movie first, so DRINK. In fact it didn’t hit the stage until about 30 years after the movie, which suggests it was a perfect movie and never needed to be on the stage in the first place. Scores: 10,10,10,10. Fine, whatever. There is crying. DRINK. Anton loved it, Tilly is an inspiration. Cynthia thought it was awesome, and Motsi thought Tilly was a force to be reckoned with, one of her best dances. Shirley thought it was absolutely first class and she couldn’t tell who the professional was. How can you say that was one of Tilly’s best dances? Based on what criteria? Strictly’s gone mad. Is this dancing? I have no idea. There’s a lot of jumping about and some nice synchronicity at the start but it gets a bit shaky towards the end. Not really sure what that was, and I didn’t really like it. Sorry. Maybe it would help if I’d seen Matilda? I think mostly this is reminding me of Daz Sampson on Eurovision in 2006. Never a good thing. This week they’re dancing Couple’s Choice to ‘Revolting Children’ from Matilda. I’m already itchy about this music choice – it’s shouty and largely undanceable, and only really works if Dave Arch has wheeled in a choir of revolting children, which would be Covid madness. But at least Matilda was definitely a stage musical first, so I suppose that’s something. Like Tom, Tilly has a family. Don’t know much about them, but they seem nice. Scores: 8,8,8,8 - a total of 32 for John and Johannes. Shirley thought John did a great job of the spins and John is getting more comfortable in leading as well as receiving (please stop, Shirley), but a bit flat-footed. OK, so not just me. Anton thought it was a bit safe and John needs to let the handbrake off. Cynthia loved the partnership but the energy needs to go up. Motsi loves how constant JoJo are, but she wants them to take it to the next level. This is such a great song for a Viennese, and John is pure musical theatre gold. The timing is great in hold, and John’s doing a nice job of gliding rather than rising and falling, which I think you’re supposed to for a Viennese. His feet look a bit flat though, although maybe that’s just me. This week they’re dancing the Viennese Waltz to ‘Chim Chim Cher-ee’ from Mary Poppins. Ricky Groves and Erin Boag did an American Smooth to an odd jazz version of this way back in the day, which I only know because I looked it up and then had to further investigate who Ricky Groves is. Eastenders, apparently. This wasn’t a stage musical until 2004, but remains one of the finest Disney movies of all time. Honestly, Strictly, is it really that hard? DRINK. Scores: 10,9,9,9 - a total of 37 for Rose and Giovanni. Motsi felt the joy even though there was a tiny mistake. Shirley saw improvements on many levels, it was fab-u-LUSS (almost). Anton absolutely loved it, it had great storytelling and perfectly captured the mood of musical theatre. Cynthia thought it was so much fun to watch and gorgeous. Rose and Gio make such an adorable Ana and Prince Hans, even though that skirt is a foul shade of neon mustard. This takes a while to get going, but once they’re in hold and actually Quickstepping Rose has a nice frame and some cracking footwork. Timing is everything in a Quickstep, and it continues to astound me how brilliant Rose is at staying in sync with Gio. LOVE the BSL chat too, really enjoyed that. This week they’re dancing the Quickstep to ‘Love Is An Open Door’ from Frozen The Musical. Obviously this was a movie first (DRINK), but I’m guessing there are many happy children watching this right now. So we’ll Let It Go. Just this once, mind. Incidentally, love is not an open door. You’re letting all the heat out, bloody close it. Scores: 7,8,8,8 - a total of 31 for Tom and Amy. Cynthia also wanted more heart from Tom, and Motsi agrees - Tom was too controlled. Shirley liked the timing and style, but Tom held back and he needs to let his emotions go. Anton enjoyed it but Tom needs to let it go (wrong musical). Everyone wants more crying. DRINK. This is very much barefoot contempo-waft, but with giant sleeves that make Tom look like Gaston from Beauty And The Beast. It’s dramatic with some nice lifts, but it feels a bit lacking in heart and passion for my liking. Didn’t love it, sorry. Tom and Amy Couple’s Choice to ultimate friend-zoning anthem ‘On My Own’ from Les Misérables. This is a beautiful song, but possibly a touch bleak for Saturday night family telly. It’s a song that means a lot to Tom, however, so let’s go with it. Everyone’s crying, DRINK. Also sending thoughts and prayers to the Dave Arch singer who’s going to tackle the depth of Eponine’s misery. Nancy is crying. DRINK. Scores: 8,8,8,8 - a total of 32 for Rhys and Nancy. Tess’s dress is making my TV go funny. Anton thought Rhys’s feet were a bit footloose, but it was a great performance and he can’t decide which way to vote (??). Cynthia loved how much joy there was and how much Rhys was enjoying himself. Motsi loved the explosion of energy but it was a bit busy and needed more attention to detail. Shirley spotted the small mistake and it was slightly ahead of the music, but Rhys can be relied on for a great performance. I love the energy of this and you can’t fault Rhys’s commitment, but his footwork needs to be sharper and his timing goes a bit awry in places. A mistake too - it just all feels a bit...chaotic? This week they’re dancing the Jive to ‘Footloose’ from the 80s movie Footloose, which wasn’t even a musical. Until 1998, when they put it on the stage for no reason. ANYWAY, Rhys and Nancy earned a stellar four tens for their Charleston last week – can they do the double with the Jive? This is another dance that plays to Rhys’s natural strengths, so I have high hopes. Scores: 9,10,10,9 - a total of 38 for AJ and Kai. Shirley thought it was absolutely sensation - it was beautifully executed and stunning. Anton was taken away from it just being a Waltz into something more beautiful. Cynthia loved watching AJ float, and was really proud of her. Motsi felt the energy, it was stunning. Can we all take a moment to celebrate Motsi’s incredible ability to wear absolutely anything. Tonight’s pink suit and hair is spectacular, I adore her. AJ’s crying. DRINK. Well, this is lovely. Some nice heel leads from AJ, and a gorgeous top line. No gapping, nice flow, all very elegant and romantic, von trapped in Kai’s arms. Really enjoyed that, goosebumpy stuff. These two are properly smitten, aren’t they? This week they’re dancing the Waltz to ‘Edelweiss’ from The Sound Of Music. Rest easy with your bingo wine, this was definitely a Broadway musical first. AJ had a wobby Paso last week that left her at the bottom of the leaderboard, but I have every expectation that she’s going to come back fighting and give us a fabulous Waltz. Out come the judges! More hot pink from Motsi, a Shirley in a gorgeous suit, Cynthia in a floaty frock. Loving this judging lineup. Out come the stars! Loving John and Johannes as chimney sweeps and Captain Von Kai. Claudia in her usual black sequins, Tess in a hot pink hot mess, like an overcooked glitterprawn. It’s a feem week, so there’s a bonus pro dance! It’s got a Cabaret theme, with Giovanni as the Emcee and Oti as Sally Bowles. Love it. And we’re off! Time for a slo-mo VT. Everyone’s ready to put on a show, and they all get to pretend they’re in the West End (DRINK) whilst living their childhood dream. IT’S SHOWTIME! All together now, let’s go fly a kite. If you haven’t seen ‘Saving Mr Banks’ with Emma Thompson as Mary Poppins author Pamela Travers and Tom Hanks as Walt Disney, I can’t recommend it enough. It’s a wonderful film. Take a sip of warm interval wine for any occurrence of the following: The word ‘showstopping’ Confusing/vertigo-inducing/mad CGI Crying VTs featuring visits to the West End Musicals that were actually movies first and thus belong in Movie Week (been dying on this hill so long I’m actually now an ancient burial mound) Not much point in Heidi’s Hunches this week, because right now it feels like there are only two groups. AJ, John and Rose just have to hold it together for a guaranteed place in the Grand Final on 18th December, and then there’s everyone else. We’ve also got two Couple’s Choices this evening – one from Tom and one from Tilly. But neither is likely to come close to Rose and Giovanni last week, so for the first time Couple’s Choice might not be a free pass to the next round. No Hit List tonight, but BBC1 is showing the original Disney version of Mary Poppins instead. As Movies go, it’s practically perfect in every way. Although in Hitlist-adjacent news, I went to see JLS at the O2 in London last night. Marvin and his crew were outstanding, so many huge tunes. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing Jazz Hands Musicals Special! Last year we were spared all the giant props and superfluous backing dancers due to Covid – my guess is things will still be relatively low-key, unless you’re Head of Dancefloor CGI, in which case unleash the sparkly hounds. Craig Revel-Horwood has tested positive for Covid (Glitter variant) and won’t be joining us this evening, so we’re sending lots of liveblog love his way for a swift recovery. He’s being replaced for one night only by musical theatre superstar Cynthia Erivo, which is very feem-appropriate. I’m fully expecting tens to be raining down like someone’s poked a hole in a Donny Osmond piñata. But if last week taught us anything, it’s that the public ultimately gets to decide. Tonight our remaining seven couples will all be battling to steal the Strictly limelight, and I’ll be up here keeping a heavily-beaded eye on all the fleckerls and heel leads. All you need to do is add your wit and wisdom in the comment box below, so grab your opera glasses and your song sheets and join me at 6.35pm. See you then!Labour has accused Priti Patel of “comprehensively failing” to curb the growing numbers of people crossing the Channel in small boats after a record number of people arrived on British shores in small boats last week. The shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, told Sky News on Sunday that his counterpart’s “incompetence on this issue is dangerous”. It follows reports that Boris Johnson is “exasperated” by his government’s failure to stem the arrivals amid concern there is no viable policy on the table to reduce the numbers coming across in small boats. High-ranking officials believe at least 10 people have died in the last few weeks while trying to cross one of the world’s busiest shipping channels. By Friday, 24,700 people had crossed in small boats already this year, nearly triple the 8,404 who arrived last year. More than 1,000 have crossed in a single day twice in the past fortnight. Polling for the Sunday Telegraph showed that 55% of the public and 77% of voters who backed the Tories at the last election believe the government’s approach to managing Channel crossings is “too soft”. Thomas-Symonds said Patel and the Home Office had generated dozens of headlines with promised schemes that had done nothing to stop the numbers arriving on the Kent coast. “It’s the home secretary who on her watch said she would make this route unviable … If numbers were to increase by the same rate again next year … we’ll have more people risking their lives in the Channel than voters in Priti Patel’s constituency,” he said. Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, said the government faces a serious challenge if it is to deliver on its promise to control the UK’s borders. “It needs to stop over-promising and under-delivering, recognise it’s a complex issue that requires less meaningless rhetoric and more intelligent realism, less harsh control and more human compassion.” Minnie Rahman, the interim chief executive of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, said MPs are treating refugees like a political football. “The reason we’ve been seeing more dangerous crossings is because government has closed down or limited practically every safe route for people seeking protection. “The only way government will end dangerous crossings is by taking practical, evidenced-based steps like providing safe, regulated means of travel for people seeking protection.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, defended Patel’s record. “The home secretary is I think doing everything she can and she hasn’t taken anything off the table. She has brought forward legislation to parliament that will make a whole lot of improvements – the nationality and borders bill – that will make a whole host of changes,” he told BBC One’s the Andrew Marr Show. Downing Street’s concerns over the Channel crossings spilled into the public domain last week when Johnson announced that Steve Barclay, the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, had been asked to review policy options and oversee cross-departmental collaboration on the issue. Barclay is expected to chair his first cross-departmental meeting on the issue this week. The meeting is likely to discuss the need for more dispersal accommodation amid fears the use of hotels is being seen as too much of a “pull factor”. He is also expected to focus on more diplomatic efforts around the government’s “offshoring policy” – paying other countries to take asylum seekers and provide a base for processing claims. Conservative MPs confronted Johnson over the Channel crossings at a meeting of the 1922 Committee on Thursday. The former Tory leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith was the first to challenge Johnson, saying: “Migration was in our manifesto, it was in our DNA. If we don’t do it, they won’t forgive us.”Joe Biden has reportedly been letting allies know he’ll be running for president again in 2024. Amid sliding approval ratings, Biden is reported to be keen to dash any assumption in Democratic circles that he’ll be standing down after a single term and opening the field to hopefuls including Vice-President Kamala Harris. “The only thing I’ve heard him say is he’s planning on running again. And I’m glad he is,” the Democratic former Connecticut senator Chris Dodd told the Washington Post in an article published Saturday – Biden’s 79th birthday. According to the newspaper, Biden shared his decision “with a small group of donors” during a virtual fundraiser earlier this month. Ed Rendell, the former Pennsylvania governor who attended the event, said there was “no difference” in what Biden told the donors to what he stated at a White House press conference in March. Then, Biden attempted to dampen speculation by stating that he had “never been able to plan three and a half, four years ahead.” Rendell told the Post: “What he is saying publicly is what he firmly believes. He will not run if he feels he can’t do the job physically or emotionally.” Biden was already the oldest presidential candidate to be elected as commander in chief when he beat Donald Trump in the November 2020 election, and will be 15 days short of his 82nd birthday on 5 November 2024, the next time voters in the US will be asked to choose their president. In 2019, at a campaign event in New Hampshire, Biden said it was “totally appropriate” for voters to consider his age. “Just like when I was 29 [when he was elected a US senator], was I old enough? And now, am I fit enough? I’ll completely disclose everything about my health. I’m in good shape,” Biden told the rally, according to the Laconia Daily Sun. On Friday, doctors declared Biden “fit to successfully execute the duties of the president” after his first physical in office. Trump, who has yet to declare if he will be running again, has frequently taunted Biden over his age and perceived health challenges. The former president, whose weight places him in the obese category, would be 78 on election day 2024.Ever feel like you’ve been had? As the final notes in Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s long goodbye play themselves out, as statements are issued and narratives massaged, it is worth taking a step back from all that background noise. For all the dead energy, and the ultimate humiliations of the Solskjær era, this has also been an uncomfortable note in English football’s modern history. What exactly just happened? Solskjær to Manchester United was a weird, doomed appointment from the start, one that bled into a weird, doomed, half-life as United’s sixth-longest-serving postwar manager. It will surely be a relief for all concerned that it is now concluded, not least for Solskjær, who seemed increasingly diminished by his appearances on the touchline – the sadness, the boggling eyes – an ancient mariner tied to the bridge of this zombified ship. And yet there is no joy to be taken here, no real sense of new beginnings. The least qualified managerial appointee in United’s modern history has been eased out of the job, with the soft landing of a significant payout. But make no mistake, the wrong person is leaving the building. It is self-evident that the problems at United will not be solved by the removal of a single sad‑looking Norwegian. It goes without saying that Ole was never really at the wheel in any meaningful sense, or if he was it was one of those small plastic contraptions strapped into the seat behind the driver. Peep your horn. Waggle the wheel. Do a press conference on Zoom. But it bears repeating all the same, because that model of ownership – the sweating of the brand, the commodification of the present – is a blight, not just on Manchester United, and not just on football, but on so many other aspects of our shared culture. For now it is necessary to offer the usual reckoning up of the Solskjær era. No doubt the next few days will bring us the inside story of his sacking. The real question is how he got the job in the first place. It made, and still makes, zero sporting sense. Only three people have ever really succeeded as manager of Manchester United: Ernest Mangnall, whose reign coincided with that of King Edward VII; and Matt Busby and Alex Ferguson, through‑the‑roof geniuses who still took years of struggle to master these treacherous waters. Solskjær had, and still has, nothing on his CV to qualify him for the job at hand. Had he been parachuted in as an unknown Scandinavian – which he was, in effect – his friends in the media would have shrieked for his dismissal from day one, appalled at this perversion of nature. Instead we have this: three years of drift and an oddly pointless tale of the tape. Only nine men in the 143-year history of Manchester United have managed the club for longer. Nobody in the postwar years has managed as many games without winning a trophy. Solskjær took a team that had finished second the season before. A total of £300m net has been spent on players in his time. United currently have four of the five best‑paid players in the league. And yet this Solskjær team still never gave any sense of developing a clear style of play. For a while bloody-minded counterattack worked well enough to give an illusion of progress. In between there were doomed experiments with playing “on the front foot”, hurling a clump of attacking players into the same cauldron in the hope some kind of alchemy might occur. It is rare to see such obviously poor coaching at this level, a team playing in atomised units, a setup where it is possible for poor, willing, overexposed Fred to remain a constant presence, while Donny van de Beek, a high-end but difficult footballer, is just too much to deal with. There were good spells. Third place in his first full season, 23 points behind Liverpool, was followed by second in the year of Covid isolation, when Solskjær’s unusually simple managerial style – based around vibes, feelings, smiling encouragement – seemed to fit the anxiety of the times. But by the end, watching his United was like a weird cultural experiment. What happens if you just don’t sack the manager? What if football becomes a fish out of water comedy: Eddie Murphy runs the world bank, Steve Martin is the US president, Solskjær is an elite manager? It seems you end up like this, a team full of high-class players losing 5-0 and 4-1 and 4-2, staggering around the ring like a half-done knockout artist, gassed and holding on, all hope placed in that single golden punch. No doubt even in those grisly final weeks some part of the United marketing machine will have enjoyed this circus: the domination of social media, the unofficial brand ambassadors jazzing up the story, the whole organisation burning Solskjær for firewood. But those weekly thrashings were unsustainable. Football management takes pieces out of you even at the best of times. Solskjær was being bullied by opposition fans, falling apart a little in his TV appearances. The job had become a paid weekly humiliation. At the end of which the Glazers have made fools of us all. Supporters who loved Solskjær as a player, who loved the idea of him succeeding, have had their most delicate loyalties preyed upon. Gary Neville, the nation’s top football pundit, and usually so clear in his thoughts, has backed himself into repeating the very obvious untruth that there is something dishonourable and ungallant in suggesting anyone, anywhere should ever stop managing a football team. There is a serious point behind all this – and a note of warning, too. The Glazers will continue to take money out of English football, to monetise the past to pay for the present, to value share price over silverware, and to make fools of those who still see this as an irresistible sporting romance. Why should this matter? First because vast sums of money are involved, every single penny of it originating in the pockets of supporters of the club, whose attachment is non-negotiable. And second because there is a need to preserve the sharp edges, the robustness of competitive sport. A great deal of pride was taken in the rejection of the European Super League, a machine designed to transform elite sport into a secure revenue-generating toy for club owners. And yet, zoom out and the Solskjær era comes from same place, an interlude in United’s history where the aim has been simply to exist, profitably – in this case by installing a pliable figurehead, by fluffing the brand, by re-signing a 36-year-old legend, and constructing a kind of waxwork museum to the recent past. How are they going to take that thing that you love out from under your feet and sell it back to you in plain sight? Like this, it seems. For now there is at least an opportunity for instant uplift. With a proper plan, with something more than DNA and shirt-power, passion and memories, this team can still finish in the top four. Players who have drifted, under-coached and badly used, can still bloom. Jadon Sancho, for example, is a brilliant but raw footballer who needs a brilliant coach to complete him. Who knows how good Mason Greenwood can become? We may find out. For now the defenestration of Solskjær, enacted by the same people who hired Solskjær and then presided over the age of Solskjær, still feels like a strange kind of new beginning.Manchester United are considering candidates including Zinedine Zidane, Mauricio Pochettino, Erik ten Hag, Luis Enrique and Brendan Rodgers to take charge from next summer after sacking Ole Gunnar Solskjær. Solskjær lost his job a month short of his three-year anniversary as manager after Saturday’s dismal 4-1 loss at Watford. On Sunday the Norwegian gave an emotional farewell interview to the club, tears welling in his eyes, as United also started searching for an interim coach to take over for the rest of this season. There is no timeframe regarding that appointment and Michael Carrick, one of Solskjær’s coaching staff, will oversee Tuesday’s Champions League group match at Villarreal and continue leading the side until someone is found. Lokomotiv Moscow’s head of sports and development, Ralf Rangnick, may be a candidate. Of those who could take over for the longer term, Zidane has the outstanding CV. He guided Real Madrid to three consecutive Champions Leagues and two La Liga titles across two spells, the second of which ended in May. But though the 49-year-old is out of work, he has not previously regarded England as an ideal fit. It is understood Pochettino would be keen to take the job. The Paris Saint-Germain manager was coveted by United during his tenure at Tottenham but the timing was never right for him. However he has never played down his interest in United. PSG, who have no desire to change manager mid-season, activated a one-year option on Pochettino’s contract in summer after he was linked with a return to Spurs. His deal runs to June 2023 but an agreement allowing him to leave could be possible at the end of this campaign. In a 13-year, four-club managerial career Pochettino has won only one trophy – last season’s Coupe de France. Despite PSG being 11 points clear at the top of Ligue 1, Pochettino has been heavily criticised for his team’s performances. He is still living in a hotel in Paris, with his wife, Karina, remaining in the family home in London. Ten Hag’s resume shows two Eredivisie titles with Ajax, including last season’s, and he guided the Dutch side to the Champions League semi-final in 2019 before Pochettino’s Spurs knocked them out. On Sunday Ten Hag attempted to distance himself from United. “I am focused on my team,” he told ESPN. “We have a brilliant squad and we want to achieve a lot. I expect from my players that they are focused on Ajax, so I have to give the right example for that too. I heard nothing about it, so I can’t think about it.” Zidane, Pochettino or Ten Hag would represent an upgrade on Solskjær with regard to tactical acumen, as would Enrique or Rodgers. Enrique, who claimed the second treble of Barcelona’s history by winning La Liga, the Champions League and a Copa del Rey in 2014-15, is Spain’s coach and laughed off links to United. Taking the job next summer would mean missing the chance to lead his country to the World Cup in Qatar. “Is it Día de los Inocentes [Spain’s April Fool’s Day]?” he said on Sunday. “I’m at the biggest team in Spain: the selección. There are 5,000 players, I have all the players I could wish for. Bigger than that, what is there?” Rodgers claimed two Scottish titles, two Scottish Cups and three Scottish League Cups in less than three years at Celtic before he departed in 2019 for Leicester City, with whom he won last season’s FA Cup. Of links with United, Rodgers said on Saturday: “I spoke to the [players’] leadership group because I hear little bits and pieces and it just stabilises everything. They know my commitment to them, they know my commitment to the club, to here, so also to us becoming a better team.” Solskjær came close to tears as he backed Carrick. “I’m becoming emotional now because he’s top, they’ll be fine,” he told MUTV. “I’ll watch them and support them.” The outgoing manager, who embraced a supporter before driving away from United’s training ground, acknowledged the team “couldn’t get the results we needed and it’s time for me to step aside” but said: “I’m going to leave by the front door, because I think everyone knows I’ve given everything for this club.” His assistants Mike Phelan and Kieran McKenna are staying. A statement from United, who are eighth, six points off fourth place, said: “Ole will always be a legend at Manchester United and it is with regret that we have reached this difficult decision. While the past few weeks have been disappointing, they should not obscure all the work he has done over the past three years to rebuild the foundations for long-term success.” The board felt Solskjær had earned the right to be given a final chance to turn things around after the most recent international break but concluded change was needed after the desired reaction was not seen at Watford. “Michael Carrick will now take charge of the team for forthcoming games, while the club looks to appoint an interim manager to the end of the season,” United said.Boris Johnson has been warned not to take the support of his MPs for granted, as he faces a backbench rebellion over controversial plans to scale back the social care cap after a tumultuous fortnight at Westminster. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) caused alarm on Thursday when it revealed it would calculate the £86,000 cap on lifetime care costs in a way that could leave tens of thousands of England’s poorest pensioners paying the same as wealthier people. With MPs due to vote on the proposal on Monday evening, some expressed hope that the government would make a last-minute concession in the face of increasingly angry backbenchers who fear backlash from constituents. Christian Wakeford, the Bury South MP, expressed anger that the plans appeared to have been changed since MPs voted in September to support the £12bn a year health and social care levy that will pay for the policy. “If we’re changing the goalposts again, halfway through the match, it doesn’t sit comfortably with me or many colleagues,” he said, warning the government: “It shouldn’t be taken for granted that we’re just going to walk through the same lobby.” Several backbenchers told the Guardian they were considering voting against the government’s proposed method to calculate the social care cap. One former minister said they were “very concerned” about the details of how the cap would operate, and it had been “clear from the start that when you looked at the detail it didn’t meet the rhetoric”. Johnson has repeatedly said he will “fix” social care. Another former minister said with the rebellion apparently gathering pace they hoped the government would be prepared to make a last-minute concession. Some MPs are considering backing other amendments, including one from Jeremy Hunt calling for the NHS to carry out better workforce planning. Robert Buckland, the former justice secretary, became the most senior Tory to say publicly that he was minded not to support the changes to the social care cap on Sunday, telling LBC: “I think the government should look again at this.” He said asking MPs to vote on the proposals before publishing more details in the promised social care white paper meant the government was in danger of “putting the cart before the horse”. Many Conservative MPs remain angry about their treatment at the hands of No 10 over the Owen Paterson affair, when they were dragooned into Johnson’s botched attempt to protect the disgraced former MP. The government announced on Thursday that the means-tested support families receive with their care would not be counted towards the £85,000 total, meaning those with relatively modest assets could still see themselves paying that amount in full. Torsten Bell, director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, said the government risked “turning very good news about long overdue social care reform into a huge political headache”. He said: “This seemingly techie change has very real implications, leaving people with fewer assets with far less protection than previously planned. Changing the cap on care costs into something benefiting only households with significant assets, who live disproportionately in the south, isn’t obviously the way you’d choose to put levelling up back on track after last week’s train traumas.” Many red wall Conservative MPs had already reacted with anger last week to the government’s integrated rail plan, which is significantly less ambitious than repeated promises from the prime minister had led them to expect. Sajid Javid defended the social care plans on Sunday, saying that while they were less generous than proposals originally set out by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot, who first devised the cap, they would still do “what we said we would do, which is protect people from the costs of catastrophic costs of care by capping it at £86,000”. The health secretary pointed out that one in seven people had care costs that were higher than £86,000, and said a new more generous means test meant that “everyone, no matter where they are in the country, will be better off under the new proposals that we’ve set out, versus the current system”. But Dilnot, who originally proposed the cap a decade ago, has said he is disappointed in the government’s approach. “The people who are most harshly affected by this change are people with assets of exactly £106,000. But everybody with assets of less than £186,000 would do less well under what the government is proposing than the proposals that we made,” he told MPs last week. Liz Kendall, the shadow care secretary, urged Conservative MPs to support Labour in rejecting the change in Monday’s vote. “You can’t sell this to constituents: they’re going to be hit in their pockets, to protect millionaires’ mansions,” she said. Daisy Cooper, the Lib Dems’ health and social care spokesperson, said: “These social care plans are two broken promises in one. Boris Johnson promised in his manifesto not to raise national insurance tax and that no one would have to sell their home to pay for care. “Now struggling families face being hammered by unfair tax rises, while still facing losing their homes to fund care costs.” Asked whether the government would break its manifesto promise that “nobody needing care should be forced to sell their home to pay for it,” Javid said people would be able to “plan for the future” if they knew their total costs would not be more than £86,000. He added that no one would have to sell their home during their lifetime, because of deferred payment agreements. These have already been in place for several years in many parts of the country, and allow patients to accrue a debt for their care that can be met out of their estate after their death. Whitehall sources blamed the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, for both the less generous social care policy, and the scaled-back rail plans, with the Treasury flexing its muscles across government. Nevertheless, the Treasury insists it has not been involved in drawing up the detail of how the care costs cap would work, and that it is up to DHSC to decide how to work within its budget.• An article (Paterson’s escape shows that the sleaze era is back, 4 November, Journal, page 1) said that Jacob Rees-Mogg had “moved a motion that blocked the suspension of [Owen] Paterson”. The motion moved by Rees-Mogg was that the house approve the report of the committee on standards and suspend Paterson for 30 days; but he then supported Dame Andrea Leadsom’s amendment, which proposed pausing Paterson’s suspension pending a review. • Other recently amended articles include: The law is failing domestic abuse victims in England and Wales. But we can change it How to get the best deal when renting a property ‘Vile desecration’: new version of The Snowman axed after composer’s criticismWhat a statement of intent this was by Gerwyn Price, the world champion and world No 1 regaining his Grand Slam of Darts title with an imperious 16-8 victory over Peter Wright. In truth the world No 2 was never really in the contest, and an average of 91.5 was a fair reflection of both a desperately disappointing performance on his part and a mildly disappointing spectacle lasting barely an hour. But take nothing away from Price, who after sweeping aside James Wade 16-9 in the afternoon semi-final was again relentless and ruthless when it mattered. After entering the arena to his customary chorus of boos, Price began the match with a 140 checkout, went into the first interval 4-1 up and after a brief revival from Wright reeled off six legs in a row to lead 10-3. He did not miss a dart at double until the eighth leg of the match. Price averaged 104 on the night, but more ominously he was still able to chalk up legs when not throwing at his best. This, perhaps, is the most instructive lesson of the last nine days: while there are plenty of players on the circuit who can match Price’s A-game, few possess his ability to grind out tournament wins with their B-game. This was once Michael van Gerwen’s domain, but the world No 3’s defeat to Michael Smith in the quarter-finals was further evidence that his margin for error is nothing like what it was. For Wright, who beat Smith in the second semi-final by coming back from 12-8 down to win 16-12, fatigue was doubtless a factor here, as demonstrated by the number of darts that missed low. But this has been a largely encouraging week for him too, proof that after an uneven season in which he has changed darts several times, he is running into form at the right moment. The World Championship begins next month, and along with Van Gerwen, Jonny Clayton and the rejuvenated Rob Cross, Wright will start among the favourites. But here again, Price showed that he remains the man to beat.Conservative MPs are urging ministers to send people travelling to the UK by small boats to offshore centres as far away as the Falkland Islands as concern grows that the party is losing support among red wall voters. Priti Patel, the home secretary, should also be willing to automatically return migrants to France if the party is to fulfil the Brexit promise of taking control of the UK’s borders, MPs said. The increasingly extreme demands come amid deepening alarm in Downing Street and the Conservative party over the rising numbers of people risking their lives by making the journey in winter. High-ranking officials believe at least 10 people have died in the last few weeks while trying to make the crossing across one of the world’s busiest shipping channels. More than 1,000 have crossed in a single day twice in the past fortnight. Labour accused Patel on Sunday of “comprehensively failing” to curb the growing numbers of people taking the dangerous journey across the Channel. Downing Street’s concerns over the Channel crossings spilled into the public domain on Friday when Boris Johnson announced a review of the government’s small boats policies. The Guardian spoke to six Tory MPs from so-called red wall and Kent constituencies on Sunday. They are demanding that the government goes further in laying down hardline policies to deter people from entering the UK. Lee Anderson, the MP for Ashfield in Nottinghamshire, said he lobbied an immigration minister two weeks ago to say that offshore processing, where those who seek asylum are sent abroad while their cases are processed, should begin as soon as possible. “I would be in favour of [using] the Falkland Islands. The only way we will put these people off is by giving them the message that if you come here you are going to be sent 8,000 miles away,” he said. Craig Mackinlay, the MP for South Thanet, said he and his backbench colleagues are facing increasing demands via email and social media for the government to stop boats carrying migrants from entering the UK. “We had a Brexit election where one of the main issues was getting control of our borders. This is of massive concern to my constituency and many of our voters across the UK,” he said. He said the government should consider sending people straight back to France “although this could have diplomatic, high octane consequences”, he added. “In the long term, we should also be more involved in patrolling the French coastline. If advanced economies can’t successfully patrol 100 miles, using the technology we now have, it doesn’t say much and I frankly don’t believe it,” he said. Another MP said that Patel, who has said on 11 occasions that she will curb the number of boats crossing the Channel, has fallen into Johnson’s habit of overpromising and underdelivering on a key government policy. “Voters will see through this government. HS2, social care and migrant boats – it is difficult not to see a pattern and it has to stop,” the MP said. Hundreds more people, including very young children, have made the dangerous Channel crossing to the UK over the weekend. Adults carrying youngsters and others wrapped in blankets were seen arriving on the south-east coast of England on Saturday with help from lifeboat crews. More than 24,700 people have arrived in the UK so far this year after making the Channel crossing in small boats – almost three times the number in 2020. Appearing on the Andrew Marr show, Labour’s shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, said Patel was “comprehensively failing” to stem the flow. “It appears the prime minister agrees because he seems to be putting the minister for the Cabinet Office in charge of a review of this,” he said. Downing Street sources said Steve Barclay has been brought in to ensure that different departments are working together to solve the small boats issue. Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, said the government faces a serious challenge if it is to deliver on its promise to control the UK’s borders. “It needs to stop overpromising and underdelivering, recognise it’s a complex issue that requires less meaningless rhetoric and more intelligent realism, less harsh control and more human compassion.” Minnie Rahman, the interim chief executive of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, said MPs are treating refugees like a political football. “The reason we’ve been seeing more dangerous crossings is because government has closed down or limited practically every safe route for people seeking protection. “The only way government will end dangerous crossings is by taking practical, evidenced-based steps like providing safe, regulated means of travel for people seeking protection.” Claims also emerged in the Mail on Sunday that Patel has become so frustrated by the obstructions of officials and legal advisers that she has considered writing to the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, to list her department’s failings. Dave Penman, the head of the FDA union, told the Guardian it was “unedifying” to see under-pressure ministers resort to briefing against their own staff. “If ministers are genuinely interested in solving this crisis, they should be concentrating on working with their civil servants rather than wasting time briefing the Sunday papers in a transparent and desperate bid to shift blame,” he said. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, defended the government’s efforts to solve the crisis in the Channel and said Covid had made things more difficult. “We do need new agreements with countries, predominately with the countries where most of the failed asylum seekers are coming from, and those aren’t always European countries, and this home secretary has done that, she has signed new agreements and put those in place with countries like India. “But also I would say that the pandemic has made returning people across the world, across asylum systems, much harder, and we do have to take that into account as well,” he said.The Ligue 1 game between Lyon and Marseille was abandoned after Marseille’s Dimitri Payet was struck by a bottle launched from the home fans, throwing Ligue 1 into fresh turmoil. Payet fell to the ground as he was getting ready to take a corner after five minutes and both teams were sent to the dressing room by the referee, Ruddy Buquet, who decided to abandon the match after a suspension of almost two hours. Payet, who according to the French League was also subject to “discriminatory comments”, left the pitch with an ice pack on his head. The stadium’s announcer initially said that the game would restart, with spectators warned any further incident would lead to it being halted for good, and Lyon took to the pitch to warm up. Jorge Sampaoli’s Marseille players, however, stayed in the dressing room, before the match was declared postponed to a near-empty stadium just before 10.45pm local time. “The referee believes safety conditions are not met,” the stadium announcer said. The Lyon president, Jean-Michel Aulas, later said: “The referee summoned everyone a second time to announce that he had changed his mind.” Aulas sent a message to Payet via the club’s Twitter account. “We send him our apologies,” he said. “The perpetrator was immediately reported and caught. It’s an isolated act.” The league said a disciplinary commission would gather for an urgent meeting on Monday. Ligue 1 has been marred by crowd trouble this season. Nice were docked two points, one of them suspended, after serious incidents during their game against Marseille, whose players clashed with home fans who pelted them with missiles and stormed on to the pitch in August. The derby between Lens and Lille was also hit by crowd problems in September, with the start of the second half being delayed by about half a hour after rival fans threw objects at each other before people ran on to the pitch, prompting riot police and stewards to intervene. There has also been crowd trouble in Montpellier, Angers, Marseille and St Etienne.A one-man play about grief and a contemporary version of a Shakespearean classic have dominated the Black British theatre awards, with both receiving four honours. A lifetime achievement award was also presented to Derek Griffiths, whose 57-year career has spanned Play School in the 1970s to his current appearance in The Mousetrap in the West End. His “multidisciplinary genius” and presence as a man of colour on children’s television had provided a transformative role model, said the awards’ organisers. Yomi Ṣode’s play And Breathe, which ran at the Almeida in north London earlier this year, won best director, best production, best male actor and best musical director. The play was “expertly directed” by Miranda Cromwell, said the Guardian’s review, which praised its “sensational stagecraft”. Its star, David Jonsson, performed an hour-long monologue on the themes of death, love and masculinity. Interacting with him on stage was Femi Temowo, composer and jazz guitarist, whose music “runs in tandem with Ṣode’s script, syncopating at times, bringing charm and comedy at others”, the review said. Last year Cromwell won best director at the Olivier awards with her co-director Marianne Elliott for their West End production of Death of a Salesman. Jonsson has previously appeared in the television drama series Industry and Deep State. Awards for Romeo and Juliet at the Regent’s Park Open Air theatre went to Isabel Adomakoh Young for best female actor in a play, Aretha Ayeh for best supporting female actor, Andrew French for best supporting male actor and Ingrid Mackinnon for best choreographer. Adomakoh Young describes herself as an actor “with a determination for social change” and a “deep-rooted belief in the capacity of art in the hands of people to make change”. She has played Lady Macbeth at the National Youth Theatre and has worked with the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Royal Court. Jay Perry, currently performing in Hamilton, won an “LGBTQ+ champion” award. Earlier this year, he said: “There is lots of work to be done on issues like racial and gender equality, trans and non-binary inclusion and more disabled performer representation … We need to remember our value and strength as a collective to push for a better and more inclusive industry.” The awards were presented by Cynthia Erivo and Danny Sapani at a ceremony in London on Sunday evening.Eddie Jones spent Sunday morning holding one-on-one meetings with his players before sending them home with a spring in their step. He then met his coaches and, again, you would expect a bit of mutual backslapping, though it is unclear if this was deemed the right time to address the elephant in the room. Maybe best to leave it for another day, but it is unlikely to go away any time soon. Because when Owen Farrell returns to fitness Jones must address the issue of how his captain gets back into this side. Recent evidence suggests that on merit Farrell has a job on his hands and that is in no small part down to the form of Henry Slade, who against South Africa stepped out of the absent captain’s shadow, rose to the occasion when Manu Tuilagi limped off and produced his finest display in an England jersey. It has long since been lamented that while he has often shown his abundant talent in flashes he rarely seizes matches by the scruff of the neck. But at Twickenham on Saturday, Slade’s performance with ball in hand was as courageous as it was classy. It came after he had been installed as the vice-captain with Farrell and Ellis Genge both missing and Slade has now started 12 of England’s last 13 matches, missing only the dismal defeat in Ireland. If he seemed liberated without Farrell alongside him in the centres perhaps George Ford’s omission from the squad has had a similar effect too. It was he who was expected to make way against Australia with Farrell returning but as it was Tuilagi was moved to the wing so that Slade kept hold of the No 13 jersey and it was he who was central to England’s attacking gameplan against the Springboks. As Jones had alluded to previously, England wanted to implement a rope-a-dope strategy and the attack coach Martin Gleeson had been tasked with finding a way to beat the Springboks’ blitz defence. Slade’s passing ability was key to England’s success in that regard, notably when he whipped the ball to Tuilagi for the opening try. It was also Slade who prized open the gap for Joe Marchant to make the break for Raffi Quirke’s try and he who fizzed a long pass to Freddie Steward in a move that ultimately led to the full-back going over. “We wanted to do something a bit different,” said Jones. “This has been the focus of our autumn campaign and we didn’t want to attack the way they wanted us to attack. We either wanted to attack really tight or we wanted to attack fairly wide, where they’re not usually attacked but Glees came up with a few plays that allowed us to get to the outside of their last defender, who closes pretty quickly.” After the Springboks had been put to the sword it was instructive to hear Jones reflect on when Slade was first coming on to the scene. He had impressed on his debut in August 2015 enough to earn inclusion in the World Cup squad and it has since emerged that England’s rivals, chiefly New Zealand who had expected to face Stuart Lancaster’s side in the knockout stages, were fearful of the impact the then 22-year-old could have. As it was, he featured just once, against Uruguay, by which stage England were already eliminated. “I always remember, leading up to the World Cup in 2015, he played a couple of practice games and was outstanding, then didn’t feature in that World Cup,” added Jones. “In his first bit of time with us, he was sort of in and out, but he’s really cemented a spot at 13 now, grown in terms of his influence on the team.” That last point is interesting because Slade played at inside centre for most of Saturday’s match, after Tuilagi was withdrawn. He has only started there a handful of times and never really taken to it but Marcus Smith’s extra zip at fly-half gave Slade that little bit more time with which to weave his magic against the Springboks. It would be a shame if it is the last we see of that partnership.The results from the autumn series are in and they make for deeply uncomfortable southern hemisphere reading. Not for 19 years have South Africa, New Zealand and Australia all lost on European soil on the same day and Ireland’s victory over Argentina duly completes a clean sweep which should give the Rugby Championship’s finest plenty to ponder over their Christmas holidays. Maybe the pattern is not entirely a surprise given how long the Springboks, All Blacks and Wallabies have spent away from home in the Covid-affected line of duty. New Zealand have looked distinctly weary in defeat in both Dublin and Paris and when South Africa, playing their 13th Test in barely four months, were asked to perform one last encore at a raucous Twickenham they were ultimately not sharp enough to deliver it. Then again, there is equally no question that rugby’s northern powerhouses are growing in strength and depth. What price New Zealand, who have not lost back-to-back Tests against European opposition away from home since 1935-36, when they face France in Paris in the opening pool game of the 2023 Rugby World Cup? Would anyone now bet the farm on South Africa turning over the Irish in Pool B? And how much better can England become having cast off the tactical shackles that had slowed any progress under Eddie Jones to a crawl? It has taken a while but fair play to Jones and his latest assembly line of assistant coaching boffins for finally taking the plunge and freeing up England to play with more purpose and attacking intent. If it was attitude and late resilience that underpinned their thrilling 27-26 victory over the world champions at Twickenham, it is the rising confidence behind the scrum that has been perhaps this autumn’s biggest upside. Gone, thankfully, is the negative aerial obsession that characterised last winter, replaced by an infectious new mix of “S Club” heaven. Marcus Smith, Henry Slade and Freddie Steward have all been autumnal shooting stars, offering England skill, energy, fresh ideas and important new focal points. Don’t stop moving is also becoming their team’s new unofficial signature tune, as evidenced by the three well-taken tries that ultimately did for the usually impenetrable Boks. Add in the excellent Max Malins, Joe Marchant, Raffi Quirke and the underused Adam Radwan and there is pop-up danger, flexible thinking and creative pace to burn all over the place. Whether by accident or design – and the absence of Owen Farrell from two of the three autumn Tests cannot be omitted from the end-of-year ledger – Jones has found his best starting fly-half, centre and full-back for the foreseeable future. England appear visibly better balanced as a result. At this point fans of England – who conceded only one try in three autumn games and have not lost when leading at half-time for two and a half years – will understandably be pressing the palms of both hands tightly together and praying Manu Tuilagi’s hamstrings can be soldered back together to allow him to rejoin the party. If the big man had spent more than eight minutes on the field on Saturday, the chances are the opposition would have enjoyed their fluctuating afternoon even less. But, equally, consider the damage England could inflict when and if some rumbustious injured forwards – Luke Cowan-Dickie, Ellis Genge, Jack Willis, the bullocking young Alfie Barbeary – are able to join the fray with Alex Dombrandt, Sam Simmonds and Jamie George also in full cry. While there were moments of concern in the second half against South Africa for England’s scrum and maul, not to mention a crushingly heavy penalty count, the unquenchable spirit of all involved was impossible to miss. If it was not quite the most satisfying win over the Springboks of Jones’s career – Japan’s 2015 RWC pool win in Brighton will forever retain that mantle – it did allow the head coach to put further clear water between his squad’s current state and their fifth-placed finish in the 2021 Six Nations. England have just beaten two of the top three ranked sides in the world and their leader is perfectly entitled to seek to airbrush two awkward years – “I never thought we were on the wrong lines” – completely out of the frame. This week he will be heading to France to check out potential World Cup camps, reassured that his keynote decision to crop the Vunipola brothers and George Ford out of the autumn picture was correct in the context of the 2023 tournament. “It is never pleasant but it is an important and necessary part of the job,” said Jones. “The timing is never right. Sometimes you get criticised for doing it too quickly, sometimes you get criticised for doing it too slowly and sometimes you get criticised for both. There’s never a right or wrong time to do it but you have to back your judgement and then get on with it.” Whether Jamie Blamire, Bevan Rodd, Trevor Davison, Alex Mitchell, Mark Atkinson and some of England’s other unheralded November participants all make the World Cup squad remains to be seen but for Smith, Steward and Slade, in particular, the past three weeks have been gloriously life-affirming. Jones remains averse to praising Smith excessively – “He’s going to be good, mate, as long as you blokes don’t pour too much poison in his head” – but the evidence is clear to those prepared to look beyond their own parochial rugby kingdoms. The armies of the north are on the march once again.The daughter of a British aid worker who was murdered by members of an Islamic State terrorist cell has described watching the video of his beheading and looking an alleged IS killer in the eye in court. David Haines was captured just days after arriving in Syria in 2013 and the following year was beheaded. The killing, which was recorded and posted online, was one of several of western and Japanese captives by the gang of four IS militants nicknamed “the Beatles” by their hostages because of their British accents. Last week Haines’s daughter Bethany flew out to see El Shafee Elsheikh appear in court. He has been charged with multiple offences relating to the capture and beheading of four US hostages killed by the terrorist cell but is not standing trial for Haines’s murder. In the programme: The Isis ‘Beatles’: Blood On Their Hands, to be broadcast on ITV on Monday, Bethany Haines talks openly and movingly about her reaction to the news of her father’s death, when she was a teenager and still at school. “It was almost a relief in a way, because you’d been waiting for it so long and it builds up in your head, but then you have to come to the realisation that you’re never going to see your dad again,” she said. “I was told not to watch it [the video], but it’s hard when you have so many people coming up to you and asking you, so I locked myself in the bathroom and, you know, Googled it, and there it came up and sat through it. .. I felt physically sick. It was final, you know? I took myself off and just needed a bit of time to kind of come to terms with what I’d just witnessed.” Haines said it was after the journalist James Foley was killed in August 2014 that she lost hope of a rescue mission, saying: “It changed everything.” She recalled one of the hardest things at the time was not being allowed to tell anyone that her father was being held hostage. At the same time, she was initially assured that he would be coming home. After Foley’s death, however, her fears increased when her father was paraded in an orange jumpsuit with a knife to his neck. She said: “That’s when I knew that he’s not going to come back. And we had to try and prepare ourselves for every single day that the video would come out and eventually it did.” Elsheikh and another Briton, Alexanda Amon Kotey, were extradited to the US last year, having been stripped of their UK citizenship. In September, Kotey pleaded guilty to multiple charges. As part of the plea deal, which will allow him to come back to the UK after 15 years to serve out his sentence, he has agreed to meet each of the victims’ families if they request it. The group’s ringleader, Mohammed Emwazi, known as “Jihadi John”, was killed in a US airstrike in 2015. The fourth member of the group, Aine Davis, was sentenced to seven years in prison in 2017. Elsheikh is due to go on trial in January. After seeing him in court, Haines said: “He just stared right into my eyes and I stared back. I’m not going to be intimidated by him. I’m not going to look away.”Greg Joseph made a 29-yard field goal as time expired to give the Minnesota Vikings a 34-31 victory over the Green Bay Packers on Sunday, finishing a classic back-and-forth with Aaron Rodgers by making sure the three-time NFL MVP didn’t get to touch the ball last. Kirk Cousins passed for 341 yards and three touchdowns for the Vikings (5-5), who watched yet another game come down to the final play after Rodgers threw three of his four touchdown passes in the second half. Unable to practice much at all this week because of a toe injury, after missing much of the first half of the month with Covid-19, Rodgers finished 23 for 33 for a season-high 385 yards. Justin Jefferson had eight receptions for 169 yards and two scores, including a third-down catch against rookie Eric Stokes that Cousins delivered for a 23-yard touchdown while being decked on a blitz by Darnell Savage. Dalvin Cook ran in the two-point conversion to make up for an earlier missed extra point by Joseph. Then on the next play from scrimmage, Rodgers threw a rainbow to Marquez Valdes-Scantling streaking past safety Xavier Woods for a 75-yard score to tie the game just before the two-minute warning. When the Vikings regained the ball, Cousins nearly cost himself the comeback by slightly underthrowing Jefferson, whom Savage darted in front of to intercept the ball. He bobbled it on the way down, though, and a replay review overturned the call. Cousins then went 3 for 3 for 51 yards on the next three snaps, Cook ran for one more first down, and then the Vikings kneeled down to set up the final kick by Joseph. They posted the highest score against the Packers since Green Bay’s 38-3 loss to New Orleans in the season opener. Indianapolis Colts 41–15 Buffalo Bills Jonathan Taylor rushed for 185 yards Sunday and scored a franchise-record five touchdowns as the Indianapolis Colts walloped the Buffalo Bills. Taylor tallied four scores on the ground and another one on a pass as Indianapolis (6-5) made a mockery of the point spread that had Buffalo listed as a seven-point favorite. Taylor is the 16th player in NFL history to score at least five touchdowns in a game. It was the third loss in four games for the Bills (6-4), who fell a half-game behind surging New England in the AFC East. Buffalo’s performance was rife with mistakes, including seven penalties and four turnovers. Houston Texans 22–13 Tennessee Titans Tyrod Taylor ran for two touchdowns and threw for 107 yards and the Houston Texans snapped the NFL’s longest active skid by beating the Tennessee Titans to end the league’s longest winning streak on a wet and rainy Sunday. The Texans (2-8) came in having lost eight straight since winning their season opener and hadn’t scored a TD on the road since 19 September. Desmond King had two of the Texans’ four interceptions three in the fourth quarter to snuff out the Titans’ attempted rally. Houston turned those and a fumbled punt into 13 points. The Texans also had two sacks. The Titans (8-3) snapped their six-game winning streak with their first loss since 3 October. Pittsburgh Steelers 37-41 Los Angeles Chargers The Los Angeles Chargers won an entertaining Sunday Night Football match-up with the Pittsburgh Steelers. The Chargers looked set for victory with a 14-point lead in the fourth-quarter before the Steelers fought back. However, Justin Herbert completed a superb performance when he threw his third touchdown of the game to seal victory. Herbert also had 90 yards rushing on the night. Dallas Cowboys 9–19 Kansas City Chiefs Clyde Edwards-Helaire ran for 63 yards and a touchdown in his return from injured reserve, Chris Jones and the Kansas City defense made life miserable for Dak Prescott, and the Chiefs beat the Dallas Cowboys. Patrick Mahomes was 23 of 37 for 260 yards with an interception and a fumble for Kansas City, but he was bailed out by a defense that played its best game of the year. Charvarius Ward picked off Prescott in the end zone near the end of the first half, and Chris Jones had 3.5 sacks while forcing and recovering a fumble. The result: The Chiefs (7-4) improved to 4-0 against the NFC East with their fourth straight win overall. Arizona Cardinals 23–13 Seattle Seahawks Colt McCoy was outstanding filling in for Kyler Murray, throwing for 328 yards and two touchdowns, and the Arizona Cardinals beat the Seattle Seahawks. For the second straight season, McCoy was a backup thrust into a starting role in Seattle and walked away with a victory. Last year, McCoy was with the New York Giants. This season, it was with Murray missing a third straight game due to an ankle injury. McCoy went 35 of 44 and thoroughly outplayed Seattle’s Russell Wilson in his first home start since undergoing finger surgery. McCoy threw touchdown passes to Zach Ertz in the first half, got a bit of luck in the third quarter when a potential interception was overturned on replay, and had his first 300-yard passing game since 2014. Detroit Lions 10-13 Cleveland Browns Nick Chubb caught a touchdown pass and ran for 130 yards as the Cleveland Browns held on to avoid a season-wrecking upset and keep Detroit winless with a sloppy victory over the Lions. Chubb returned to Cleveland’s lineup after a one-game absence due to Covid-19. The star running back caught a five-yard TD pass from Baker Mayfield and then helped the Browns (6-5) run out the clock. Washington 27–21 Carolina Panthers Taylor Heinicke threw three touchdown passes to upstage former teammate Cam Newton, helping the Washington Football Team post a 27-21 win over the Carolina Panthers. Newton was playing his first home game with the Panthers since 2019. He was signed as a free agent prior to last weekend’s upset victory at Arizona. Yet it was a good homecoming for Washington coach Ron Rivera, who guided the Panthers to the Super Bowl in the 2015 season. He was fired during the 2019 season. Cincinnati Bengals 32-13 Las Vegas Raiders Joe Mixon rushed for 123 yards and scored two touchdowns and the Cincinnati Bengals defeated the Las Vegas Raiders. The well-rested Bengals (6-4) came out of their bye week and snapped a two-game skid to climb back into the AFC North race, while the Raiders (5-5) lost their third straight since their bye week when they led the AFC West. Joe Burrow was 20 of 29 for 148 yards and threw one touchdown for Cincinnati, while Offensive Rookie of the Year candidate Ja’Marr Chase hauled in three passes, including one TD. Chase leads all rookies with eight touchdowns this season. San Francisco 49ers 30–3 Jacksonville Jaguars Jimmy Garoppolo threw two touchdown passes for the third consecutive week, and the San Francisco 49ers dominated Jacksonville for their third win in four games. Coming off their best game of the season a 31-10 stunner against the Los Angeles Rams on Monday night the 49ers (5-5) traveled cross-country on a short week and looked every bit like a playoff contender for the second time in six days. New Orleans Saints 29–40 Philadelphia Eagles Jalen Hurts ran for three touchdowns, Darius Slay returned an interception for a score and the Philadelphia Eagles beat the New Orleans Saints. The Eagles (5-6) have won two in a row for the first time this season and rookie coach Nick Sirianni earned his first victory at home in five tries. The Saints (5-5) dropped their third straight since losing quarterback Jameis Winston to a season-ending ACL injury during a 36-27 win over Super Bowl champion Tampa Bay. Miami Dolphins 24–17 New York Jets Tua Tagovailoa threw a go-ahead five-yard touchdown pass to Myles Gaskin early in the fourth quarter and the Miami Dolphins hung on to beat the New York Jets for their third straight victory. A week after an impressive win over Baltimore, the Dolphins (4-7) overcame some penalties and the Jets had some sloppy plays of their own to get their first three-game winning streak since winning five in a row in the middle of last season. With the game tied at 14, Tagovailoa was facing heavy pressure when he got a throw off to Gaskin, who held onto the ball to put the Dolphins ahead 21-14 with 10:15 left despite getting hit by both CJ Mosley and Isaiah Dunn in the end zone.Keir Starmer will make a pitch to win over Britain’s business leaders by promising a Labour government will not simply “throw cash at” the country’s problems. Speaking to the CBI’s annual conference in the Midlands, Starmer will put fiscal discipline at the heart of his party’s appeal to a sector Labour believes has been alienated by Boris Johnson’s government. Starmer will tell businesses that Labour “absolutely don’t think that the solution to every problem is to throw cash at it”, promising to run “a stable government and a tight ship”. He will highlight Rachel Reeves’s tough approach to the public finances, saying: “We will never spend money just for the sake of it.” He will also announce the creation of a new skills advisory panel, including former education secretary David Blunkett, to ensure Labour has the right policies on preparing young people for work. Labour has previously attacked the government for wasting billions of pounds during the pandemic on “crony Covid contracts”, as it tries to chip away at the idea that the Conservatives can be trusted with taxpayers’ money. Reeves, the shadow chancellor, has said a Labour government would set up an “office for value for money”, which will scrutinise government spending decisions before taxpayer resources are committed. Labour has already made some significant spending pledges, however, including the shadow chancellor’s promise of £28bn of green investment each year until the end of the decade, to facilitate the transition to net zero. Some business groups have reacted angrily to aspects of government policy in recent months, including the prime minister appearing to blame the private sector for the shortage of HGV drivers that caused a fuel crisis earlier in the autumn. Starmer will say a Labour government would seek a better long-term deal for hauliers with the EU, as he repeats the call he made in his party conference speech for the government to “make Brexit work”. Fleshing out that idea, he will say Labour would seek regulatory equivalence for financial services; argue for Britain to maintain its data adequacy status, allowing digital firms to compete with EU rivals; and negotiate for mutual recognition of professional qualifications. “I believe all of this is achievable by robustly defending our interests, and patiently negotiating,” Starmer will tell his audience. Starmer has been careful to insist the issue of Brexit cannot be reopened since Labour was comprehensively defeated in the 2019 general election, having himself been instrumental in persuading his party to adopt a pro-second referendum policy. Labour hopes to unite its remain and leave-supporting voters by highlighting concerns about economic issues, including the rising cost of living, with inflation climbing, and national insurance contributions set to rise in April. Starmer’s emphasis on fiscal discipline is intended to contrast with the approach of his predecessor, Jeremy Corbyn. The Labour leader promised his party they will “never again go into an election with a manifesto that is not a serious plan for government”. He has also said he does not think the big six energy companies should be brought into public ownership, in a rejection of the sweeping nationalisation Labour planned in 2019. Lord Blunkett will be joined on Labour’s skills advisory panel by former senior civil servant Rachel Sandby-Thomas and businessman Praful Nargund, director of an IVF provider, Create. They will tour the country with the shadow education secretary, Kate Green, talking to teachers, children and educational experts. Blunkett said: “Nothing can be more important than spreading what works, embedding high-quality and inspirational teaching and learning, and adapting a curriculum that provides motivation to young people at every stage, and reassurance to employers that they will have literate, numerate, creative and responsive employees for the future.” Labour has already announced that it would place careers advisers in every school, and beef up the teaching of digital skills. “Young people are ambitious, optimistic and excited for their futures. Yet far too many are being let down by a Conservative government that’s living in the past,” Starmer will say. The CBI conference is being held across multiple sites and will also feature a speech by the prime minister, who is expected to highlight the prospects for green jobs across the economy.Boris Johnson will seek to boost the UK’s clean energy credentials after a tricky UN climate crisis conference by announcing that all new buildings in England will be required to install electric vehicle charge points from next year. In a speech to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) in the north-east of England on Monday, the prime minister will reveal plans, briefed as “world-leading”, to toughen up regulations for new homes and buildings. From next year developers on sites such as supermarkets and office blocks will be required to install electric vehicle charging points, in an attempt to help phase out the use of petrol and diesel cars before sales of them come to an end in 2030. The government expects the move to lead to 145,000 new charging points each year. Buildings undergoing renovations that leave them with more than 10 parking spaces will also be subject to the new measures. Heralding the importance of clean energy just weeks after the UK hosted Cop26, Johnson will say the country is at a pivotal moment, adding: “We cannot go on as we are.” He will tell business leaders that it should not just be public spending that is used to “adapt our economy to the green industrial revolution”, but that the government will focus on investment in science and technology, raise productivity and “then get out your way”. Defending the new requirements, Johnson will add: “We must regulate less or better and take advantage of new freedoms.” The government will also support a new loan programme worth £150m, distributed by Innovate UK over three years, to help British small and medium-size enterprises commercialise their latest research. The “innovation loans” will be accessible to a variety of sectors – including green businesses – and follow a pilot with businesses. A further £9.4m in funding has been confirmed for what Downing Street said was a first-of-a-kind hydrogen project in the UK’s largest onshore windfarm, near Glasgow. The money will go to the Whitelee green hydrogen initiative to develop the country’s largest “electrolyser” – a system that converts water into hydrogen gas. It is used to store energy and supply local transport providers with zero-carbon fuel. As part of the government’s bid to reach net zero by 2050, almost 26,000 publicly available electric vehicle charging devices have been installed – including 4,900 rapid ones. A total of 250,000 points in homes and workplaces have already been put in place. Ed Miliband, the shadow business secretary, accused the government of “failing Britain’s automotive companies and workers”. He said: “Ministers have stepped back and left manufacturers, workers and the public on their own, failing to take the action necessary to make the switch affordable for families hit by a cost of living crisis. “By extending the help to buy an electric car for those on lower and middle incomes and accelerating the rollout of charging points in areas that have been left out, [Labour] would ensure that everyone could benefit and make the green transition fair.” The prime minister’s climate spokesperson, Allegra Stratton, raised eyebrows in August when she revealed she was still driving a third-hand diesel. When asked why she did not drive an electric vehicle, she said: “I don’t fancy it just yet.” Stratton, who lives in north London, said this was because of the length of time it took to make trips to visit her father in the south of Scotland, her mother in Gloucestershire, her grandmother in north Wales, and her in-laws in the Lake District. However, in October, just before world leaders gathered for Cop26, Stratton revealed she had ditched the diesel car.Tamara Molan decided to study law for a reason: she wants to advocate for change. “[As a teenager] there was a situation within my extended family … I was exposed to the worst side of the family courts,” she says. “It sparked this passion inside me to help fight.” Molan, who is in her second year of a double degree in law and psychology, plans to enter criminal or family law after graduation so that she can make a positive impact with her work. But not every student who enrols in a law degree has their sights set as directly on the courtroom. Zack de Ruyter is in his first year of a double degree in law and commerce. “I’m not one of those people who knew from the age of three that they wanted to be a lawyer,” he says. “I’m still not sure that I want to be a lawyer. But studying law, I have that option in the future.” As “less of a numbers person and more of a language person”, de Ruyter says law was a field of study that matched his skill set, and something that intrigued him. He chose Curtin because it offered a pathway to legal practice that was 18 months shorter than other institutions. Two semesters in, it feels like the right choice. “Studying law now, I’ve found that I am really interested in it,” he says. “I find the classes are very engaging. Especially if you’re a person who has even a slight interest in politics, as you would expect in a law classroom, you can get some really good debate going back and forth.” And the discussions can get spirited. “The law classroom often feels like I take my beliefs in there and they get smacked around with a cricket bat by a whole lot of people who are a lot smarter than I am,” de Ruyter laughs. “But at the same time, it’s very enjoyable and very interesting. I think if you’re cut out that way, you take a lot from law school.” Beyond just enjoying the work, de Ruyter also knows that there are more options with a law degree than just becoming a lawyer. It is, he says, “the key that unlocks a lot of doors”, with law graduates going on to work in many areas, from politics to journalism to international relations. That’s certainly the belief of Professor Robert Cunningham, the Dean of Curtin Law School. He says it’s important for students to “follow their interests” when it comes to the law and advises looking for that intersection of law and another passion point. “One of the things about law is that there is a legal dimension to almost every aspect of our lives,” he says. “So if you are interested in music, for example, there’s a whole range of law that relates to music. It might be the intellectual property arrangements that sit behind music, it might be the contractual agreements in relation to paid gigs.” Like de Ruyter, Molan likes the options that a law degree offers graduates - even though she intends to work as a legal practitioner. “Initially, going in, I thought that once you finished your degree you’re just a lawyer in a law firm and that’s what you do,” she says. “I didn’t realise there’s so many different things you can do with a law degree.” Molan also wants to dispel the notion that law is a field for the extroverts among us. Anyone with the passion and drive can excel at law, she feels, so long as they’re able to form strong logical arguments. Both Molan and de Ruyter agree that law is a demanding field of study, but the benefits make it well worth the hard work. The community atmosphere at Curtin also helps. De Ruyter says: “At Curtin I’ve found a very supportive, nurturing environment.” He thinks anyone with an interest in the law would gain a lot from the degree - whether or not they want to go on to become a legal practitioner. “If it’s something you’re interested in but you’re only considering it because you’re a bit scared of the workload or the people around you, I would say have no fear,” he says. “Step right in.” Learn more about Law at Curtin University.